
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01552/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 4 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                     VV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A MacKenzie, Counsel instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,  the
    appellant is granted anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Following a successful error of law challenge  to  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee  or  as
    otherwise requiring international human rights protection, the decision
    under appeal comes before me to be re-made.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in 2011

 3. The appellant was born in Sri Lanka on 21 May 1983.  He arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 30 April 2011, and applied for asylum  on  that  day,
    following apprehension by  Immigration  Officers.   The  appellant  was
    given a screening interview on 1 May 2011 and he attended a substantive
    asylum interview on 20 May 2011.  On 26 May 2011 the then Secretary  of
    State gave her reasons for refusing to recognise him as a refugee.  The
    appellant's appeal against this  decision  came  before  Judge  Tipping
    sitting at Taylor House on 16 August 2011.  In her subsequent decision,
    she set out the appellant's account at paragraphs [6] to [10], which  I
    reproduce below:

         "6.  The appellant's claim is that he has suffered  persecution  at
             the hands of the Sri  Lankan  authorities  by  reason  of  his
             political opinion as a supporter or member of  the  LTTE,  and
             that he  fears  further  persecution  if  now  returned.   The
             account of events given by the appellant  varies  between  the
             sources of his evidence, but the account on which he relied at
             the hearing appears to be as follows:  The appellant was  born
             on 21 May 1983 and brought up  in  Mullaitivi  on  the  north-
             eastern coast of Sri Lanka.  He worked as  a  fisherman.   His
             father was an LTTE  sympathiser,  and  his  elder  sister  and
             younger brother joined the LTTE in 1995 and 2008 respectively.
              The family continued to  live  in  Mullaitivi  apart  from  a
             period when they were displaced by military occupation of  the
             area by the Sri Lankan Army.  The appellant was married  on  7
             March 2007 and set up home independently but in the same area.
              He was forcibly conscripted into the LTTE  in  June  of  that
             year.

         7.   The appellant's experience of the sea led the LTTE  to  decide
             to train him as a builder of boats  for  LTTE  use,  including
             suicide bombing missions.  He worked in a team of 11 under the
             command of Lt.-Col. Sutha.  By reason  of  his  knowledge  and
             skills, the appellant was promoted to be  'second  leader'  of
             the team.  The  appellant  was,  however,  caught  up  in  the
             advance of the Sri Lankan Army in March 2009, and was  ordered
             by the LTTE to take part briefly in the front  line  fighting.
             After that, his assistance to the LTTE was limited to carrying
             food from LTTE kitchens to the front line.  He encountered his
             wife  by  chance,  and  she  was  able  to  inform  him   that
             arrangements had been made for him to escape with her from the
             LTTE  by  boat,  together  with  his  younger  brother.   This
             occurred on 16 April 2009.  However, the boat was intercepted,
             and the appellant and his brother were taken  to  Chettykullam
             Camp.  The appellant's  brother  was  identified  as  an  LTTE
             member and arrested.  The appellant himself was questioned  on
             a number of occasions whilst in the Camp.

         8.   He was  released  in  September  2010  and  went  to  live  in
             Vavuniya.  However, in December 2010, the  appellant  was  re-
             arrested, and taken to Joseph Camp.  He was kept there for two
             days and ill-treated during questioning.  He was  hung  upside
             down and beaten,  sustaining  injuries  of  which  he  carries
             scars.   He  was  photographed  and  finger-printed.   He  was
             detained at the Joseph Camp until March 2011.

         9.   He was then released on payment of a bribe by his uncle.   The
             release was disguised as an escape.  He  was  taken  from  the
             Camp as if still a prisoner but the vehicle in  which  he  was
             travelling suddenly stopped and  he  was  told  to  run  away.
             Shots were fired over his head.  The  appellant  went  to  his
             uncle's house in Vavuniya.   Arrangements  were  made  for  an
             agent to take him out of Sri Lanka, and on 20 March  2011,  he
             left Sri Lanka and travelled with  the  agent  to  Dubai.   On
             arrival the agent discovered that his colleague in  Dubai  had
             been arrested, and he told the appellant that they would  have
             to leave Dubai.  The appellant did not know  when  he  boarded
             the plane in Dubai on 3 April 2011 that they  were  to  travel
             back to Sri Lanka.  On arrival there, he was lodged in a house
             in  Colombo,  while  fresh  arrangements  were  made  for  the
             appellant to leave Sri Lanka.

         10.  On 28 April 2011, the  appellant  again  left  Sri  Lanka  and
             travelled to London 'via a few countries.'  He  did  not  know
             that he was coming to the  United  Kingdom  until  he  arrived
             here.  The appellant  approached  immigration  control  alone.
             His passport did not contain a visa, and he  was  detained  by
             the immigration officer for that reason.  He then applied  for
             asylum.  The appellant states that if he is  returned  to  Sri
             Lanka he will be shot by the authorities."

 4. At paragraphs [11] to [13], Judge Tipping discussed the expert evidence
    of Mr Martin who found a number of scars on the appellant's body  which
    were faint, but which were  discernable  on  careful  examination.   Mr
    Martin opined that the scars on the appellant's  back  were  consistent
    with his claim to have been beaten during detention, the circular scars
    on his leg were consistent with  cigarette  burns,  and  those  on  his
    wrists and ankles were consistent with him having  been  restrained  by
    handcuffs and or ligatures.

 5. The judge noted that the appellant was specifically asked at  interview
    whether he had any scars remaining, and replied that he  had  sustained
    injuries from a beating during detention but the  scars  had  vanished.
    The appellant claimed that he had mentioned visible scarring,  but  the
    interviewing officer had failed to record this.  It was clear to  Judge
    Tipping that the reply given  by  the  appellant  had  been  accurately
    recorded.  Also his  account  of  ill-treatment  during  detention  was
    limited to a claim to having been beaten, and there was no  mention  of
    being burnt by cigarettes.  The judge found the  discrepancy  difficult
    to explain, but decided that the inconsistency should not be  taken  as
    damaging the credibility of his evidence.

 6.  At  paragraph  [14]  she  turned  to  other  inconsistencies  in   the
    appellant's account of events.  The appellant was  asked  at  screening
    interview what activities he had carried out for the LTTE, and  he  had
    said he had given food to the Tigers, he had driven for them  and  also
    carried artillery for them.  The judge  found  this  reply  ran  wholly
    counter to the claim made at the main interview and maintained  at  the
    hearing, which was that he had been  employed  by  the  LTTE  to  build
    vessels for terrorist use.  It was only later in the  asylum  interview
    that the appellant had first claimed to have been second in command  of
    a boat building team.

 7. Judge Tipping did not find it credible that the  appellant  would  have
    been allowed to escape through the payment of a  bribe,  and  with  the
    assistance of a government minister, as the appellant suggested at  one
    point during the  interview.   At  the  same  interview  the  appellant
    claimed that prior to his release he had been identified by an informer
    as a builder of LTTE suicide boats.  In the  circumstances,  the  judge
    found, the appellant would clearly have been liable  to  be  prosecuted
    for aiding terrorist acts.   He  would  have  been  a  relatively  high
    profile prisoner, and the judge did not accept that he would have  been
    allowed to go, even on payment of a bribe.  He would have been  of  too
    great  adverse  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities   for   the
    accompanying officers to have taken the personal risk to themselves  of
    releasing him.  Also she did not  accept  that  a  government  minister
    would have had any motive for assisting the appellant in  securing  his
    release.

 8. Judge Tipping  found  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his  release
    contained elements of pantomime that stretched credibility to  breaking
    point and that his account of his departure from  Sri  Lanka  was  also
    riddled with inconsistencies.  He stated  that  the  agent  procured  a
    passport  in  his  own  identity.   He  said  he  himself  signed   the
    application form and that the passport contained  his  photograph.   It
    was with this passport that he sought to enter the United Kingdom.   He
    originally claimed the passport was obtained in  January  2010  but  on
    being reminded that this conflicted with his  claim  to  have  been  in
    detention at that time, he said the passport had been obtained  at  the
    time of his first alleged release from detention in May 2009.  Finally,
    returning in part to  his  first  account,  he  had  claimed  that  the
    passport was applied for  in  September  2010,  but  not  issued  until
    January 2011.  He sought to account for this delay by saying he was too
    frightened to go to the passport office, but this ran  counter  to  his
    claim that obtaining the passport was in the hands of the  agent.   The
    appellant claimed to have been identified as a high profile  member  of
    the LTTE, yet he also claimed that during his detention in January 2011
    the authorities issued him  with  a  passport.   Asked  about  this  at
    interview, the appellant again said that it had been  issued  with  the
    help of a Minister.  In his own evidence, the appellant was thus issued
    with a passport in his own identity whilst on detention as a  terrorist
    suspect.

 9. The judge found there was  no  discernible  reason  for  the  appellant
    allegedly employing an agent.  The agent took no  direct  part  in  the
    appellant's attempted entry  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant
    simply arrived here on his  own  passport,  but  lacking  a  visa.   He
    nonetheless claimed that his family paid  the  agent  �15,000  for  his
    assistance, a sum which was wholly disproportionate  not  only  to  the
    degree of assistance that the agent provided, but  also  the  resources
    available  to  a  fisherman  and  his   family,   notwithstanding   the
    appellant's explanation that the money had been raised by the  sale  of
    land.  Moreover, despite the appellant's claim not to have known he was
    travelling to the United Kingdom, there was clearly a  pre-arrangement,
    since the appellant arrived here with the contact details of  a  friend
    with whom accommodation had already been arranged at the  time  of  the
    screening interview, despite the appellant  having  been  in  detention
    since his arrival in the UK. The judge continued:

         "15. These flaws in the appellant's evidence relate to the core  of
             his claim to have been subject to persecution in Sri Lanka, to
             have been released illegally from detention, to have left  Sri
             Lanka clandestinely, and to  be  at  risk  of  coming  to  the
             adverse attention of the authorities if now returned.

         16.  I have had careful regard to the supporting evidence of Mr  MK
             and Mr PR.  Both state that they knew  the  appellant  in  Sri
             Lanka.  Mr MK says that he recalls the appellant selling  fish
             in the market, and that he met him again  when  the  appellant
             was driving a vehicle for the LTTE.  There is  no  mention  of
             boat building.  They met by chance at a funeral  in  Lewisham.
             Mr PR says that he knew the appellant in Sri  Lanka,  that  he
             was forcibly recruited into the  sea  tigers,  and  that  very
             recently he met the appellant by  chance  in  his  solicitor's
             office.  Given the striking discrepancies in  the  appellant's
             evidence, little weight can to my mind  be  accorded  to  this
             supporting evidence; I regard it as self-serving.

         17.  The appellant states that his wife has been  harassed  by  the
             authorities since the appellant since Sri Lanka because of his
             earlier escape  from  custody.   I  have  had  regard  to  the
             complaint lodged by the appellant's wife (though not until  19
             July 2011) with the Human  Rights  Commission  of  Sri  Lanka.
             There is no evidence of any further steps in the  matter.   It
             is open to anyone to lodge a complaint, and the  mere  lodging
             of a complaint is not therefore evidence of much  weight.   At
             the hearing,  the  appellant  said  that  his  wife  had  been
             arrested by the authorities, detained for three days,  and  on
             release  had  been  required  to  report  regularly   to   the
             authorities.  He claimed that this  took  place  on  12  March
             2011, and therefore before he left Sri Lanka.   The  appellant
             claimed at the  hearing  to  have  told  the  officer  at  the
             substantive interview about the arrest of his wife.  There  is
             no record of this.  The appellant said that he was  upset  and
             dizzy at the  interview,  though  this  runs  counter  to  his
             affirmative reply when asked  at  the  end  of  the  interview
             whether he was  still  feeling  fit  and  well  (Q.330).   The
             appellant's  failure  either  at  screening   or   substantive
             interview to mention his wife's arrest and  detention,  events
             which he states had taken place only a few  weeks  before  his
             arrival here, undermine the credibility of this aspect of  the
             appellant's account.

         18.  The appellant said at interview that he had not  been  charged
             with any offence.  He has nevertheless now belatedly submitted
             (in the appeal bundle at pages 25 to 27) three documents  that
             he claims are orders for his detention and confiscation  of  a
             vehicle.  These date from 30 March 2010 and earlier, and there
             is no explanation of the appellant's failure to  produce  them
             until now.  The originals have not been produced,  and  it  is
             fair to comment that the documents  could  readily  have  been
             typed  on  any  personal  computer.   The  appellant  has  not
             explained their provenance or submitted any  evidence  of  how
             they reached him.  In all  the  circumstances,  I  can  attach
             little weight to these documents.

         19.  I return to the issue of scarring.  The evidence of Mr  Martin
             establishes to  my  mind  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
             appellant has at some point been  beaten,  leaving  the  scars
             that are visible on his back.  It also appears to be the  case
             that he was restrained at hand and foot.   The  gunshot  wound
             remains wholly unexplained, and Mr Martin's  report  does  not
             record anything the appellant may have  told  him  about  this
             injury.  During the hostilities in Sri Lanka, a  bullet  wound
             could have been sustained in a wide range of  ways,  including
             accidentally.

         20.  I turn therefore to an assessment of the  credibility  of  the
             appellant's  evidence.   In  my  view,  the   medical   report
             establishes that the appellant was at some point held  by  the
             Sri Lankan  authorities  and  ill-treated  in  the  course  of
             questioning; there is no other reasonable explanation  of  the
             scars borne by the appellant.  There is evidence in the public
             domain that during the civil war, the Sri  Lankan  authorities
             routinely rounded up and questioned Tamils, young men like the
             appellant in particular, in their efforts to contain the Tamil
             insurrection.  There is also  evidence  that  the  authorities
             used beatings to  extract  information.   I  accept  that  the
             appellant may have been detained in this way, and I do not  of
             course condone the ill-treatment he may have suffered.

         21.  The detention of the appellant on one occasion  of  this  kind
             would not of itself, given the changed circumstances since the
             end of hostilities, create a  reasonable  likelihood  that  he
             would  now  be  of  adverse  interest  to   the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities.    The   clear   discrepancies    and    internal
             inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  that  I  have
             addressed above to  my  mind  undermine  the  much-embellished
             account that the appellant has now given.  I do not find  this
             account credible."

10. On the issue of risk on  return,  Judge  Tipping  reiterated  that  the
    appellant was not a high profile LTTE unit second in  command  that  he
    described in later versions of his evidence.  He might have been forced
    to assist the LTTE at a low level, as he initially claimed, by  driving
    and providing food.  But as such, he would not be of  adverse  interest
    to the authorities on return.  This conclusion was supported by his own
    evidence that he was not of such interest on return  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    early April 2011.

11. Judge Tipping's decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds raised was promulgated on 8 September  2011.   The  appellant's
    representatives applied unsuccessfully for permission  to  appeal,  and
    the appellant's appeal rights became exhausted as of 7 February 2012.

New evidence in support of a fresh claim for asylum

12. On 9 February 2012 the appellant was detained pending removal from  the
    UK.  On 13 February 2012 he submitted a Rule 35  -  torture  allegation
    claim.  This was refused on 15 February 2012.  At the end of the  month
    his representatives obtained a court injunction, and removal directions
    were cancelled.  On 2  April  2012  the  appellant  was  released  from
    detention, and on 29 August  2013  the  appellant's  solicitors  placed
    further  evidence  before  the  Home  Office  in  support  of  a  fresh
    application for international and human rights protection.   The  fresh
    evidence fell  into  two  categories.   The  first  category  comprised
    witness statements from three individuals testifying to  the  appellant
    taking part in protests and rallies in London against  the  Sri  Lankan
    government.  The other strand of new evidence was a medical  report  by
    Dr Camilo Zapata dated 16 August 2013.

The rejection of a fresh claim

13. In a letter dated 9 October 2013 Kiran Gil  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State gave her  reasons  for  deciding  that  the  further
    submissions dated 29 August 2013 were not significantly different  from
    the material which had previously been considered and therefore did not
    amount to a fresh claim for asylum and human rights.   With  regard  to
    the medical evidence, it was noted that in  his  report  of  16  August
    2013, Dr Zapata stated that:

         "In my opinion, bearing in mind some reduction in the frequency  of
         his symptoms, Mr [V's] PTSD is currently reasonably well-treated by
         psychiatrists and I strongly believe his  PTSD  would  continue  to
         improve if he were to continue to receive the very  good  treatment
         and management he has had while under the joint management  of  his
         GP and Dr Hussain, his psychiatrist at Ladywell CMHT.  Mr  [V]  has
         also benefited from counselling at the stress  and  refugee  group,
         although he  is  not  currently  attending  due  to  financial  and
         transport difficulties; I recommend he  attends  these  counselling
         and support groups."

14. It was considered that the level of the appellant's illness  fell  well
    short of the threshold required to engage Article 3,  as  indicated  by
    the case of Y and Other (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  Furthermore, it  was  noted  that  the
    appellant had a  number  of  family  members  residing  in  Sri  Lanka,
    including his wife and other family, who could support him.

15. After further  correspondence  between  the  solicitors  and  the  Home
    Office, on 28  February  2014  the  Home  Office  agreed  to  give  the
    appellant a right of appeal against the decision made on 9 October 2013
    to refuse to grant him leave to remain.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

16. The appellant's appeal came before  Judge  Cameron  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 18 July 2014.  Both parties  were  legally  represented.   The
    judge received oral evidence from the  appellant,  and  two  supporting
    witnesses.  In closing submissions on behalf of the appellant, Mr Lewis
    submitted there had been significant developments since the decision of
    Judge Tipping.  The Tribunal in GJ and Others at  paragraph  [275]  had
    accepted the evidence of a lawyer that despite the  seriousness  of  an
    offence, bribes were paid and a person could leave through the airport.
     Secondly, there was now evidence that the appellant had been suffering
    from PTSD at the time of his screening interview, when he had not  made
    reference to being involved in boat building.  The  fact  that  he  was
    second in command was not significant. What  was  significant  was  the
    accusation that he was aware of where they had buried arms.  Given  his
    believed involvement in the hiding of arms, he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return.

17. Judge  Cameron  set  out  his  findings  of  fact  and  credibility  at
    paragraphs [31] onwards.  At paragraphs [37]  to  [44],  Judge  Cameron
    considered  the  previous  psychiatric  reports  made  by  Dr   Zapata,
    beginning with the first one which was dated 20 August 2011, four  days
    after the hearing on 6 August 2011.  He noted that  the  appellant  was
    seen by the psychiatrist on 11 August 2011, which was five  days  prior
    to the hearing before Judge Tipping.

18. At paragraphs [46] to [48], the judge considered the most recent report
    of Dr Zapata dated 7 April 2014, and at paragraphs [49]  to  [62],  the
    judge gave his reasons for finding that the new evidence relied  on  by
    the appellant did not establish to the required standard of proof  that
    he was of continued adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.   I
    reproduce paragraphs [45] to [62] below,

         "45. In an up-to-date report dated 7 April 2014  Dr  Zapata  states
             that the appellant is still symptomatic in terms of  his  PTSD
             but that he has improved since he  was  last  seen  in  August
             2013.  The appellant continues  to  be  seen  by  his  GP  and
             psychiatrist and other health professionals.  There is further
             reference at paragraph 14 to the  appellant  having  taken  an
             overdose of paracetamol and superficially lacerating both  his
             arms.  At paragraph 16 there is reference  to  medication  the
             appellant is currently prescribed.

         46.  At paragraph 21 there is reference in the  last  4  weeks  the
             appellant has wished that he  was  dead  but  has  not  harmed
             himself but had thought about suicide by  taking  an  overdose
             but had no actual suicide plans when he was seen by Dr Zapata.
              The report at paragraph 37 again refers to the fact that  the
             appellant's symptoms  could  explain  inconsistencies  in  his
             evidence.

         47.   Dr  Zapata  states  at  paragraph  46  that  the  appellant's
             condition would worsen if removed to Sri Lanka and his suicide
             risk would increase.  He  states  that  the  appellant  should
             continue his psychological psychotherapeutic treatment for  at
             least another 6 months (48) and that the threat of  return  is
             currently in his opinion worsening the appellant's  state  and
             consequently increasing his risk of suicide (49).

         48.  Dr  Zapata  again  indicates  at  paragraph  52  that  if  the
             appellant were removed back to Sri Lanka the risk  of  suicide
             could reach a higher level  and  be  maintained  as  treatment
             would not be readily available to him.   At  paragraph  56  he
             states that the appellants risk  if  his  appeal  was  refused
             would increase to extremely high.

         49.  It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that  documents  now
             obtained including a letter from an MP in Sri Lanka  and  also
             from a Sri Lankan attorney  which  deal  with  the  appellants
             arrest enable the  tribunal  to  go  behind  the  findings  of
             Immigration Judge Tipping.  The letter from the  MP  indicates
             that that he was aware of the appellant's  previous  detention
             and also  refers  to  the  fact  that  in  November  2011  the
             appellant's father asked his advice about the  fact  that  the
             appellant's wife  was  being  detained  and  harassed  by  the
             authorities seeking her husband.

         50.  The letter from the Sri Lankan lawyer refers to  documents  in
             connection with the appellant dated March  2010  and  December
             2009.  Although he states that the documents are  genuine  and
             not  fabricated  the  documents  simply  indicate   that   the
             appellant was believed to have  undergone  training  with  the
             LTTE.  Given that it is accepted by  Judge  Tipping  that  the
             appellant was detained and ill-treated and that he was  a  low
             level member of the LTTE, I do not find that these  particular
             documents take the matter any further.

         51.  The appellant does of course indicate  that  he  is  still  of
             interest and refers to the fact that he was contacted  by  his
             wife after  his  asylum  interview  indicating  that  she  had
             documents pertaining to the arrest of  his  brother.   In  his
             witness statement dated 18 July 2014 he again  refers  to  the
             findings of the previous Immigration Judge and gives a further
             explanation as to  why  those  findings  were  incorrect.   In
             addition he states that he has  maintained  contact  with  his
             wife and that in March 2014 she told him that  she  was  still
             being harassed by CID officers looking  for  him.   He  states
             that she still continues to report to the police  station  and
             is questioned about him.

         52.  I do take into account the new evidence  in  relation  to  the
             appellants statement that his wife has been  harassed  by  the
             authorities in connection with his whereabouts and  that  this
             statement appears to be corroborated  by  the  MP's  statement
             that he was contacted in 2011 about this issue  however  I  am
             not satisfied even to the lower standard of  proof  that  this
             evidence is credible given the change in emphasis  adopted  by
             the Sri Lankan authorities towards those who  were  previously
             members of the LTTE particularly given the findings  that  the
             appellant was not a high level member of the LTTE.

         53.  Although the appellant has provided additional witnesses,  one
             of whom in fact gave evidence on the previous  occasion,  they
             do nothing more than confirm that the appellant was  a  member
             of the LTTE and was detained.  This is  in  fact  accepted  by
             Judge Tipping.

         54.  Taking into account all of the evidence  available  I  am  not
             satisfied that the appellant has shown that  the  findings  of
             Judge Tipping that he was not a  high-profile  member  of  the
             LTTE are incorrect.

         55.  I find that the appellant was a member of  the  LTTE  and  did
             assist them.  I also accept the evidence that he was  detained
             and ill-treated.  He was however released on the payment of  a
             bribe and left  the  country  albeit  that  he  then  returned
             briefly and left again with the aid of an  agent.   I  do  not
             find even to the lower standard of proof  that  the  appellant
             would still be of interest to the authorities  given  his  low
             level profile and I do not accept  the  evidence  as  credible
             that his wife has been required to report for the last 2 years
             or so and is still being questioned about him.

         56.  Dealing with the appellants return to Sri Lanka the  court  in
             MP (Sri Lanka) have confirmed the risk factors set out by  the
             Upper Tribunal in GJ at paragraph 356.  The tribunal confirmed
             that if a person was  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
             service there remained a real risk of  ill-treatment  or  harm
             and that internal relocation  within  Sri  Lanka  was  not  an
             option for such a person. They also  indicated  that  the  Sri
             Lankan  authorities  approach  was  based   on   sophisticated
             intelligence.  It was stated that the Sri  Lankan  authorities
             knew that many Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as  economic
             migrants and also that everyone in the Northern  Province  had
             some level of involvement with the LTTE during the Civil  War.



         57.  I do take note of the fact that in MP (Sri  Lanka)  the  court
             upheld findings that the attendance at  one  or  even  several
             demonstrations was not of itself evidence that a person  is  a
             committed Tamil activist seeking to promote Tamil  separatists
             within Sri Lanka.  The appellant's evidence  is  that  he  has
             attended a number of pro-LTTE activities  in  the  UK  and  he
             states that his photograph has appeared on  certain  websites.
             There is also evidence that the  appellants  were  videotaping
             those who attended some of these demonstrations.

         58.  As indicated above I accept to the  lower  standard  of  proof
             that the evidence available including the  medical  report  is
             sufficient for me to make a finding  that  the  appellant  was
             detained and ill-treated.  I also note the MP's  comment  that
             he was contacted in 2011.  I do however note paragraph  30  of
             MP (Sri Lanka) and in particular the comments  that  2011  was
             still relatively soon after the ending of  the  war  when  the
             risks may have been greater.

         59.  Although I accept that the  appellant  was  detained  and  was
             subjected to ill-treatment he was released on the payment of a
             bribe and left Sri Lanka.  I do take into account  the  change
             in the authorities position in particular that their focus  is
             now on identifying Tamil activists in  the  diaspora  who  are
             working for Tamil separatism and to  destabilise  the  unitary
             Sri Lankan state.

         60.  The appellant undertook low level activities for the LTTE.  In
             this country he  has  attended  a  number  of  demonstrations.
             There is nothing however on the evidence available which would
             indicate that the appellant is an activist or that he would be
             perceived as an activist such as to now be of interest to  the
             authorities on return.

         61.  I not satisfied even to the lower standard of proof  that  the
             appellant would come within any of the risk factors  currently
             set out  in  GJ.   I  am  not  therefore  satisfied  that  the
             appellant would be at risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  for  a
             convention reason.

         62.  Given the conclusions as outlined above, I do  not  find  that
             the appellant has discharged the burden of proof to  establish
             that he is entitled to the grant of asylum.   I  come  to  the
             conclusion that the appellant's removal would  not  cause  the
             United Kingdom to be in breach of its  obligations  under  the
             Qualifying Regulations."

19. On the topic of the appellant's alternative claim under Article 3  ECHR
    (mental health/suicide risk), the judge accepted at paragraph [69]  the
    findings in GJ that there were only facilities available in the  cities
    and they did not provide appropriate care for mentally ill people.  But
    he was not satisfied that  the  severity  of  the  appellant's  current
    mental health was such that there was a real risk that he would  commit
    suicide.  He would clearly have assistance during his removal,  and  he
    would be removed  to  Colombo  where  there  were  some  mental  health
    professionals available.

The Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

20. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of Judge Cameron to dismiss his appeal  on  asylum
    and human rights grounds, and  permission  was  granted  by  Designated
    Judge McCarthy.  An error of law hearing took place at Field  House  on
    17 October 2014 before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly, at  which  Mr
    Lewis of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant, and  Mr  Bramble,
    Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  Judge Kelly's decision was subsequently promulgated on  28
    October 2014, and the decision is set out in its entirety below

         "1.  The appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
             of  First-tier  Tribunal  Cameron  who,  in  a   determination
             promulgated on the  6th  August  2014,  dismissed  his  appeal
             against the respondent's decision to  refuse  his  application
             for asylum and to remove him to Sri Lanka.

         2.   The present proceedings arise from a fresh claim  for  asylum.
             His appeal against the  rejection  of  a  previous  claim  for
             asylum was dismissed  by  Judge  Tipping  in  a  determination
             promulgated on the 5th September 2011.  Judge Tipping accepted
             that the appellant had been detained and tortured in 2010  (an
             experience in respect of which  he  still  bore  the  physical
             scars) due to his membership of  the  LTTE  ('Tamil  Tigers').
             She nevertheless did not find his account of subsequent events
             credible,  and  thus  concluded  that   he   had   failed   to
             substantiate  his  claim  to  be  the  subject  of  continuing
             interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities.   The  evidence  upon
             which the appellant based his fresh claim was  to  the  effect
             that the Sri Lankan authorities were  continuing  to  question
             his wife about his whereabouts, and  thus  demonstrating  that
             they continued to have an adverse interest in him.

         3.   The appellant's first ground of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
             is predicated upon the  First-tier  Tribunal  having  accepted
             that the appellant's wife 'had  actually  been  detained  (not
             merely questioned) on account of the suspicion with which  the
             appellant was  held  following  the  appellant's  escape,  and
             further that his father had also been detained' [paragraph  14
             of the application for permission  to  appeal].   However,  as
             Designated Judge McCarthy pointed out when granting permission
             to appeal, that premise is not borne out by  the  contents  of
             the Tribunal's determination.  Thus, at  paragraph  52,  Judge
             Cameron said this:

                  "I do take into account the new evidence  in  relation  to
                  the appellant's statement that his wife has been  harassed
                  by the authorities in connection with his whereabouts  and
                  that this statement appears to be corroborated by the  MPs
                  statement that he was contacted in 2011 about  this  issue
                  however I am not satisfied even to the lower  standard  of
                  proof that this evidence is credible given the  change  in
                  emphasis adopted by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  towards
                  those who were previously members of the LTTE particularly
                  given the findings that the appellant was not a high level
                  member of the LTTE."

         4.   It is right to say that Judge Cameron subsequently appeared to
             backtrack somewhat upon his otherwise  clear  earlier  finding
             that the appellant had failed to  substantiate  his  claim  of
             continued interest in him by the authorities [see paragraph 58
             of the determination].  I therefore indicated to Mr Lewis that
             because I had decided (for other reasons) to re-determine this
             appeal, I was prepared to revisit  this  issue  at  a  resumed
             hearing.  It is nevertheless my  expectation  that  the  issue
             will be argued by reference to the evidence  that  was  before
             the First-tier Tribunal.  I therefore make it plain  that  any
             further evidence that may be submitted  in  relation  to  this
             issue is likely to be the subject of very close scrutiny,  and
             the degree of weight that  the  Tribunal  attaches  to  it  is
             likely to be substantially dependent upon the  credibility  of
             any explanation that is given for its late arrival.

         5.   The ground upon which I have decided to set aside the decision
             of the First-tier Tribunal is that, having apparently accepted
             the factual basis of the appellant's subjective fear  of  ill-
             treatment on return to Sri Lanka - that is to  say,  his  ill-
             treatment by the authorities in 2010 -  it  thereafter  failed
             adequately to explain why it did not also  accept  the  expert
             evidence  of  Camilo  Zapata   (a   Consultant   Psychiatrist)
             concerning the risk of suicide.  It was Dr  Zapata's  evidence
             that, whilst the appellant  did  not  have  'current  suicidal
             plans,' if he were to fail in his asylum appeal the risk of  a
             'completed  suicide'  would  nevertheless  increase  from  its
             currently 'high' level to an 'extremely high' one  [paragraphs
             55 and 56 of the  addendum  to  his  report].   Judge  Cameron
             stated that it was 'relevant to note that the  appellant  does
             not currently have active suicidal thoughts and there  are  no
             plans made' [paragraph 68:  emphasis  added].   Whilst  it  is
             obviously the case that a Tribunal can only make  findings  of
             fact by reference to past and  present  circumstances,  it  is
             equally obvious that any assessment of risk is necessarily  an
             exercise in predicting future possibilities.   In  this  case,
             the Tribunal's consideration of the likely situation  for  the
             appellant on return to Sri Lanka was confined to  its  finding
             that there would be 'mental health professionals' available to
             him in Colombo [paragraph 69].  The Tribunal thus reached  its
             conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk of  suicide
             on return to Sri Lanka by combining Dr Lapata's assessment  of
             the appellant's present state-of-mind (that is to say,  whilst
             he is in  the  United  Kingdom)  with  its  own  finding  that
             treatment for that condition would be available  to  him  upon
             his future return to Sri Lanka.  A rational assessment of  the
             matter would have involved consideration  of  the  appellant's
             predicted state-of-mind on return to  Sri  Lanka,  within  the
             context of the mental health  facilities  and  family  support
             that would be available to him at that time.  I therefore  set
             aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  ground
             that it did not conduct a rational assessment of the  risk  of
             suicide upon the appellant's forced return to Sri Lanka.

         6.   Unfortunately, by the time that I had concluded that there had
             been a material error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
             determination of this appeal, there remained insufficient time
             to hear the arguments of the representatives relating  to  the
             re-making of the decision.  It will therefore be necessary  to
             list the matter for a resumed hearing on another date.

         7.   For the avoidance of doubt, and subject to what I have said at
             paragraphs 4 and 5 above, the factual findings of  the  First-
             tier Tribunal are preserved.

         Decision

         8.   The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law  and  its
             decision is set aside."

New evidence relating to alleged ongoing adverse interest

21. For the purposes of the re-making  of  the  decision,  the  appellant's
    solicitors served on the Tribunal and on the Specialist Appeals Team  a
    supplementary bundle marked U for a contemplated hearing on 27  January
    2015.  The supplementary bundle contained  a  fresh  witness  statement
    from  the  appellant,  a  witness  statement  from   Mrs   Sakundaldevi
    Vijayalingam, a psychiatric report prepared  by  Dr  Saleh  Dhumad  and
    various documents which had been obtained from Sri Lanka following  the
    error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

22. In a letter dated 8 January 2015 a lawyer in Vavinuya (who Mr MacKenzie
    asked me not to identify by  name  in  this  decision)  said  that  the
    appellant's wife, T, had been referred to him  by  a  named  Member  of
    Parliament of Sri Lanka, who had personally spoken  to  him  about  her
    pathetic situation and had requested him to render her his professional
    assistance.  According to his records, he could confirm that T came  to
    his office in the first week of March 2012.  He  obtained  instructions
    from her about the continued harassment and  reporting  to  the  police
    station which had come about due to matters relating  to  her  husband.
    There were thousands of similar cases.   As  the  law  stood  now,  the
    remedies available to LTTE suspects and  sympathisers  were  nil  since
    they were  counted  as  terrorists.   The  police  and  other  security
    agencies had absolute power  to  impose  conditions,  such  as  regular
    reporting, on an indefinite basis, if acts related  to  terrorism  were
    made out.  He advised T that she had no legal remedy, and that her only
    recourse was to make a complaint against the police to the Human Rights
    Commission in Vavuniya.  He gave this advice to  T,  but  she  was  not
    interested in approaching the commission as  ordinary  Tamils  believed
    that the  commission  was  full  of  state  spies  leading  to  further
    harassment.

23. After obtaining T's consent, he had contacted  the  police  station  in
    August 2014 through his junior (whose name he gave) to know the reasons
    for the prolonged reporting conditions which they  had  imposed  on  T.
    His junior was informed that T was a traitor just like her husband, and
    that her husband was one of the key people who were  directly  involved
    in concealing weapons of the  LTTE,  done  with  an  intention  to  use
    against the state when time was once again  in  their  favour.   V  had
    knowledge about the locations where the weapons were buried and he  was
    also a vital link for surviving LTTE members in the country as well  as
    abroad.

24. He was certain they were determined to take action against V  and  were
    currently using his wife as an instrument to  bring  him  back  to  the
    country.   He  requested  that  the  appellant's  solicitors  keep  the
    information he was providing in the letter strictly  confidential.   It
    was on that basis that Mr MacKenzie  asked  me  to  keep  his  identity
    secret.

25. In a letter dated 12 January 2015, another  lawyer,  Mr  Francis  Royce
    Regi Croos, who has an office in Vavuniya according to his  letterhead,
    responded to a letter from Theva Solicitors dated 10 November 2014.  He
    said he had known T for many years as her father was  a  family  friend
    and lived next to their home in Vanni.  He was aware that the appellant
    left the country to evade the imminent arrest by the Sri  Lankan  armed
    forces and authorities due to his explicit involvement with  the  LTTE.
    Based on his personal knowledge and after having seen T many  times  in
    2014 while reporting, he could confirm she was directed  to  report  to
    the police station situated at the heart  of  Vavuniya  town.   He  was
    defending a case against his client who was charged on  the  Prevention
    of Terrorism Act for aiding and abetting terrorists  to  build  a  safe
    house where they attempted to hide  weapons  and  valuable  belongings.
    For legal reasons he was unable to reveal  his  client's  name  in  the
    letter, but he could confirm that he was interrogated about V, who  was
    believed to be part of a team who tried to hide weapons.  Therefore, he
    would like to state that V was still  wanted  for  his  involvement  in
    hiding weapons.  T was required to report in respect of  her  husband's
    alleged involvement in burying weapons.

26. In a letter dated 20 January 2015 the  Grama  Sevaka  officer  for  the
    village of Vannankualam in Mullaitivi district said that before he  was
    transferred to this village, he served as the Grama Sevaka officer  for
    Pandarikulam.  T was domiciled with her two children in Thonikkal area,
    which had come under his previous jurisdiction. He knew  T  very  well.
    He had had the opportunity to interact with  T  for  various  acts  and
    development activities in the village.  It was difficult for T to bring
    up her children as a single mother, and she  had  been  facing  serious
    problems from society.

27. The Sri Lankan armed forces, police and CID regularly asked him to give
    them an updated list of people in his village who were said to  be  the
    most wanted people for involvement with the LTTE and terrorist  related
    activities.  T's husband V was one of the people on the list  that  was
    handed over to him to give an update.  Those who gave him the list  had
    chided them (the appellant and his wife) as attempting to  give  oxygen
    to the decimated LTTE, both in Sri Lanka and foreign  soil.   They  had
    asked him to submit various details about T, including the name of  the
    schools where her children had been studying, how much she  was  paying
    for the tuition fees, details of  immoveable  and  moveable  properties
    bought by her recently, the identities of people who were visiting  her
    home regularly, and her continuing relationship with former members  of
    the LTTE and their family members.  As he had a heavy workload, he  had
    expressed his inability to assist them but had agreed to carry out some
    other tasks for them.  He was still aware that she had  been  reporting
    to the police station due to her husband's involvement with the LTTE as
    V was accused of concealing weapons belonging to the  LTTE.   From  the
    conversations, pocket meetings and emergency meetings he had  had  with
    officers of the armed forces, he could confirm that V was one of  their
    wanted targets who would face imminent arrest  and  interrogation  upon
    his arrival to this country.  He had seen  T  many  times  at  Vavuniya
    Police Station when summoned to the police station to  discuss  various
    official matters with police officers.

28. In her unsigned witness statement, Mrs  Vijayalingam  said  she  was  a
    naturalised British citizen.  She had come to the UK as  a  refugee  in
    2000, and in 2004 she was granted indefinite leave  to  remain.   Since
    she came to the UK, she had visited Sri Lanka three  times.   She  went
    back in November 2005 for her father's funeral and in September 2009 in
    connection with her relative's wedding.  Her last visit was  in  August
    2014 to attend  the  wedding  of  her  elder  sister's  son  which  was
    scheduled for 31 August 2014.  She had known  V's  father  for  a  long
    time.  Like her family members, V also shared close contacts  with  the
    LTTE.  She saw V in Sri Lanka in November 2005 at her father's funeral.
     When she visited the country in 2009 she was not able to meet V or his
    family as the war had displaced everyone from the  northern  region  to
    camps.

29. In January 2012 she met V in the UK  at  Lewisham  Hindu  temple.   She
    learnt from him that he was wanted by the authorities in Sri Lanka, and
    that in his absence his family was being targeted.  She tried her  best
    to help V to overcome his mental condition.

30. When she returned to Sri Lanka in August 2014, she went to V's  parents
    and invited them to the wedding.  She obtained  T's  address  from  the
    appellant's mother, and went to her house to invite her to the  wedding
    as well.  She learnt from her that she was interrogated by  the  police
    for her husband's LTTE associations.  She had to report to  the  police
    station each week.  Neither V's  parents  nor  his  wife  attended  the
    wedding.

31. She next encountered T at the Vavuniya Police Station.   She  had  lost
    her bag in an auto-rickshaw, and she had  to  go  three  times  to  the
    police station to file  a  complaint  as  the  police  were  busy  with
    preparations for a visit by the president.  On her third visit  to  the
    police station, she met T who had come there for her weekly  reporting.
    She was unable to speak to her at the time.  She was sitting at a  desk
    where persons who had to report were also made to wait.  A  weak  smile
    and shame was the only thing they could share.

32. When she returned to the UK, she invited the appellant to come  to  her
    house, and she informed him about the difficulties faced  by  his  wife
    and family in Sri Lanka.

Adjournment

33. At a scheduled hearing earlier  in  2015,  the  witness  was  ill,  and
    therefore was unable to attend to give oral evidence.  As Ms  Isherwood
    wished to cross-examine her on her evidence, I agreed  to  adjourn  the
    hearing.

Recent suicide attempt

34. On 15 November 2015  the  appellant  attended  University  Hospital  in
    Lewisham having taken an overdose of paracetomal.  As a result of  this
    incident, the appellant's solicitors commissioned a further psychiatric
    report from Dr Camilo Zapata, which was produced on  1  December  2015.
    This report, together with medical notes relating to  the  incident  in
    November 2015, was served in a supplementary bundle marked U2.

The Continuation Hearing

35. Mrs Vijayalingam was tendered as a witness, and she was  cross-examined
    by  Ms  Isherwood.   She  also  answered  questions  for  clarification
    purposes from me.  She had applied for asylum in the year 2000, and her
    claim had been rejected.  She  had  been  granted  asylum  following  a
    successful appeal.  She initially said she could not recall  the  basis
    of her asylum claim, but she later confirmed  that  the  basis  of  her
    asylum claim was that she feared the Sri Lankan government  because  of
    her connections with the LTTE.  She was a sympathiser and supporter  of
    the LTTE.  She had problems before she came  here  in  2000,  including
    being detained and taken to court.  It was put to her that  nonetheless
    she did not have any fear about going back.  She said that as  she  had
    British nationality,  she  was  confident  that  this  would  give  her
    protection.  A British passport had been issued to her in October 2009.

36. It was put to her that she was speculating when she said that T was  at
    the police station for the purposes of reporting.  The  witness  denied
    this.  She saw the appellant sitting on a bench.  When she saw  T,  she
    gave her a  "thumbs  up"  sign,  and  T  in  response  made  a  gesture
    indicating that she was here to sign a document.  T had previously told
    her that she came to the police station every week to report.   So  she
    understood that the signing gesture meant that she was here to  report.
    When Ms Isherwood queried this, she said she saw a notice  board  above
    T's head which had words to the effect that  this  was  the  place  for
    people reporting.  It was put to the witness that  T  could  have  been
    there for a number of other reasons.  The witness  said  that  she  had
    taken her friend's son with her, and she asked him to get  confirmation
    from the police sergeant that the bench was for people to  sit  on  who
    were reporting.  The friend's son obtained this confirmation  from  the
    police sergeant.  Ms Isherwood put to the witness  that  she  had  made
    this all up.  The witness denied this, saying there was no need for her
    to lie.

37. In her closing submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Ms
    Isherwood invited me to make an adverse credibility finding in  respect
    of the evidence of alleged ongoing advesre interest  in  the  appellant
    and his wife.  With respect to the Article 3 claim, she submitted  that
    the Tribunal in GJ had been wrong to find that adequate  treatment  for
    people suffering from PTSD would not be  available  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  She relied on the findings  of  the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights in AA v Sweden made on  2  September  2008  (application  number
    859A/04) and on a recent Country of Origin Information response.

38. In reply, Mr MacKenzie submitted that the MP's letter  referred  to  in
    the decision of Judge Cameron was a significant piece of evidence which
    was supportive of the claim that the authorities in Sri Lanka continued
    to have an adverse interest in the appellant,  and  thus  continued  to
    require his wife to report every week.  As to the mental health  claim,
    the COI response actually assisted the appellant's  case,  rather  than
    the respondent's, as it highlighted the absence  of  provision  in  the
    appellant's home area of Mullaitivi.  The evidence referred to in AA  v
    Sweden was out of date, and in any event the Secretary of  State  could
    not reasonably rely on the findings in that decision to  undermine  the
    findings made in GJ at paragraphs [454] and [455].  For  such  findings
    were based on evidence  provided  by  the  UK  Border  Agency,  as  the
    Tribunal made clear:

         "The evidence is that there are only 25  working  psychiatrists  in
         the whole of Sri Lanka.  Although  there  are  some  mental  health
         facilities in Sri Lanka, at paragraph 4  of  the  April  2012  UKBA
         Operational Guidance Note on Sri Lanka, it records  an  observation
         by basic needs that 'money that is  spent  on  mental  health  only
         really goes to the large  mental  health  institutions  in  capital
         cities, which are inaccessible and do not provide appropriate  care
         for mentally ill people."

Discussion and Findings on Re-Making

The Burden and Standard of Proof

39. In international protection claims, the standard of proof  is  that  of
    real risk or reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.  Evidence  of  matters
    occurring after the date of decision can be taken into account.

Past Persecution or Serious Harm

40. Under Paragraph 339K, the fact that a person has already  been  subject
    to  persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
    persecution or serious harm, will be regarded as a serious indicator of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

Duty to Substantiate Claim for International Protection

41. Paragraph 339L of the immigration rules provides that it is the duty of
    the person to substantiate his claim. Where aspects of  his  claim  are
    not supported by documentary or other evidence, those aspects will  not
    need confirmation when all of the following conditions are met:

      a) The person has made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim;

      b) All material factors at the person's disposal have been  submitted,
         and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of other relevant
         material has been given;

      c) The person's statements are found to be coherent and plausible  and
         do not run counter to available specific  and  general  information
         relevant to the person's case;

      d) The person has made his claim at the earliest possible time, unless
         the person can demonstrate good reasons for not doing so;

      e) The general credibility of the person is established.

42. It is convenient at this stage to refer to the country guidance case of
    GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319. This country guidance replaces all existing country guidance  on
    Sri Lanka, and it includes the following headline guidance:

         "(2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state ... Its  focus
             is on preventing both (a) the resurgence of the  LTTE  or  any
             similar Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the  revival  of
             the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  Security  Services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists ...

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes ...

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop'  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             'watch' list.  A person whose name appears on a  'watch'  list
             is not reasonably likely to be detained  at  the  airport  but
             will be monitored by the security services after  his  or  her
             return.  If that monitoring does  not  indicate  that  such  a
             person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the  unitary
             Sri Lankan state or revive the internal  armed  conflict,  the
             individual in question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             to be detained  by  the  security  forces.   That  will  be  a
             question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any  diaspora
             activities carried out by such an individual."

43. As the decision of Judge Tipping stands undisturbed, I take this as  my
    starting-point in the fact-finding exercise. The  central  question  is
    whether the new evidence relied upon before Judge Cameron and the  even
    newer evidence relied on before me is  of  sufficient  credibility  and
    cogency as to lead to a different conclusion on future  risk,  applying
    the lower standard of proof and bearing in mind Paragraph 339K.

The MP's letter

44. In a letter dated  2  January  2012,  Mr  Nohrathaligam,  a  Member  of
    Parliament for Vanni district, informed the appellant's solicitors that
    in July 2007 the appellant's father  had  telephoned  him  seeking  his
    assistance regarding his son's forceful conscription by the  LTTE.   He
    told him he was unable to help as it was a matter beyond  his  control.
    After that he lost contact with him, until he met him again in November
    2011 at his residence in Vavuniya after he and his other family members
    had been released from an internal displacement camp in the same month.

45. He was contacted by V's uncle for help in getting V out of Joseph  Camp
    detention.  He contacted the officers  at  Joseph  Camp  where  he  was
    incarcerated, and was given the information that V was identified as an
    LTTE terrorist.  So the only way to help the appellant was to  get  the
    help of agents who had close contacts  with  the  military  and  police
    establishments, and to bribe them for their release.  So  he  gave  the
    contact number of a person who  had  close  connections  with  the  Sri
    Lankan army to V's uncle.

46. In November 2011 the appellant's father came with his daughter-in-law T
    who had been arrested and detained.  She  was  later  released  on  the
    condition that she had to report each week to Vavuniya Police  Station.
    This was the usual tactic employed by the army and police to  compel  a
    wanted person, such as V, to surrender.   He  advised  the  appellant's
    father and wife to retain the help of an attorney.  Some  weeks  later,
    his mother came to seek his assistance as her husband (the  appellant's
    father) had been taken by the Sri Lankan authorities to investigate his
    son's involvement with the LTTE,  and  on  suspicion  that  he  was  in
    contact with V.  He said that he was not in a position  to  render  her
    any help.  The reality was that people who had been associated with  or
    had a link with the LTTE  had  been  harassed  and  humiliated  by  the
    authorities, and this was what was happening to V's family.

47. The evidence of the MP dovetails with the  new  evidence  contained  in
    supplementary bundle U insofar as the well-known  lawyer  that  the  MP
    says he recommended to T has now come forward to confirm on a  strictly
    confidential basis that T consulted him in 2012.

48. But there are problems with  the  chronology.   As  recorded  by  Judge
    Tipping, T's human rights complaint was lodged on 19  July  2011.   The
    lawyer says that according to his records, T came to his office in  the
    first week of March 2012, and it was at that point that he advised  her
    to make a complaint to the police to the  Human  Rights  Commission  at
    Vavuniya.  Indeed, he says that T  rejected  his  advice,  as  she  was
    concerned the Human Rights Commission  was  full  of  state  spies  and
    therefore a complaint would only lead to further harassment.   However,
    the fact is, according to other evidence filed by  the  appellant,  his
    wife had already made a complaint to the Human Rights  Commission,  and
    therefore her stated response is not credible for two reasons.   It  is
    not credible that she would have rejected his advice  because  she  was
    fearful of the consequences, and it is not credible that she would  not
    have told him that she had already made a complaint to the Human Rights
    Commission in July 2011, and that this information would not have  been
    noted in the records which the lawyer  claimed  to  have  kept  of  his
    consultation with T in the first week of March 2012.

49. The MP's letter  also  engenders  another  significant  discrepancy  in
    respect of what happened to the  appellant  and  his  family  in  2011.
    According to the appellant, all his family, including his  parents  and
    his uncle, ended up in Arunsalam camp in May 2009.  The  appellant  and
    his family were based at the camp until September 2010, when his wife's
    aunt, who was a teacher and permanent resident of Vavuniya and a family
    card holder, got them all released  from  the  camp  (B5  to  B7,  main
    bundle).  The appellant says he was arrested for a second time  by  the
    CID on 4 December 2010, as a result of information provided by an  LTTE
    informer who had  revealed  the  appellant's  involvement  in  building
    suicide boats.  On the appellant's  account,  the  MP's  assistance  in
    obtaining his release from Joseph Camp would have needed to  have  been
    sought in the early part of 2011; and his assistance in respect of  the
    alleged harassment of the appellant's wife  following  the  appellant's
    "escape" from Joseph Camp in March 2011 would  have  been  sought  soon
    thereafter, before T eventually made a complaint to  the  Human  Rights
    Commission, allegedly about her harassment by the CID.

50. It is plainly asserted in the MP's letter that the  appellant's  father
    and  other  family  members  were  only  released  from   an   internal
    displacement camp in November 2011, which is more  than  a  year  after
    (according to the appellant) they were in fact released.

51. Moreover, the plain implication  of  his  account  of  the  appellant's
    father and T seeking his assistance in November 2011 is that T had only
    very recently been arrested, detained and then  released  on  condition
    that she had to report each week to Vavuniya  Police  Station.   Hence,
    the MP said that at the meeting in November 2011  she  was  afraid  she
    would be detained and harassed again, "when she  goes  for  reporting."
    But on the appellant's account, she had been  reporting  for  some  six
    months already.

52. It is strongly arguable that the implication of the MP's letter is that
    V himself was still in Joseph Camp at the beginning of  November  2011,
    as his account of V's uncle seeking his help to  get  V  released  from
    Joseph Camp is immediately preceded by  a  reference  to  the  date  of
    November 2011 as being the date when he saw the appellant's father  and
    other family members again for the first time since July 2007.  Even if
    that is not the correct interpretation, it is significant that  the  MP
    does not give a date for the alleged approach by V's uncle to help  get
    V out of Joseph Camp detention.

53. In summary, the message of the MP's letter is that (a)  he  helped  the
    appellant to escape from Joseph Camp in the late summer or early autumn
    of 2011, when in fact the appellant was already in the United  Kingdom;
    and (b) that the authorities only began to harass the appellant's  wife
    by arresting, detaining and then releasing her on  condition  that  she
    report once a week some six months after the alleged escape.  Thus, far
    from supporting the appellant's core claim, the MP's letter  ultimately
    serves to undermine it.

New background evidence on bribery?

54. Another reason which has been advanced for departing from the  findings
    of Judge Tipping is that the evidence given to, and  accepted  by,  the
    Tribunal in GJ and Others shows that the  appellant's  claim  of  being
    officially treated as an escapee, although  he  had  been  unofficially
    released on payment of a bribe,  is  a  plausible  one.   However,  the
    proposition which was accepted by the Tribunal in GJ and Others was not
    a novel one.  In  earlier  country  guidance  it  was  recognised  that
    release upon payment of a bribe  did  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
    authorities no longer had an adverse interest in the person released.

55. Each case must be considered  on  its  own  particular  facts,  and  it
    remains the case that the  appellant's  account  of  being  allowed  to
    escape, even though he was perceived  as  being  able  to  provide  the
    authorities with useful information as to where explosives were  buried
    and, moreover, was  perceived  as  still  being  a  terrorist,  is  not
    credible.  It is far  more  likely  that  the  appellant  was  released
    because the authorities had  no  further  interest  in  him.   This  is
    reinforced by the fact that the appellant on his  own  case  re-entered
    Sri Lanka from Dubai in April 2011.  The fact that he was able  to  re-
    enter  the  country  through  Colombo  Airport  without  being  stopped
    undermines the claim that he was treated as an escapee  and  was  being
    actively sought by the authorities in April 2011, with the  consequence
    that his wife was being harassed about his  whereabouts.   It  is  also
    necessary to recognise that Judge Tipping's  reasons  for  disbelieving
    the core claim extended to the account given by the claimant as to  the
    manner in which his alleged escape was orchestrated.  The new  evidence
    which has been put in since the hearing before Judge Cameron  does  not
    impinge on this aspect of Judge Tipping's findings.

Impact of PTSD diagnosis

56.  The  subsequent  diagnosis  of  the  appellant  suffering  from   PTSD
    potentially  provides  an   explanation   for   some   of   the   stark
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  noted  by  Judge  Tipping.
    However, it is only since  the  error  of  law  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the appellant  has  been  declared  unfit  to  give  oral
    evidence.

New evidence adduced since the error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal

57. The new evidence emanating from Sri Lanka  in  supplementary  bundle  U
    falls to be treated in accordance with the guidance  given  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed and, separately, in Devaseelan.  As the  evidence  relates  to  a
    state of affairs which began as far back as March or April  2011,  this
    is evidence which could have been deployed at the hearing before  Judge
    Tipping, and certainly should have been deployed at the hearing  before
    Judge Cameron.  Due to the prevalence of bribery and corruption in  Sri
    Lanka, there is no a priori assumption of  reliability  in  respect  of
    documents emanating from lawyers or those who hold public office.   The
    documents discussed in PJ (Sri Lanka) fall into a different category as
    they were primary documents, namely certified copies of what was  on  a
    court  register,  which  had  been  separately  authenticated  by   two
    different sets of independent  lawyers.   In  contrast,  there  are  no
    primary documents being deployed here.  There are no purported extracts
    from court or police records, and there has been no disclosure of,  for
    example, a contemporaneous record that would have been  made  when  the
    lawyer was allegedly consulted by T about her reporting  conditions  or
    the contemporaneous record which would  have  been  compiled  when  the
    lawyer's junior allegedly visited Vavuniya  Police  Station  in  August
    2014 in order to ascertain why she was still the subject of a reporting
    condition.

58. The second supplementary witness statement for the appellant signed  on
    26 January 2015 contains a  purported  explanation  for  the  delay  in
    obtaining additional secondary  (as  opposed  to  primary)  documentary
    evidence of T being  the  subject  of  reporting  conditions,  and  the
    reasons for this.

59. The appellant signed the witness statement shortly after  he  had  been
    seen by Dr Dhumad, who produced a  psychiatric  report  on  20  January
    2015.  He observed that V's concentration  was  very  poor  during  the
    interview.  He was unable to recall some of the details,  due  to  poor
    concentration and PTSD symptoms.  There was evidence of memory problems
    and  cognitive  impairment.   In  his  opinion,  his  presentation  was
    consistent with a diagnosis of moderate  depressive  episode,  and  his
    symptoms met the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD.  Based  on  the  two
    interviews which he had with him on 19 January 2015, in his opinion the
    appellant was unfit to attend court hearings, and to give  evidence  at
    present.

60. In the light of this  diagnosis,  it  is  reasonable  to  question  the
    reliability of the appellant's second supplementary witness  statement,
    which presents as being made by someone who is in  full  possession  of
    their faculties and is not suffering from any cognitive impairment.

61. In any event I do not find the explanation which is attributed  to  him
    to be a credible one.  His explanation is that his legal representative
    asked for the contact details of people who had "a reputation" and  who
    were aware of what was happening to his wife  in  Sri  Lanka.   But  he
    could not get those details earlier, because his wife wanted to  obtain
    consent from these people before passing their details to him.  She was
    concerned that lawyers  from  the  UK  contacting  these  people  would
    endanger her if the authorities  became  aware  of  such  contact.   In
    addition, the lawyers and the Grama Sevaka  officer  were  hesitant  to
    give their consent "due obviously to security concerns."

62. I infer from the undisputed evidence that  T  is  very  anxious  to  be
    reunited with her husband in the UK. So I do not find it credible  that
    she would have delayed or obstructed this commonly desired  outcome  by
    refusing requests from the UK to provide corroborative evidence of  the
    authorities' alleged ongoing adverse interest in her.  It is  also  not
    at all obvious why the lawyers and  the  Grama  Sevaka  officer  should
    initially be  hesitant  in  giving  the  required  information  due  to
    security concerns.  If it were true that the authorities had an ongoing
    adverse interest in the appellant and his wife for  the  reasons  which
    they report, they would not be breaking  any  confidence  or  breaching
    their country's security by making such disclosure to an English court.

63. The evidence of Mrs Vijayalingam falls into a  different  category,  in
    that she was apparently in Sri Lanka at the time of the hearing  before
    Judge Cameron. So she could not  have  given  the  testimony  to  Judge
    Cameron which she gave to me.

64. I do not consider that she was an independent witness.  Although not  a
    family member, her family is close to the appellant's family,  and  she
    has known the appellant since childhood.  When she went to Sri Lanka in
    August 2014, she knew that the appellant was claiming by way of  appeal
    that he was wanted by the authorities in Sri Lanka,  and  that  in  his
    absence his wife was being targeted.

65. It is reasonable to question whether in practice she would have  needed
    to go three times to the police station in Vavuniya in order to  report
    the loss of her baggage in an auto-rickshaw, and in any event there  is
    no documentary evidence, such as a police report  or  insurance  claim,
    which supports this aspect of her account.  But  the  main  reason  for
    disbelieving her account is that in her witness statement she  referred
    to the appellant sitting at "the desk" whereas in her oral evidence she
    said the appellant was sitting on a bench; and each time she was  asked
    to explain how she knew that T  was  at  the  police  station  for  the
    purposes  of  complying  with  her  reporting  conditions  she  gave  a
    different explanation.  Initially, it was that T had indicated by a non-
    verbal gesture that this was the purpose of  her  attendance.   On  the
    second occasion, Mrs Vijayalingam said that there was  a  notice  above
    the bench where she was  sitting  which  made  it  clear  that  persons
    sitting on the bench were there to sign on.  On the third occasion, she
    said that she had gone there with her friend's son, who she  said  went
    on her behalf to speak to a police sergeant in order to confirm that  T
    was there to report.  Mrs Vijayalingam had not gone to Sri  Lanka  with
    instructions to gather evidence to support the appellant's  claim,  and
    it is wholly incredible that she would have made a point  of  obtaining
    confirmation from the police sergeant as to why T was  waiting  in  the
    police station.  Moreover, on her own evidence, she already knew that T
    reported every week, and T had already communicated to  her  that  this
    was just such a visit. So she would not  have  perceived  the  need  to
    obtain "proof" of this from the police sergeant who was in attendance.

Conclusion on refugee claim

66. In conclusion, for the reasons given above, I find that  the  appellant
    has not discharged the burden of proving to the  required  standard  of
    proof that he is of ongoing adverse interest to the authorities in  Sri
    Lanka, or that he was of ongoing adverse interest  to  the  authorities
    when he left Sri Lanka in the spring of 2011.  Accordingly,  there  are
    not substantial grounds for believing that on return to Sri  Lanka  the
    appellant would be on a stop list or wanted  list,  or  that  he  would
    otherwise face a real risk of persecution as a suspected terrorist.  By
    the same token, there are not substantial grounds for believing that on
    return  to  Sri  Lanka  the  appellant  would  face  a  real  risk   of
    intentionally inflicted ill-treatment of such severity as to cross  the
    threshold of Article 3 ECHR.

Suicide Risk

67. The appellant is on much stronger ground in his pursuit  of  relief  on
    Article 3 (mental health/suicide risk) grounds.  This  arises  in  part
    because there has been deterioration in the appellant's condition since
    the hearing before Judge  Cameron.   According  to  Judge  Cameron  the
    appellant was  fit  to  give  oral  evidence,  and  did  so.   But,  as
    previously noted, Dr Dhumad opined in January 2015 that  the  appellant
    was no longer fit to give evidence.  In  the  same  report,  Dr  Dhumad
    opined that he was very likely to suffer serious deterioration  in  his
    mental health if he was to be returned to Sri Lanka now  and  this  was
    not a course that he would  recommend.   Indeed,  in  his  opinion  the
    appellant was currently unfit to fly.  At the time when he was seen  by
    Dr Dhumad, the appellant was taking  50mg  of  amitriptyline  per  day,
    which in Dr Dhumad's opinion was a very low  dose.   According  to  the
    medical  notes  generated  at  the  time  of  the  appellant's   recent
    overdosing incident, his description  of  amitriptyline  had  increased
    three-fold to 150mg per day.  Nonetheless,  the  appellant  impulsively
    ingested ten paracetomal tablets with the consequence that he collapsed
    outside a tube station, and was taken to hospital.

68. Dr Okeke of the Lewisham Crisis and Home Treatment  Team  reviewed  the
    appellant's case on 17 November 2015 with among others,  Mr  Revendran,
    who is described as a friend and interpreter.  Dr Okeke  recorded  that
    the reason why V was unable to go back home was because of his fear  of
    future torture.  V said he would rather die by taking  ten  paracetomal
    tablets but when asked how he felt currently, he stated he preferred to
    be allowed to see his family again and he rated his chances  of  taking
    another overdose as five out of ten.

69. After a four year history of contact with mental health services he was
    discharged to  the  care  of  his  GP  who  provided  prescriptions  of
    amitriptyline.  He had apparently not attended a number of appointments
    with IPTT who were going to offer him psychological intervention.

70. Dr Zapata saw the appellant  on  23  November  2015.   The  appellant's
    presentation was still symptomatic in terms of his  PTSD,  but  he  had
    worsened in this respect since he last  saw  him  in  July  2014.   His
    depression now seemed  less  well  treated  and  clinically  much  more
    evident.  The most concerning aspect in his presentation  was  now  his
    marked suicidal risk which he deemed to be very high, with evidence  of
    suicidal planning and intent.  The appellant had  been  re-referred  to
    the Community Mental Health  Team  because  he  had  stopped  attending
    appointments.  His friend had been ensuring that he attended,  but  the
    same friend had been travelling and  staying  in  Sri  Lanka  for  some
    months.  As a result the appellant had  stopped  attending  as  he  had
    nobody to accompany him.  He could not  attend  meetings  alone  as  he
    could not travel to places on his own  due  to  severe  anxiety  and  a
    tendency to get lost.  In the last seven  months  without  CMHT  mental
    health support, the appellant had worsened in terms of his  psychiatric
    symptoms.

71. Much damage had been caused to his mental state and the support he  had
    been receiving from his friend and his friend's  family,  his  GP,  his
    consultant psychiatrist and his psychotherapist has  been  interrupted.
    Deportation  would  completely  sever  these  important  emotional  and
    therapeutic links, and be yet  another  loss  event  in  the  patient's
    hitherto traumatic life.  This would contribute yet more stressful  and
    traumatic life events, raising the risk of suicide  even  further.   In
    his opinion, his risk of self-harm, risk of completing suicide was very
    high indeed.  If he were to fail in his asylum appeal, his  risk  would
    suddenly increase to extremely high.   His  overall  suicide  risk  had
    increased further since he had last assessed him in July 2014.

72. I consider that the appellant's circumstances are similar to  those  of
    the third appellant in GJ and Others, whose  mental  health  claim  was
    analysed by the Tribunal at paragraphs [447]  onwards.   The  appellant
    bears on his body the scars of significant ill-treatment in Sri  Lanka.
    He suffers from post traumatic stress disorder of such severity  as  to
    have made a recent suicide attempt.   Although  not  objectively  well-
    founded, the appellant has a genuine fear of return.  He is too ill  to
    give reliable evidence.  It would be possible  for  the  respondent  to
    return him to Sri Lanka without him coming to harm, but once there,  he
    would be in the hands of the Sri Lankan mental  health  services.   The
    Tribunal in GJ found that the resources of Sri  Lanka  were  spare  and
    were limited to the cities, and cited the respondent's own evidence  in
    her OGN that the  facilities  did  not  provide  appropriate  care  for
    mentally ill people.

73. Given the  severity  of  the  third  appellant's  mental  illness,  the
    Tribunal was not satisfied on the particular facts that  returning  him
    to Sri Lanka in his current state  of  health  would  comply  with  the
    United Kingdom's international obligations under Article 3 ECHR.

74. I do not consider that the  material  relied  upon  by  Miss  Isherwood
    justifies a different approach being taken to this appellant as against
    the third appellant in GJ and Others.  The out-patient  treatment  that
    the appellant requires would be potentially available in  Colombo,  but
    he would not be returning to live in Colombo but  in  Mullaitivi.   The
    Med COI Report states that there are  no  psychiatrists  or  registered
    psychologists available  in  Mullaitivi.  There  are  also  no  suicide
    prevention crisis intervention  centres  established  in  the  northern
    districts.   There  is  the  potentially  compensatory  factor  of  the
    appellant having the support of close family members in Mullaitivi, but
    I note that the presence/absence of family support was not  treated  by
    the Tribunal in GJ  and  Others  as  being  a  decisive  consideration.
    Accordingly, I find that the appellant  has  made  out  his  claim  for
    relief on Article 3 mental health (suicide risk) grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
on all grounds raised  contained  an  error  of  law,  and  accordingly  the
decision is set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is  substituted:  the
appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds  is  dismissed,  but  his  appeal  is
allowed on mental health grounds under Article 3 ECHR,  and  the  respondent
is directed to grant appropriate leave to the  appellant  in  the  light  of
this outcome.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

