
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01124/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st May 2013                                |On 10th July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                              tarek sase hoosin
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Pickering, Counsel instructed on behalf of
Howells Solicitors     LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Wardle, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Libya who  was  born  on  25th  December
    1975, who arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  17th  December  2010  and
    claimed asylum on 20th December 2010.

The background to the appeal:

 2.  The basis of the Appellant's claim was that  he  had  worked  for  the
    Interior Security Services from 2005 in Libya.  In 2007 he  claimed  to
    have been beaten and imprisoned for 25 days  because  he  questioned  a
    decision to arrest a number of his neighbours.  He then applied  to  be
    transferred but that request was refused  in  2009.   He  tendered  his
    resignation in August 2010 but this was rejected.  He then decided that
    the only way to leave his employment would be to leave Libya  which  he
    did in November 2010 travelling through Egypt and Turkey on his way  to
    the United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on 20th December 2010, two  months  before
    the February 2011 uprising against the Gaddafi regime in Libya.

 4. The Respondent refused the Appellant's asylum  claim  on  12th  January
    2011.  The Appellant exercised his right to appeal and  the  case  came
    before Immigration Judge Hindson sitting  at  Bradford  on  18th  March
    2011.  In a determination promulgated on 24th March 2011  he  dismissed
    his appeal.  The Immigration Judge accepted the Appellant's account  of
    his activities in Libya but did not accept that those activities placed
    the Appellant at risk on return.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on  12th  April
    2011.  The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on 1st May  2012.   At
    the time of the hearing, the Gaddafi regime had been overthrown and the
    basis of the Appellant's case was that he feared risk  on  return  from
    rebels as a former member or perceived member of the  regime.   It  was
    further claimed on behalf of the Appellant that  adverse  interest  had
    been shown in him by rebels in Benghazi.

 6. In a  determination  promulgated  on  21st  November  2011,  the  Upper
    Tribunal (Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly)  did  not  find  that  the
    Appellant had demonstrated that he was of adverse interest to rebels in
    his home area and in any event  considered  that  the  Appellant  could
    internally relocate to Tripoli to avoid any  localised  threat  in  the
    Benghazi area.  Thus the Upper Tribunal dismissed the appeal.

 7. The Appellant sought leave to appeal from the Upper  Tribunal  on  four
    specific grounds.  The first ground was that the judge  had  failed  to
    engage with or misinterpreted the background evidence  in  relation  to
    risk.  Under this, it was claimed that the finding that  there  was  no
    evidence that all former employees  in  the  Gaddafi  regime  had  been
    subject to persecution was incorrect and  that  there  was  significant
    information showing risk  to  those  simply  perceived  as  being  pro-
    Gaddafi.  The second ground was that the judge did  not  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's credibility, the third ground was
    that the judge had not properly engaged with  the  expert  evidence  in
    respect of the issue of internal relocation and the fourth ground, that
    the judge did not  properly  engage  with  the  risk  of  harm  to  the
    Appellant and the issue of Article 15(c).

 8. The application for permission to appeal was considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 6th September 2012.  Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt  considered
    that grounds 2 and 4 were  without  merit  but  granted  permission  to
    appeal in respect of grounds 1 and 3.  The following reasons were given
    by the Upper Tribunal for granting permission to appeal:-

         "Ground 1 challenges the DUTJ's finding that  the  Appellant  would
         not be at risk on the basis of his accepted  profile  as  a  prison
         guard in the Interior  Security  Services  (ISS),  working  at  the
         Benghazi head office where  his  responsibilities  included  making
         arrests.  The DUTJ stated at [19]:

             'My attention has not been drawn, however to any  report  that
             suggest that all individuals who were at that time employed by
             the regime - of whom there must have been a great many -  have
             been routinely persecuted or  otherwise  ill-treated  on  this
             account alone.'"

         And

             "... Whilst there are many reports to support  the  contention
             that certain tribes are  perceived  as  having  supported  the
             regime,  neither  Professor  Joffe  in  his  report  nor  Miss
             Pickering at the hearing referred me to  a  single  report  of
             individuals being targeted solely on account of  their  former
             low level employment by the regime."

             However the DUTJ did have such evidence before him at page 13-
             15, 22, 24, 27, 41, 43, 45, 47, 62, 134, 135 and  158  of  the
             Appellant's first bundle and pages 7  and  20  of  the  second
             bundle.  The country evidence on this point was referred to in
             submissions recorded at (paragraph 17)  and  in  the  skeleton
             argument before the  DUTJ.   The  references  to  the  country
             evidence to attacks on those who worked for the ISS and  other
             organs of the former regime did not distinguish  between  high
             or low level involvement or suggest that only those of a  high
             profile  were  at  risk  of  mistreatment.   It  is  therefore
             arguable that the DUTJ was in error in finding  this  evidence
             to be of no relevance to this Appellant.

             Ground 3 is arguable for the same reasons.  The assessment  of
             risk to the Appellant in the determination under challenge was
             made for the first time by the  DUTJ  because  of  the  regime
             change  since  the  case  was  considered  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.  It is clearly arguable that on that issue raised by
             ground 1, this is not a second appeal."

9.     The case therefore came before the Court of Appeal and  in  an  order
    made by consent on 14th February 2013, the appeal was allowed  and  the
    determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly promulgated on  11th
    June 2012 was quashed.  An order  was  made  remitting  the  appeal  by
    consent to the Upper Tribunal for a rehearing in  accordance  with  the
    statement of reasons attached to the order.   At  paragraph  6  of  the
    statement of reasons the following is stated:-

         "The Respondent has considered the Appellant's Notice of Appeal and
         the grant of permission by the Upper Tribunal.  Having done so  she
         considers that the Upper Tribunal materially erred in law  by  both
         failing to engage with the background evidence in relation to  risk
         (ground 1) and in  failing  properly  to  engage  with  the  expert
         evidence in  relation  to  internal  relocation  (ground  3).   The
         parties are therefore in  agreement  that  this  matter  should  be
         remitted back to the Upper Tribunal for  further  consideration  of
         those points."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

Preliminary matters:

 9. Thus the appeal came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   At  that  hearing
    Counsel Miss Pickering appeared on behalf of  the  Appellant,  who  had
    appeared in the court below and Mr Wardle on behalf of the Secretary of
    State.  This case had not been the subject of a Case Management  Review
    hearing and at the  outset  of  the  appeal  there  were  a  number  of
    preliminary matters that  required  consideration.   The  first  matter
    related to the ambit of the remittal.  In the bundle  of  documentation
    that had been produced on behalf of the Appellant there were  documents
    relating to correspondence  with  the  Home  Office  concerning  policy
    considerations.  This had not been raised at any stage before the Upper
    Tribunal nor before the Court of Appeal.  Furthermore there was no Rule
    15 notice served in respect of this evidence.  The  second  preliminary
    matter related to a further document in the form of a letter  exhibited
    in the bundle at pages 278 to 80.  Again there had been no  application
    for such evidence to be adduced.  In respect of  the  policy  argument,
    Miss Pickering conceded that this had not been a matter raised  at  any
    earlier stage and that the Respondent had not therefore dealt with this
    issue by providing any documentation concerning  the  position  of  the
    Secretary of State.

10.   As to the second issue, she also conceded there had been no  Rule  15
    notice served but submitted that the oral evidence of the Appellant, in
    conjunction with the document, was relevant to the first ground and the
    issue the Court of Appeal had identified required consideration by  the
    Tribunal. Miss Pickering took further instructions and after doing  so,
    she  stated  that  she  was  instructed  not  to  pursue  any  argument
    concerning policy matters but sought to apply under Rule 15  to  adduce
    the letter and witness statement on behalf of the Appellant.  Mr Wardle
    on behalf of the Secretary of State raised no objection to this course.
     In those circumstances, the Tribunal admitted into evidence the letter
    exhibited at page 278 to 290 in the bundle, Counsel  having  drafted  a
    Rule 15 notice.  In  addition,  Miss  Pickering  submitted  a  skeleton
    argument.

The evidence:

11. The Upper Tribunal was provided with a consolidated bundle   on  behalf
    of the Appellant which included the evidence that  had  been  submitted
    before the Upper Tribunal for the hearing on 4th January 2012 and  also
    that evidence that had been submitted before the Upper Tribunal on  1st
    May 2012.  The bundle included updated country  materials  and  also  a
    second supplementary report of Professor Joffe dated 10th May 2013.  On
    behalf of the Appellant, there was a further  witness  statement  dated
    1st May 2013 and the letter from the Supreme Security  Committee  along
    with its translation at pages  278  to  290.   Also  exhibited  in  the
    Appellant's bundle was a copy of the UKBA Libya's Operational  Guidance
    Note dated May 2013.

12.   No further bundle was submitted on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    although Mr Wardle relied upon the documentary evidence produced in the
    Appellant's bundle and also that relating to the past papers  submitted
    on behalf of the  Respondent  including  the  determinations  of  Judge
    Hindson and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly.   In  this  respect,  he
    stated that he placed no reliance on the refusal letter initially filed
    on behalf of the Appellant as it was recognised that the events in that
    letter had been overtaken by the passage of  time  and  the  change  of
    regime in Libya.

13. The Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant.  He confirmed that  his
    witness statement exhibited at page 267-268 of the bundle dated 1st May
    2013  was a true and accurate statement of his evidence  when  he  made
    it.  That statement was adopted as his evidence-in-chief.   No  further
    questions were asked of the Appellant.

14.   In cross-examination, the Appellant was asked about the letter in the
    bundle which had been recently produced.  When asked when he first  had
    learnt of the letter from the SSC, he said that he had first  heard  of
    it last year when a friend told him about it.  When asked  specifically
    when he had learnt of the letter he said that would be in July 2012 and
    that he had learned of it from a friend of his brother in Libya.   When
    asked how his friend had found  out  about  the  letter  the  Appellant
    stated that his brother had told him.  He could not remember  when  his
    brother had told him but he conveyed the message to him.  When asked if
    his brother had ever mentioned the letter to  the  Appellant  directly,
    the Appellant claimed that his brother had never mentioned it  and  had
    never discussed any such matters with him.  When  asked  why  not,  the
    Appellant stated that he was worried about putting his life at risk and
    that he had told his brother not to  discuss  such  matters  with  him.
    When asked why the Appellant  had  told  his  brother  not  to  discuss
    matters with him, the Appellant claimed that  it  was  because  he  was
    worried about his brother.  In  his  evidence  he  confirmed  that  the
    letter had been delivered to  his  home  and  he  was  asked  in  those
    circumstances why he did not wish to  hear  about  it?   The  Appellant
    stated that he did not want his brother to be involved in any  trouble.
    When asked how he got the letter he said that his brother's friend  had
    sent it to him.  In those circumstances it was  put  to  him  that  his
    brother must have given it to the friend and therefore he  was  clearly
    involved and that it made no difference to talking to him about it.  He
    was asked if that was the only letter  that  he  had  received  and  he
    confirmed that it was and he could not state if any past colleagues  of
    his had received any similar letters.

15. The Appellant confirmed again that he first learnt  of  the  letter  in
    July 2012 and that was the only letter that he had known about.  He was
    therefore asked to explain how that was possible when  the  letter  was
    dated 19th September 2012.  The Appellant stated that  the  letter  was
    issued on 19th September but the militia had told his brother that they
    would send him a letter in due course and on that day his  brother  had
    argued with him and got into a fight.  He then claimed  that  they  had
    come to the house on a frequent basis.

16. There was no re-examination.

The submissions:

17.   At the conclusion of the evidence, I heard submissions from  each  of
    the advocates.  Mr Wardle had not produced a skeleton argument but made
    oral submissions.  He confirmed that in the light  of  the  Operational
    Guidance Note that in respect of the issue of internal  relocation,  if
    the Appellant was at risk on return as being perceived as  a  supporter
    of the former regime, the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  internal
    relocation was not possible.  Thus his submissions were directed to the
    first and only ground of appeal relating to risk of return in the light
    of the Appellant's profile taking into account  the  findings  of  fact
    made by the two earlier judges.

18. Mr Wardle submitted that when looking at the Appellant's profile and in
    particular  the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge   Hindson,   the
    Appellant was a gate guard who had been imprisoned and later  attempted
    to resign and had left Libya in 2010.  Judge Kelly had found that since
    he had left Libya there had been no intervening interest in him  as  he
    had not accepted that the Appellant's family had been  visited  by  the
    militia or that they had been questioned about the Appellant.

19.  He invited the court to consider the evidence given at the Tribunal at
    the hearing concerning recent interest in him supported by  the  letter
    now produced by the SSC.  Mr  Wardle  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was that he had been made aware of the letter in July 2012 but
    looking at the content of the letter it is clear that  it  was  not  in
    existence until September 2012.  The statement that he  had  given  was
    not consistent with the account given in oral evidence and there was no
    reference to members of the SSC coming to the  house  on  a  number  of
    occasions  or  stating  that  they  would  issue  a  letter  and   then
    subsequently provide one.  The explanation given by the Appellant as to
    why he did not tell his brother was implausible and the timing  of  the
    document was questionable given that it  appeared  so  soon  after  the
    appeal was dismissed by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly.   There  had
    been a clear opportunity on behalf of the  Appellant  for  that  to  be
    authenticated as it was  available  for  Professor  Joffe.   There  was
    reference to it at paragraph 51 of the expert report but  there  is  no
    mention in the expert evidence as to whether similar letters  had  been
    issued or whether the expert had ever seen a letter issued in that way.
     Given the previous findings made by Judge Kelly little  weight  should
    be attached to such a document, particularly since  the  Appellant  has
    had the opportunity to have it authenticated but had not done so.

20. Thus Mr Wardle submitted that the risk of return  as  related  to  this
    Appellant began with findings of Judge Hindson as to his role and those
    of Judge Kelly, namely, that there  was  no  evidence  of  any  adverse
    interest in him since he had left Libya.

21. With reference to the expert evidence, Professor Joffe at paragraph  49
    (page 294) referred to documentation being in existence concerning  his
    past role however, it was reasonable to assume  that  if  there  was  a
    record of his former  employment  there  would  also  be  a  record  in
    existence as to the Appellant's dissent against Colonel Gaddafi and the
    punishment that he incurred.  When assessing risk, it was conceded that
    the country materials made reference to 8,000 individuals being held in
    various forms of detention (see page 297  of  the  country  materials).
    However, that figure was a small figure when  put  in  context  of  the
    numbers who may have been involved in the former regime.   He  referred
    the Tribunal to paragraph 27 of Professor Joffe's  report  noting  that
    there was a large number of a population who were involved in some  way
    or other in the Gaddafi regime.  In  particular,  the  figures  include
    former security members,  former  government  officials  and  suspected
    Gaddafi loyalists and other groups who are part of the  8,000  who  are
    said  to  be  in  detention  currently.   In  any  event  the   country
    information as it presently stands is too vague  to  ascertain  whether
    this Appellant, given his profile, is at real risk of persecutory  harm
    from the militia and the current regime in  Libya,  particularly  given
    the finding made by Judge Kelly that he had not  been  of  any  adverse
    interest since he had left Libya.  In those circumstances, that it  had
    not been demonstrated that the Appellant would be at any risk  of  harm
    by reason of his past employment under the Gaddafi regime.

22. Miss Pickering relied upon her skeleton argument.   She  accepted   the
    findings of fact made  by  Judge  Hindson  and  Judge  Kelly  were  the
    starting point for assessment of risk.  She reminded the Tribunal  that
    Judge Hindson had accepted the factual basis of the Appellant's account
    which was that he had joined the Interior Security Services in 2005 and
    had been posted to their headquarter in Benghazi in 2006.  This  was  a
    role that he had remained in until 2010 when he  left  Libya.   He  was
    known in the neighbourhood for his role and had been  involved  in  the
    arrest of individuals within the Libyan community.   His  role  was  of
    relevance when looking at the issue of whether he would be perceived as
    a supporter of the past regime.

23. In making an assessment of risk, she referred to the expert  report  of
    Professor Joffe and that weight should be attached to that report.  The
    contents of the report demonstrate that it was not a matter of  whether
    the Appellant had a minor role in  the  security  forces,  the  country
    materials led to the  position  that  there  was  no  distinction  made
    between those of a low level or those at a high  level  of  involvement
    (see paragraph 49 of Professor Joffe's report).   Whilst  it  had  been
    submitted on behalf of the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    previously outspoken against the regime  and  had  been  imprisoned  by
    them, that would not mitigate the risk to him and that it was the  mere
    fact of his employment that would place him at risk.

24. As to the numbers in detention, she submitted that  caution  should  be
    exercised in relation to those figures, but in any  event  the  country
    materials made reference to the fact that most  detainees  were  former
    security force members (297 Human Rights Watch  Report)  and  that  the
    country materials at pages 303, 304, 309 demonstrated that there was  a
    wider net of those who had been subject to detention and  ill-treatment
    including targeting former members of the security services,  targeting
    killings of former members (page 304) even to the extent of  those  who
    were who rightly or wrongly considered or perceived to be supporters of
    the regime (page 309 of the  country  materials).   At  page  357,  she
    referred the Tribunal to evidence that armed groups continued to detain
    thousands accused of links to the former regime and at page  356  there
    was credible evidence of groups hunting down former  security  officers
    in Tripoli.

25. She drew the Tribunal's attention to the Operational Guidance Note  and
    while she accepted it was not binding, the  Operational  Guidance  Note
    should be given some weight  as  the  sourced  material  used  for  its
    contents came from reputable sourced  material  including  the  Amnesty
    International  Report  and  the  US  State  Department   Report.    The
    conclusion at paragraph 3.10.18 was that given the generalised attitude
    of resentment towards the perceived Gaddafi supporters and fighters and
    the forces which the Gaddafi regime previously  sought  to  subdue  the
    opposition, that the Respondent accepted that there  was  a  reasonable
    likelihood that applicants in that category would be  able  to  show  a
    need for international protection.  When applied to this Appellant, his
    profile, irrespective of any recent interest in  him,  would  make  him
    someone who would fall  within  that  category  and  be  likely  to  be
    perceived as a Gaddafi supporter.

26. She submitted that he would be known in his  neighbourhood  as  someone
    who had played a role in the Interior Security  Services  and  thus  if
    returned would be someone perceived as supporting the former regime and
    that would likely to be known to others.

27. The account of him receiving a letter from the SSC was in line with the
    background evidence which shows that even  the  militias  operate  with
    impunity  and  commit  human  rights  abuses.   Whilst  there   is   an
    inconsistency as to the date,  that  in  itself  does  not  necessarily
    undermine the document itself or the evidence given by the Appellant.

28. Professor Joffe at paragraphs 49 to 50 stated that the archive for  the
    former regime had survived the uprising civil war in Libya and that the
    archive had been utilised to track down or trace  those  involved  with
    the Gaddafi Government.  In this context it was speculative  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State  to  suggest  that  the  records  would  also
    include those who had been imprisoned by  the  regime.   There  was  no
    evidence concerning this but in any event, the thrust of the  materials
    before the court demonstrated that those who were part  of  the  regime
    like this Appellant were likely to be  those  who  are  perceived  upon
    return as to be part of the former regime and therefore be at  risk  of
    harm.  Thus she submitted the appeal should be allowed.

My Assessment

29. It is common ground between the advocates that the starting point  when
    making an assessment of risk are the findings of fact  made  by  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hindson) and Judge  Kelly,  sitting  as  a  Deputy
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal.  Judge  Hindson  had  the  opportunity  of
    hearing the Appellant give  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  and  after
    considering the  issues  raised  in  the  refusal  letter  reached  the
    conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  given  an  account   which   was
    "essentially true" (I refer to paragraph 42).

30.   Thus the basis  of  the  Appellant's  account  is  as  follows.   The
    Appellant is a national of  Libya  born  on  25th  December  1975.   He
    attended a local school in Benghazi and finished high school  in  1991.
    After that he was employed as a market trader.  Between the years  1993
    and 1994 he undertook national service and after  completing  that,  he
    was told that he could obtain regular employment as  interior  security
    personnel.  He joined the Interior Security Services in 2005  stationed
    at different sites, providing security services and in 2006 was  posted
    to the Interior Security Service's head office  in  Benghazi.   At  the
    head office whilst regarded as a regular soldier he was  able  to  wear
    civilian clothes.  Whilst working there he became concerned  about  the
    prisoners or detainees and how they were  being  treated  for  example,
    when they were arrested and brought to custody and able to suffer abuse
    from officers.  The Appellant expressed concern about the treatment.

31. In 2007 he was told that some arrests were to take place  in  his  home
    area and he was asked if he wished to take part in the  operation.   He
    said it would be inappropriate to do so because people would  know  him
    and  he  would  not  be  comfortable  arresting  those  who  he   knew.
    Subsequently after the operation had taken place, he saw people he knew
    as his neighbours in the high security block  reserved  for  those  who
    were charged with national security issues.  He made  enquiries  as  to
    why they had been arrested.  He was told in  effect  to  mind  his  own
    business.

32. After about three days, his actions were reported to a superior and  he
    was called in for questioning in May or June 2007.  In  the  course  of
    that interview, he said that he knew these people who had been detained
    and did not believe they were involved in any kind of terrorist of anti-
    government activities.  As a result  he  was  imprisoned  for  25  days
    during which time he was interrogated  and  beaten.   He  was  released
    after 25 days and was compelled to sign a  declaration  to  the  effect
    that he would not disclose to anyone what had gone on in  the  service.
    He returned to work and believed he was being  monitored.   He  applied
    for transfer to another department but that was denied in 2009 and also
    attempted to tender his resignation in August 2010.  In October 2010 he
    discussed the situation with his brother who advised him that he should
    leave Libya and he left on 15th November 2010.

33. The Appellant sought asylum on 20th December 2010,  two  months  before
    the February 2011 uprisings against the Gaddafi regime.

34. It was the Appellant's case that he had  maintained  telephone  contact
    with his family in Libya and in particular his brother.  Until December
    2011, the family has not suggested that anyone  had  shown  a  specific
    interest in him.  He had claimed that  he  had  been  informed  by  his
    brother that people  had  been  making  hostile  enquiries  as  to  his
    whereabouts at the uprising in February  2011.   Those  enquiries  also
    included them going the family home in Benghazi.  The findings made  by
    Judge Kelly in respect of these issues are set out at paragraphs 20  to
    25 of his  determination.   The  judge  found  that  he  had  left  his
    employment three months prior to the uprising and that it was more than
    a year before he reported adverse interest in him on  account  of  that
    employment.  Until less than a month before  his  appeal,  he  had  not
    given a hint that anybody  had  shown  any  adverse  interest  in  him,
    whether on account of his former employment or  otherwise.   The  judge
    found that the Appellant had not provided a  credible  explanation  for
    his brother's failure to inform him of the events, nor  was  there  any
    letter confirming any support for  those  events  and  the  Appellant's
    brother and the medical evidence produced did not support  the  factual
    basis.  Thus the judge did not accept that the Appellant had shown that
    he had been of any adverse interest by anyone in Libya arising from the
    course of his employment.

35. I now turn to the oral evidence that I have heard in  this  appeal.   I
    have had the opportunity of hearing the Appellant  give  oral  evidence
    and for that to be the subject of cross-examination.  The account given
    by the Appellant in his witness statement is that in 2012  some  people
    came to the family home asking for him.  They gave his brother a letter
    written by the Supreme Security Committee stating that if he was  found
    he should be brought to the committee.  When the  people  came  to  the
    house they said "We need Tarek".  His brother told them that he was not
    in Libya and since that date  people  from  the  group  had  come  back
    several times asking for him.

36. The Appellant has produced a  letter  purportedly  issued  by  the  SSC
    (exhibited at pages 278 to 280).  The document is dated 19th  September
    2012 and is from the "Free Libya, the Ministry of the Interior, Supreme
    Security Committee, Department of Investigations."   The  body  of  the
    letter states as follows:-

         "We hereby inform you that the person called Tarek Sase  Hoosin  is
         one of the people wanted by the Supreme Security Committee for  the
         reason that he was one of those  collaborating  with  the  previous
         regime in the oppression of the Libyan people.

         We request any organisation which receives information  about  this
         person to inform us of this because the matter is very important in
         the handing over of this person.

         We thank you very much for your cooperation with us."

         Stamp and signature.

37. The Supreme Security Council is referred to in  the  country  materials
    before me as a "quasi official body  of  former  anti-Gaddafi  fighters
    that is cooperating with the Interior Ministry  for  ensuring  law  and
    order.  The police force is weak and dependent largely on the SSC.  The
    SSC lack vetting  and  scant  training  contributes  to  abuse  by  its
    members."

38. When considering such documentation, I remind myself  of  the  guidance
    given in the decision of the Tribunal in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439 in which the Tribunal acknowledged the argument  that  "documents
    and information contained in them  may  be  either  genuine  or  false;
    documents may be genuine but that  information  itself  may  be  false;
    documents may not be genuine but the  information  may  nonetheless  be
    true."  The Tribunal in that case went on to state:-

         "It is trite in immigration and asylum law that we must  not  judge
         what is or is not likely to happen in other countries by  reference
         to our perception of what is normal within in the  United  Kingdom.
         The principle applies as much to documents as to any other form  of
         evidence.  We know from experience  and  country  information  that
         there  are  countries  where  it  is  easy  and  often   relatively
         inexpensive to obtain 'forged' documents.  Some of them  are  false
         in that they are not made by whoever purports to be the author  and
         the information they contain is wholly or partially  untrue.   Some
         are 'genuine' to the extent that they emanate from a proper source,
         in the proper form, on the proper paper, with the proper seals, but
         the information they contain is wholly or  partially  untrue.   ...
         The permutations of truth, untruth, validity and 'genuineness'  are
         enormous.  At its simplest we need to  differentiate  between  form
         and content; that is whether a document is properly issued  by  the
         purported author and whether  the  contents  are  true.   They  are
         separate questions.  It is a dangerous oversimplification merely to
         ask whether a document is 'forged' or even 'not genuine'."

    The only question is whether the document is one  upon  which  reliance
    should properly be placed.  Such documentation should be not looked  at
    in isolation but should be assessed along with other pieces of evidence
    and therefore "in the round".  I confirm that I have had in mind  those
    words of the Tribunal when making  an  assessment  of  the  variety  of
    documents that have been produced in this case.

    I have considered this part of the Appellant's account with care and
    the documents produced in support of it in the light of Tanveer Ahmed
    and in the light of the background country materials.

39. In making assessment of that  letter  I  take  into  account  the  oral
    evidence I have heard from  the  Appellant.   He  was  asked  questions
    concerning his knowledge of the letter and when he first  became  aware
    of it.  It is clear from his evidence  that  he  became  aware  of  the
    letter in July 2012.  The document on the face of it gives  a  date  of
    its issue as 19th September 2012 and thus was not in existence  at  the
    time the Appellant claimed to have been first aware of the letter.   In
    cross-examination he confirmed that he had received no  similar  letter
    and that was the only letter that had been received in Libya.  When the
    discrepancy was put to him he stated that it had been  issued  on  19th
    September but the militia had told his brother that they would send him
    a letter and on  that  occasion  his  brother  had  a  fight  with  the
    authorities.

40. I do not accept the  explanation  as  a  credible  one  for  the  clear
    discrepancy between the date of the letter and the time  in  which  the
    Appellant said that he became aware of the letter itself.  The  witness
    statement provided by the Appellant gave details of how the letter came
    into existence and it makes no  reference  whatsoever  to  the  militia
    coming to the house on  one  occasion,  then  telling  the  Appellant's
    brother that they would send  a  letter.   The  account  given  in  the
    statement is that there was a visit by the Supreme Security Council who
    gave his brother a letter.  If the account was  as  the  Appellant  now
    claims and that they had  come  on  more  than  one  occasion  and  had
    specifically told his brother that they were going to send him a letter
    then I am satisfied that the witness statement would have given such an
    account.

41. Furthermore, the Appellant's account in evidence as to why his  brother
    had not told him directly about these incidents is wholly  implausible.
    The Appellant confirmed in cross-examination that his brother  did  not
    mention the letter to him at any time.  When asked why not, he  claimed
    that he did not want his brother being involved and that would put  his
    life at risk.  The Appellant had told him not to discuss  matters  with
    him.  I find that to be inconsistent with the Appellant's own  evidence
    that he had received the letter from his brother's friend and  that  it
    had been his brother who had given him the  letter.   His  brother  was
    therefore clearly involved and furthermore according to the Appellant's
    oral evidence at the hearing, his brother had fought  and  argued  with
    members of the security council therefore demonstrating his involvement
    in the Appellant's affairs.

42. I also find the Appellant's account in  his  evidence  as  to  why  his
    brother had not told him about the letter directly  or  at  all  to  be
    wholly implausible.  The Appellant confirmed that his brother  had  not
    mentioned the letter to  him  because  he  did  not  want  to  put  his
    brother's life at risk.  I find  that  inconsistent  with  his  earlier
    evidence as stated that  his  brother  had  been  clearly  involved  by
    fighting with the authorities.  I also consider that if the Appellant's
    brother had received a visit by the SSC in July that it  is  reasonably
    likely that he would have informed the Appellant of  this.   I  do  not
    believe that given the circumstances of the Appellant's appeal that his
    brother would have concealed from him a source  of  potential  evidence
    relevant to any danger or risk  emanating  from  Libya,  nor  that  the
    Appellant would not have wished to talk  about  such  matters  as  they
    would be clearly relevant irrespective of any risk.

43. When making an assessment of the document, I note  there  has  been  no
    attempt to authenticate the document either  in  its  form  or  in  its
    content.  It is clear from the expert report of Professor Joffe  (dated
    May 2013, at paragraph 51) that the  expert  knew  of  the  letter  but
    Professor Joffe makes no reference whatsoever as to whether any similar
    letters had been issued or even if he had seen or  been  aware  of  any
    such letters.

44. Given the previous findings of Judge  Kelly  that  there  had  been  no
    interest in him since his arrival in 2010, I do not  find  it  credible
    now that the SSC would begin to attempt to track him down via visits at
    his home after such a period of time.

45. Having considered the evidence as a  whole  including  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence and the form and content of the  document, I do not  find
    that it is a reliable document  upon  which  I  can  place  weight  and
    consequently I have reached the  conclusion  from  the  evidence  when,
    taken as a whole, that it has not been demonstrated  that  there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that there has been any adverse interest shown in
    the Appellant by the SSC since he has left Libya.

46.   I now turn to the risk of return in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's
    history and profile.  The Appellant relies upon a report from Professor
    Joffe.  Since the date of his last report in April 2012 it is  recorded
    that it has been an eventful time in the history of Libya.  The country
    has organised its first national elections and has begun the process of
    reconstructing the state.  At the same time, the security situation has
    worsened, particularly in Benghazi and in the Fezzan  typified  by  the
    assassination of the  American  Ambassador  to  Libya  in  Benghazi  in
    September 2012.  It is recorded that there had been  growing  political
    tensions, particularly over the roles to be played by  those  who  were
    engaged by the Gaddafi regime before the civil war and  now  that  that
    regime  has  been  removed  from  power.   Most  worryingly,  religious
    extremism has intensified  in  Libya  and  the  country's  poor  border
    security has made it into a regional arsenal and arms supplier.

47.   The report at paragraphs 8 to 17 gives a pr�cis of what has  happened
    in relation to the elections that were due to be held in June 2012  but
    which were subsequently held on 7th July.

48. In respect of Governorates of Libya, that is dealt with  at  paragraphs
    18 to 27.  A good start was made  by  the  new  assembly,  the  General
    National Congress (GNC) to the process  of  introducing  Constitutional
    Governorates in Libya.  On 8th August 2012, the  National  Transitional
    Council formally handed over power to the new GNC.  Mohammed Mughariff,
    the former Libyan Ambassador to India until he  defected  in  1980,  to
    become the founder of the NFFL, the foremost opposition  group  to  the
    Gaddafi regime in exile thereafter.  He was selected as  speaker.   The
    report sets out the formation of a new government due to  be  completed
    by 8th October and was delayed by a dispute between the premier and  Dr
    Jibrl about how former regime members should be treated within the  new
    state.  Dr Jibrl wanted them to be able  to  return  to  government  in
    administration posts but Dr Shaghour insisted that due weight had to be
    given to issues of accountability for past  behaviour.   The  difficult
    issue of the future status  of  past  collaborators  with  the  Gaddafi
    regime had raised its head and that  became  what  is  described  as  a
    "light motif" and the political development of Libya during  the  year.
    Dr Abu Shaghour's success was not maintained and  within  a  month  the
    government had fallen and in his place congress elected  Ali  Zidan,  a
    human rights lawyer as premier for the remaining twenty months  of  the
    interim administration.   He  was  not  successful  in  overcoming  the
    fragmentation of the  security  situation  and  in  January  2013,  the
    parliamentary leader Mohammed Mughariff, who acts  as  Libya's  interim
    president, narrowly escaped an assassination attempt whist in  southern
    Libya.  In April 2013 some of the most powerful militias, led by  those
    from Misurata, took action  which  directly  threatened  the  political
    process in Libya by threatening to close down the  GNC  and  blockading
    foreign affairs, justice and electricity ministries in Tripoli.

49. It is recorded at paragraph 26 that the new constitutional arrangements
    were a very hopeful sign for the future but there remained considerable
    scepticism about whether anything substantive would be achieved.  Since
    the elections took place there have been  incidents  that  have  dashed
    much of the optimism.

50. The security situation in Libya is set out at paragraphs 28 to 39.  The
    report refers to worsening  security  situation  being  highlighted  in
    August 2012 which pointed out that violence had worsened in Tripoli and
    Benghazi since the elections at the start of July as well as Kufrah and
    in the Jabal Nafusa.  The report refers to gun battles, car bombs and a
    seven member delegation from Iran being kidnapped.  There had also been
    a string of  assassinations.   Further  security  problems  emerged  in
    October.  The crisis began after members of the Misurata  militia  were
    kidnapped during a punitive mission to avenge the  fatal  ill-treatment
    in Bini Walid of  the  alleged  assassination  of  Colonel  Gaddafi  in
    October 2011.  The government allege that the town had become  a  haven
    for former regime officials and for criminals.  After a  brief  assault
    the town was occupied amidst international fears that  revenge  attacks
    would be carried out.  The new  Libyan  Government  insisted  that  the
    human rights at the town's 80,0000 population, 25,000 of whom were said
    to have fled the refugee camps to avoid fighting, had been respected.

51. It is recorded that the security problems still remain and no means had
    been found to bring the major militias in line  with  the  government's
    declared objective of  integrating  them  into  forces  under  its  own
    control.  Whilst it is right that 6,000 new recruits  had  emerged  for
    police training courses, the Zintan and  Misurata  militias  remain  as
    effectively independent powers within the state.  It is  also  recorded
    at paragraph 34 that the major militias not only continue to  dominate.
    nominally state controlled forces of  the  Supreme  Security  Committee
    (the replacement for a police force, ostensibly under  the  control  of
    the Ministry of Interior but,  in  reality,  controlled  by  autonomous
    militia command structures) and the Libyan  Shield  (which  supplements
    the army under the formal command of the Ministry of Defence), but they
    also persist in their usurpation of the role of the state over security
    and judicial issues.

52.   As to the situation in Benghazi,  at  paragraph  36  Professor  Joffe
    notes that in Benghazi there had been a  series  of  assassinations  of
    security officials who had had links with the former  regime.   At  the
    start of  April  2013,  four  Egyptian  Christians  were  arrested  for
    allegedly  proselytising.   Although  they  were  eventually   released
    without charge the incident highlighted  the  growing  intolerance  and
    uncertainty  of  the  situation   in   Libya.    The   non-governmental
    organisation Reporters without borders reported at  the  end  of  April
    2013 that media  workers  in  Libya  were  increasingly  threatened  by
    militias.  Security in Benghazi deteriorated yet again when the  police
    chief there was assassinated in mid  January  2013.   At  paragraph  39
    Professor  Joffe  quotes  the  guidance  given  by  the   Foreign   and
    Commonwealth Office dated  10th  May  2013  advising  against  all  but
    essential travel to Benghazi noting that armed  groups  are  disrupting
    access to a number of government ministries in Tripoli.

53. There is a  separate  section  dealing  with  the  Salafist  threat  at
    paragraphs 40 to 46.

54. The factual evidence given  in  Professor  Joffe's  report  as  to  the
    current situation in Libya appears to be consistent with that  set  out
    in the other  country  materials  provided  including  the  Operational
    Guidance Note (sourced from Amnesty International Reports  and  the  US
    State  Department  Report)  and  Human  Rights  Watch   Reports.    The
    developments in the evidence of Professor Joffe are consistent with the
    wider country evidence on the continuing  problems  with  the  security
    situation in Libya particularly Benghazi and the issue of the  militias
    and the impunity  with  which  they  operate  outside  of  governmental
    authority.

55. I have therefore considered the risk on return  in  the  light  of  the
    Appellant's past history and profile and that material.  I have set out
    earlier the findings made by Judge Hindson and  Judge  Kelly  that  are
    relevant to his profile and past  history.   The  report  of  Professor
    Joffe and the country materials demonstrate that the security situation
    in Libya over the past year has seriously declined despite the advances
    implied by the elections in July 2012.  The  militias  have  reinforced
    their control and the government have been unable to rein them in  (see
    paragraph 47; page  293  of  the  bundle).   The  border  security  has
    worsened and judicial authority is nonexistent,  individuals  in  Libya
    face a completely arbitrary security situation which include that human
    rights cannot be guaranteed.  The situation in Benghazi is described as
    a "veritable reign of terror" against individuals associated  with  the
    previous regime.

56. The question is whether the Appellant will be perceived as a  supporter
    of the  former  Gaddafi  regime.   The  Appellant's  past  profile  and
    employment history is of direct relevance to this issue as  to  how  he
    will be perceived or likely to be  perceived  by  the  population  upon
    return.

57. Whilst Mr Wardle describes the Appellant as "merely a  guard"  that  is
    not an entirely accurate  picture  of  the  Appellant's  profile.   The
    evidence accepted by the Tribunal was that he had been a member of  the
    internal security services since 2005 and had subsequently been  posted
    to the head office in Benghazi.  His role in the security services  was
    known to those in his home area and those  in  custody  (for  terrorism
    offences) who were aware of the Appellant who  would  see  them  during
    their incarceration.  The Appellant had remained in that post until  he
    left in 2010.

58. Even if his  role  in  the  regime  could  be  classified  as  "minor",
    Professor Joffe states in the report that the actual duties carried out
    were in effect immaterial and that the mere fact of his employment  was
    sufficient to place him at risk.

59.   I have considered the country materials that have been placed  before
    me as to demonstrate those categories of person who are likely to be at
    risk due to their past support for the Gaddafi regime.   On  a  careful
    reading of them,  those  country  materials  do  not  seem  to  make  a
    distinction between those who had a high level or showed a low level of
    support for the former regime.  It was noted that armed groups  set  up
    investigation and arrest units, drafted lists of "wanted"  individuals,
    set up checkpoints and forced their way into homes to capture  presumed
    outlaws or people suspected of aiding the former  regime  and  in  some
    cases ran their own detention facilities.  In implementing their policy
    the armed brigade went after a large  number  of  suspects.   The  mere
    possession of pro-Gaddafi songs or photographs saved on a mobile  phone
    often justified immediate detention as  did  hailing  from  a  town  or
    community accused of siding with the Gaddafi forces during the war.  In
    many cases presumed ties to the former regime appear to be little  more
    than pretexts to  retaliate  against  people  against  whom  the  armed
    brigade had held personal or professional grudges  or  as  a  means  of
    extorting a ransom.  (See pages 248 to 249  of  the  bundle;  trial  by
    error justice in post-Gaddafi  Libya  Crisis  Group  Middle  East/North
    Africa Report dated 17th April 2013).

60.   It is further recorded that armed groups continue to detain thousands
    of accused of links to the former regime.   Some  were  released  after
    preliminary investigation, but many are being held without due  process
    and without having seen  a  judge.   Of  the  roughly  7,000  still  in
    detention, some 3,000 are said to be in facilities  officially  run  by
    the state.  The rest remain in makeshift prisons under the  control  of
    armed groups, mainly in Tripoli and Misurata.  In May 2012 the NTC gave
    the Interior and Defence Ministries a two month deadline  to  refer  to
    proper judicial authorities detainees "against whom there is sufficient
    evidence attesting that they  have  committed  acts  considered  crimes
    under the law or otherwise set them free."  However, details  were  not
    fleshed out and so far, it appeared that local judicial districts  have
    decided on their own how to proceed, forming  screening  committees  in
    consultation with local authorities and armed groups.

61. Thus it does not seem to matter what the Appellant's  actual  behaviour
    was (even if it included as Mr Wardle points out, his  imprisonment  at
    the hands of the Gaddafi regime), the fact that the Appellant held such
    employment  would  not  mitigate  the  risk  to  him.   There  remains,
    according to Professor Joffe, archive material  of  the  former  regime
    which had survived the uprising and civil war in Libya which  is  being
    utilised to track  down  or  trace  those  involved  with  the  Gaddafi
    Government.  Whilst it is stated that it was speculative on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State to submit that  that  documentation  would  also
    include those who had been imprisoned by the Gaddafi regime,  it  seems
    to me that the archives are likely to include that type of  information
    as much as it is  to  include  those  who  were  part  of  the  regime.
    Nonetheless it appears from the country materials that someone's actual
    behaviour, may not necessarily be the determining factor in  assessment
    of risk. Thus I consider the fact that he had  been  outspoken  against
    the regime is not likely to play  a  significant  part  in  how  he  is
    perceived in view of the country materials and the report of  Professor
    Joffe.  The fact of his past employment and his role it  is  reasonably
    likely to place him in the category of  those  who  are  likely  to  be
    perceived as supporters of the former regime.

62. In making an assessment of risk to those perceived in such  a  way,  Mr
    Wardle submits that the actual figures are very few given the  size  of
    the population in Libya.   He  refers  to  paragraph  27  of  Professor
    Joffe's report where he refers to the proposal  circulated  inside  the
    GNC to bar anybody who had held a position under the former regime from
    holding an official position in the future.  Professor Joffe  noted  "A
    law that would, in effect, bar virtually half the population".  Thus he
    submits that the actual figures of those who  have  been  targeted  are
    small in comparison with the figure for the population  and  those  who
    had worked for the regime.

63. The country information  gives  a  figure  for  the  number  of  people
    currently in detention in Libya.  The figures as at October 2012 are in
    the region of 8,000 detainees (see page 297).  Of those  8,000,  it  is
    estimated that 3,000 are held by  the  Justice  Ministry,  3,000  by  a
    multitude of armed groups and 2,000 held by the Defence Ministry  ...at
    the Supreme Security Committee (the quasi official body  of  the  anti-
    Gaddafi fighters).  It is  recorded  that  most  detainees  are  former
    security  force  members  of  the  Gaddafi  security   forces,   former
    government officials, suspected Gaddafi supporters/loyalists, suspected
    foreign fighters or migrants from sub-Saharan  Africa  (see  page  297,
    Human Rights Watch).

64. It is right to observe that the Human Rights Watch Report  states  that
    the precise number of  detainees  in  government  and  militia  custody
    remains unclear.  I do  not  find  that  to  be  surprising  given  the
    evidence before the Tribunal  which  makes  reference  to  unauthorised
    detention camps and thus they may  not  feature  in  the  gathering  of
    statistical data concerning  detainees.   There  is  also  the  general
    difficulty in monitoring the detention of  individuals  in  Libya.   It
    does not necessarily cover or allow for  detention  by  groups  outside
    state authority including independent militias and those who  cooperate
    with the Interior Ministry.  Furthermore, whilst the report  refers  to
    half of the population holding any position  under  the  former  regime
    that is likely to cover a wide spectrum of individuals including  those
    with no authority and having mundane links to the regime  to  those  in
    employment in high profile government office.  There  is  no  breakdown
    for example, of those in the Appellant's position as former members  of
    the security services.  In that context, I do not  consider  that  that
    changes the position concerning those who are currently detained. It is
    submitted that there appears also to be a much wider net of  those  who
    are being targeted.  At page 309 (Human Rights Watch) it  also  appears
    to include  those  who  are  "rightly  or  wrongly  perceived  to  have
    supported  Gaddafi  being  under  threat"  and  it  is  recorded   that
    "thousands of women and children have been displaced from  their  homes
    and living in camps often harassed.  Men have been  detained,  tortured
    and killed."  There is no further description of the profiles of  those
    who have been rightly or wrongly perceived to  have  supported  Gaddafi
    therefore it is difficult to  place  weight  upon  that  as  a  general
    statement when making an assessment of  risk.   Nonetheless,  there  is
    evidence before the  Tribunal  that  those  who  were  former  security
    officials have been targeted.  At page 356, it is  recorded  that  many
    brigade members openly boast that they are " on a quest  to  hunt  down
    individuals who hunted them in the past.  A Darna fighter vowed to kill
    a former security officer from Tripoli, who years  earlier,  reportedly
    had called him 'a useless pig from the east' in  front  of  his  entire
    family."

65. I have been referred to the most recent Operational Guidance Note which
    is dated May 2013 exhibited at pages 399  onwards  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  I have taken a careful approach to  the  Operational  Guidance
    Note, taking into account the caveat at the beginning of  the  document
    that they do not purport to be comprehensive and have to  be  "read  in
    conjunction with relevant COI Service Country of Origin Information and
    any other relevant information." The Tribunal  has  not  been  provided
    with any relevant  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  (COIR)  in
    respect of Libya and Miss Pickering invites the court to  consider  the
    sourced material that has been  used  when  compiling  the  Operational
    Guidance Note.  The sourced material which can be seen at the  foot  of
    the page refers to well-known sources such as the US  State  Department
    Reports for human rights and  also  Amnesty  International.   In  those
    circumstances I find it appropriate to have regard to the  Respondent's
    guidance to her caseworkers as set out in the OGN.  At  paragraph  3.10
    onwards, the OGN considered those who are perceived supporters  of  the
    former regime.  The conclusion is  set  out  at  paragraph  3.10.18  as
    follows:-

         "Given the generalised attitude  of  resentment  towards  perceived
         Colonel Gaddafi supporters and fighters, and the force of which the
         Gaddafi regime previously sought to subdue the  opposition,  it  is
         likely that applicants in this category will be able to show a need
         for international protection.  Perceived supporters of Gaddafi  and
         his regime  are  at  risk  of  extrajudicial  execution,  arbitrary
         detention, torture, ill-treatment and death in detention,  both  by
         authorities of the interim government or its armed  affiliates,  as
         well as by armed militias  operating  without  government  control.
         Communities perceived to be loyal to Gaddafi have also  experienced
         forced  displacement,  indiscriminate  shelling,  looting  and  the
         burning of homes".

66. It is right that at paragraph 3.10.19 it is stated  that  consideration
    will be given  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  individual,
    including ethnicity, age and the nature and  degree  of  the  perceived
    relationship to the Gaddafi's regime.  Where it  is  accepted  that  an
    individual applicant was closely involved with Gaddafi and the  regime,
    or his particular circumstances indicated likely risk of attracting the
    adverse interest of militia brigades allied to the Libyan  authorities,
    a grant of  asylum  will  generally  be  appropriate,  subject  to  any
    exclusion considerations at Article 1F of the Refugee Convention.

67.   Whilst the paragraphs make reference to internal  relocation,  it  is
    conceded on behalf of the Respondent by Mr Wardle that if the Appellant
    is perceived  as  a  former  supporter  of  the  regime  then  internal
    relocation does not apply.

68.  I have therefore considered in full the matters set out in the OGN and
    also the country materials placed before me and the  expert  report  of
    Professor Joffe.  I find that the Appellant's profile, when set against
    the material, demonstrates that there is a reasonable  likelihood  that
    someone who has played a role within  the  security  services  as  this
    Appellant has, will be perceived as someone  who  assisted  the  former
    repressive regime and is likely to be perceived  as  a  former  Gaddafi
    supporter on return.  There is a further reasonable likelihood that  on
    the evidence presented that his role will be known by those in Benghazi
    upon return.  The country materials are consistent concerning the risks
    to those who are perceived in this  way  which  include  the  risks  of
    extrajudicial execution, arbitrary detention, torture and ill-treatment
    by both the government authorities or its armed affiliates as  well  as
    armed militias who operate without government control.  It had not been
    argued on behalf of the Secretary of State that there is likely to be a
    sufficiency of protection for those perceived to be supporters  of  the
    Gaddafi regime in the light of the country materials  that  demonstrate
    that most detainees held by the government and militias include  former
    security service members who have supported the Gaddafi Government  and
    armed militias who are operating in Libya  and  not  under  control  or
    authority of the present government.

69. Drawing together all of those matters, I am satisfied that there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that on return to Libya the Appellant, by  reason
    of his past profile and employment and on the particular facts  of  his
    appeal, is likely to be perceived as a former supporter of the  Gaddafi
    regime and thus will be at a real risk of serious harm  or  persecutory
    treatment on return to Libya.  Thus he succeeds in his appeal.

Decision

70. The appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention and on human  rights
    grounds (Article 3).




Signed                              Date: 4/7/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
