
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01032/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 3 August 2015                         |            On 13 August 2015       |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     ss
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  sought  political  asylum  and
    protection under Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  Her application was refused.  Her ensuing appeal was heard  by
    Judge Ghani sitting at Birmingham on 22 April 2015.  The Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Moquit of Counsel and the Respondent  by  Miss  Rands
    (possibly of  Counsel  but  more  probably  a  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer).  In a determination of 20 May 2015, promulgated  on  27  May,
    the judge dismissed the appeal on political asylum and Articles 2 and 3
    human rights grounds, whilst allowing it  on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The  Appellant  has  not  appealed  the  dismissal  of  her  appeal  on
    political asylum and Articles 2 and 3 grounds.  The  Respondent  sought
    permission  to  appeal  the  decision  on  Article   8   grounds.    As
    subsequently augmented by procedural directions, this  was  granted  by
    Judge Murray on 16 June 2015 in the following terms:

         "1.  The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  Judge of the  First-
             tier Tribunal Ghana dismissed her asylum  appeal  but  allowed
             her  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  in  a   determination
             promulgated on 27 May 2015.


         2.   The grounds of application state that at  the  outset  of  the
             hearing the appellant's representative told the court he would
             not be pursuing Article 8 as  there  was  another  outstanding
             application where this would be considered.  The judge  agreed
             to proceed with the hearing without considering Article 8.  To
             allow the case under Article 8 was therefore materially unfair
             as the presenting officer did not cross examine on this  point
             and did not make any submissions on this issue.   The  grounds
             go on to state that the  judge  has  confined  his  Article  8
             findings to paragraph 41 and his findings on family  life  are
             unreasoned.  Neither does he make his Article 8 findings  with
             any regard to the Immigration Rules or public interest.


         3.   It is clear that the judge informed the court  that  he  would
             not be pursuing Article 8.  For him to then  allow  the  claim
             under Article 8 is unfair.


         4.    There  is  a  material  error   of   law   in   the   judge's
             determination."


3.   The Appellant attended the error of law hearing, which  took  the  form
    of submissions.  I have taken these into  account,  together  with  the
    skeleton argument of the Respondent.  I reserved my decision.

Decision

4.   The first ground of the application for  permission  to  appeal  states
    that:

         "At the  outset  of  the  hearing  the  appellant's  representative
         informed the court that he would not be pursuing Art 8 as there was
         another outstanding application where  this  would  be  considered.
         The judge agreed to proceed with the  hearing  without  considering
         Art 8.  To therefore allow the case on  the  basis  of  Art  8  was
         therefore clearly materially unfair."

5.   Neither party has submitted evidence of what was said  on  this  matter
    in court.  Mr Turner said that he had no instructions upon it.  I  note
    that it was open to the  representatives  of  both  parties  to  submit
    evidence about this.

6.   The only evidence is that in the record of proceedings  of  the  judge,
    which I read to both representatives at the hearing.  At  the  foot  of
    page 1 of the record,  immediately  before  the  commencement  of  oral
    evidence, the judge wrote:

         "(?) Asylum (?) Art 2/3 stand and fall with the Asylum case."


7.   At page 16, at the conclusion of the submissions of Miss Rands for  the
    Respondent and immediately before  the  commencement  of  those  of  Mr
    Moquit for the Appellant, the judge wrote:

         "Mr Muquit indicated Art  8  -  not  relied  upon  -  there  is  an
         outstanding application."

8.   I find as a fact that Mr Moquit did submit that the Appellant  was  not
    relying upon Article 8, since there was an outstanding application.

9.   Mr Turner submitted that the Tribunal had been under a  statutory  duty
    - doubtless under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 - to  consider
    Article 8, and should therefore have done so.  However, if, as I  find,
    the  Appellant's  representative  disclaimed  reliance  upon  it,   the
    Tribunal was not required to do  so.   For  it  to  have  done  so,  in
    circumstances in which Miss  Rands  had  been  entitled  to  rely  upon
    Article 8 not having required consideration and had thus not  addressed
    it in cross-examination or submissions, was procedurally unfair.

10.  The second ground of application is that the consideration  of  Article
    8 in paragraph 41 of the decision of  the  judge  was  inadequate.   Mr
    Turner submitted that it was not.  Alternatively, in relation  to  both
    grounds of appeal, he submitted that the outcome of the application and
    the appeal must inevitably have been in the Appellant's favour, so that
    any error of law was not material.  I conclude  that  this  submission,
    whilst tenable, relies upon a number of  assumptions  which  cannot  be
    made with sufficient assurance.

11.  I accordingly conclude that the consideration  of  the  appeal  by  the
    Tribunal on Article 8 grounds was procedurally unfair.  Whether it  was
    also inadequate is therefore of no moment.   Insofar  as  the  decision
    allows the appeal on Article 8 grounds, which it does in paragraphs  41
    and  43,  I  set  those  paragraphs  aside.   The  remainder   of   the
    determination,  dismissing  the  appeal  on  political  asylum  and  on
    Articles 2 and 3 human rights grounds, remains unaffected and stands.



Decision

12.  Paragraphs 41 and 43 of the original decision contain a material  error
    of law.  I set them aside.  Thus there is  no  decision  on  Article  8
    human rights grounds.

13.  The remainder of  the  original  decision,  dismissing  the  appeal  on
    political asylum and Articles 2 and  3  human  rights  grounds,  is  to
    stand.

14.  Since the Tribunal should not have considered the appeal on  Article  8
    grounds, it does not require to be re-heard.

Signed
     Dated: 4 August 2015




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis


