
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01309/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 10th June 2013                             |on 13th June 2013            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                             HILINA GEBRETSADIK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Pipe instructed by The Birmingham Law Centre
For the Respondent: Mr Smart Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                     ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND DIRECTIONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Narayan who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  following  a
        hearing at Stoke on the  14th  March  2013,  dismissed  the  appeal
        against the direction  for  the  appellants'  removal  to  Ethiopia
        following the rejection of his claim for asylum or any  other  form
        of international protection.


     2. It was accepted that the determination is flawed  by  legal  errors
        and must be set aside. Both advocates had difficulty following  the
        reasoning in the determination and were unable to fully  understand
        why the appeal had been dismissed. The  reasons  for  accepting  an
        error in the date of the translated  document  yet  rejecting  what
        appeared to be an identical error in relation to the  word  'trail'
        was not explained and is, on the face of it, irrational.  This  was
        held to warrant no weight being placed upon an important  document.
        The determination also contains contradictory findings.


     3. Ground 7 also refers to the  fact  that  if  it  was  accepted  the
        appellant had been detained and released on bail he is in breach of
        bail conditions. As he had been tortured in the past  in  detention
        it was necessary for the Judge  to  have  made  clear  findings  on
        whether he accepted the fact of detention and release on bail  and,
        if so, whether this gave rise to a risk  on  return  sufficient  to
        breach Article 3.  He did not. If detained there must  be  a  clear
        finding whether it was a political detention, the reasons  for  the
        detention, and consequences for the appellant on return.


     4. Mr Smart submitted that if there is to be  a  further  hearing  the
        finding  the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  as  a  result  of  any
        association with OLF should be preserved. I rejected this as it  is
        not possible to  understand  in  relation  to  the  documents  what
        elements of the evidence the Judge  accepted  and  those  rejected.
        Having considered the determination as a whole I  find  the  errors
        are such that no findings may be preserved and the matter will have
        to be determined afresh.


     5. The Judge made an error of law material to the decision to  dismiss
        the appeal. The determination is set aside. It was agreed the  case
        shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. There shall  be  oral
        evidence from two witnesses  and  the  following  directions  shall
        apply:




                                 DIRECTIONS


              i.  The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to
   be heard by                  a salaried judge or panel of that tribunal
   nominated by RSIJ Renton                  on the 21st October 2013, at
   Sheldon Court, Birmingham. Time                    estimate 3 hours
   unless varied by RSIJ Renton.


              ii.  The appellant shall file and serve a consolidated,
   indexed, and                     paginated bundle containing all the
   evidence he intends to rely upon                   no later than 4.00pm
   14th October 2013.  Witness statements in the                   bundle
   shall stand as the evidence in chief of the maker. A skeleton
   argument must be included in the bundle.


              iii.     An Amharic interpreter is required.


              iv. Any further directions relating to the conduct of the
   appeal shall be                  given by RSIJ Renton or a judge
   nominated by him.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12th June 2013
