
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01279/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th March 2015                            |On 17th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                        Mr. Mahindashakaran Rajendren
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Turner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 20th  March  1989.   He
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Blandy
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 10th July 2014.  In  a  determination  dated
    1st September  2014  Judge  Blandy  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against decisions of the Respondent dated 21st February 2014 to  remove
    the Appellant from the United Kingdom and to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   On 24th December 2010 the Appellant was granted entry  clearance  as  a
    student valid until 30th October 2014.   He  travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom on or about 24th December 2010.  Before  his  visa  expired  he
    applied for asylum in January 2014 the refusal of which has given  rise
    to the present proceedings.  The Appellant's case was that he had  been
    a supporter of the Tamil Separatist Group the LTTE  since  March  2005,
    one of his brothers was a captain in that force.  He attended  meetings
    and delivered items for the cause.  On 27th August 2007 he was arrested
    by the Sri Lankan Task Force as part of  a  roundup,  identified  by  a
    masked man and detained at a naval camp in  Trincomalee  where  he  was
    detained for five days  and  ill-treated.   He  was  next  detained  in
    December 2009 by the Karuna Group (a group with links to the Sri Lankan
    authorities) and released after ten days.  He was arrested again by the
    Karuna Group on 5th May 2010 because the Karuna Group  could  not  find
    the Appellant's brother.  On this occasion he was held for fifteen days
    and again ill-treated.

3.    His  parents  were  both  arrested  on  3rd  April  2012  because  the
    Appellant's brother had failed to abide  by  bail  conditions  and  had
    disappeared.  The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had been
    involved with the LTTE nor  that  he  had  been  detained  and/or  ill-
    treated.  The Respondent considered  the  Appellant's  credibility  had
    been damaged by virtue of Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and noted  that  the  Appellant
    had been able to leave Sri Lanka by air from Colombo Airport using  his
    own passport.

The Decision at First Instance

4.   In dismissing the appeal against the Respondent's  decision  the  Judge
    first considered the Appellant's general credibility in  the  light  of
    the operation of Section 8.  The Appellant had made two applications in
    2010 for entry clearance but it was not until 24th December 2010  after
    the first application was refused and the  second  application  granted
    that the Appellant travelled to the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  had
    plenty of time according to the Judge to research what he had to do  in
    order to seek international protection on arrival if  he  had  been  as
    fearful of his safety in Sri Lanka as he had claimed.  He had  come  to
    the United Kingdom as a student, was an educated and intelligent  young
    man.  He had had access to  the  Internet  because  that  was  how  his
    application for entry clearance was submitted.  Nevertheless he did not
    claim asylum on arrival nor did he attempt to regularise his stay  even
    though he had ceased his studies after only one term.

5.   His leave to remain was curtailed in 2012 by  the  Respondent  although
    the Appellant says that he was unaware that  that  had  happened.   The
    Judge found that too to lack credibility finding at paragraph 19 of the
    determination that the Appellant: "must have realised  that  his  leave
    would be curtailed when he stopped studying because  colleges  have  an
    obligation to report permanently absentee students to the  Respondent".
    The Judge did not find any of the reasons given by  the  Appellant  for
    the delay in claiming asylum to be plausible and after citing the  case
    of JT Cameroon [2008] EWCA Civ 878 the Judge directed himself that  the
    operation of Section 8 was a question of  degree  in  each  case.   The
    damage  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  which  followed   from   the
    Appellant's immigration history was so great as to substantially damage
    the Appellant's credibility.

6.   The Judge did note at paragraph 22 that the  Appellant  relied  heavily
    on documents he had produced which suggested that the family had  faced
    problems in Sri Lanka due to the Appellant's  brother's  membership  of
    the LTTE.  The first set of documents related to the prosecution of the
    Appellant's brother for certain credit card offences.  The Judge  found
    these documents to be reasonably coherent  and  credible.  He  accepted
    that the Appellant's brother was arrested in 2011 for various  offences
    involving credit card fraud and passing funds to the  LTTE.   What  the
    Judge was not prepared to accept was that any of that had  anything  to
    do with the Appellant (paragraph 28).

7.   The Appellant produced another document, a letter from  the  Office  of
    the Superintendent of Police in Trincomalee  and  dated  29th  November
    2013.  This document the Judge stated stood on its own.  At  paragraphs
    29 to 33 the Judge examined this particular letter  making  three  main
    points against it.  The first was that the translation the Judge had of
    this letter from the police did not seem to match  the  letter  itself.
    The Judge stated at paragraph 29:

         "The translation is  rendered  unreliable  by  the  fact  that  the
         Sinhalese version clearly contains a date in ordinary  numerals  at
         the beginning of the second line of the first  paragraph  but  that
         date is not translated.  It also clearly  does  not  translate  the
         wording in the two lines above  where  the  words  'Office  of  the
         Superintendent of Police - Trincomalee' are  on  the  original.   I
         noticed that something is typed over the top of those words but  is
         completely illegible.  Those words also do not appear to have  been
         properly printed in that there is a shape towards the bottom of the
         lettering which is particularly apparent in the word 'Trincomalee'.
          It is evident that the letterhead including the words  'Office  of
         the Superintendent of Police - Trincomalee' do not form part  of  a
         template which might have been printed out on a  printer  with  the
         remainder of the letter because those words and  the  remainder  of
         the letterhead are printed at a slightly different angle  from  the
         typing and printing of the remainder of the letter."

8.   The second point taken by the Judge against the document  was  that  it
    had not  been  authenticated.   The  Judge  was  aware  from  documents
    submitted by the Appellant's solicitors that they were  waiting  for  a
    lady Ms. Sundari to return to the United Kingdom on 24th February  2014
    in order to verify the document but it appears that she never did that.

9.   The third point taken by the Judge against the letter from  the  police
    was that it was inconsistent with the Appellant's account.  The  letter
    stated that the Appellant had been arrested and released  on  condition
    he should report to the Superintendent on  the  last  Sunday  of  every
    month.  The Appellant had not reported or signed although he  had  been
    informed over the telephone on several occasions  and  the  police  had
    gone to his house to look for him.  The difficulty with that  was  that
    the Appellant's case was that he had been detained only once by the Sri
    Lankan forces and that  was  in  2007  when  he  was  released  without
    conditions.  The 2013 letter from the Superintendent of police was  not
    only  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's  statement   that   he   was
    unconditionally released but suggested that some six years after he was
    released back in 2007 the  police  were  still  seeking  to  enforce  a
    condition that he was required to sign on.  The Judge found that  delay
    of six years to be wholly lacking in credibility.  If the Appellant had
    been required to sign on in 2007 but had not done so  it  was  credible
    that he would have been  sought  and  detained  but  it  wholly  lacked
    credibility that he was only being sought on the grounds  of  any  such
    failure some four years after hostilities  in  Sri  Lanka  had  ceased.
    There was no supporting evidence from the Appellant's mother  that  the
    police had called at  the  house  looking  for  the  Appellant  and  no
    evidence from the Appellant that the police had ever done that  or  had
    ever telephoned him.

10.  The Judge came to the view that whereas he could  place  some  reliance
    on the documentation regarding the Appellant's brother albeit  that  it
    was not relevant to
    the case, he could place no weight at all on the letter  purporting  to
    come from the Superintendent of Police.   At  paragraph  32  the  Judge
    wrote that the letter from the Superintendent of Police:

         "... is just the sort of letter that could easily be obtained by  a
         relatively minor example of corruption, perhaps the  bribing  of  a
         person in the Office of the Superintendent of Police in Trincomalee
         to write such a letter and purport to sign  it  on  behalf  of  the
         stated signatory."

    The Appellant  had  fabricated  his  allegations  suggesting  that  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka were in any  way  interested  in  him  or  his
    parents. The Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

11.  The Appellant attacked the determination on three  main  grounds.   The
    first was that the Judge had  made  Section  8  of  the  2004  Act  his
    starting point on credibility and citing the  AIT  case  of  SM  [2005]
    UKAIT 00116.  The grounds argued that it  was  the  task  of  the  fact
    finder to look at all the evidence in the round to try and grasp it  as
    a whole and see how it fits together and whether it  is  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof.  Whilst the  grounds  acknowledged  that
    the Judge  had  considered  other  parts  of  the  evidence  in  making
    credibility findings it was a material error for the Judge to begin his
    assessment on credibility with a detailed assessment on the  Section  8
    factors.  That became the foundation for the  credibility  findings  in
    the appeal.

12.  The second (and briefest) ground argued that it was  a  material  error
    for the Judge to find that the lack of any medical evidence  of  injury
    to the Appellant damaged credibility.

13.  The third ground relying on the Court of Appeal decision in  PJ  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1011 argued that the Judge in discounting the letter from  the
    Office of the Superintendent of Police in Trincomalee had  ignored  the
    fact that the letter had been provided to a lawyer in Sri Lanka Mr.  T.
    Karikalan for authentication.  Mr.  Karikalan  confirmed  that  he  had
    attended Trincomalee Police Station on 21st March  2014  and  that  the
    record demonstrated that the Appellant had  indeed  been  arrested  and
    detained by the Special Task Force and then released  on  condition  to
    report on request.  The Judge had also ignored the fact that  the  same
    lawyer had obtained the court documents  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    brother which the Judge had been prepared to accept as reliable.

14.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle on 24th September  2014.   In  refusing
    permission to appeal he wrote:

         "As a matter of practicality a Judge will deal with the issues that
         arise one at a time.  He was  entitled  to  attach  the  weight  he
         deemed appropriate in the circumstances.  He was entitled  to  take
         into account the fact that the Appellant claimed to have scars from
         ill-treatment and yet no medical evidence was produced  as  to  the
         cause of those scars.  From paragraph 22 onwards  the  Judge  dealt
         with the documents produced in support of the case and  found  them
         unreliable for reasons that are adequately explained.  He  did  not
         just dismiss them out of hand but took account of them in the round
         with the other evidence.  The grounds amount to nothing more than a
         disagreement with the findings of the  Judge  which  were  properly
         open to him on the evidence before him.  They disclose no  arguable
         error of law."

15.  The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds quoted  from  a  letter  received  by  the
    Appellant's solicitors from Mr. T.  Karikalan  which  stated  that  the
    latter had attended Trincomalee Headquarters on  21st  March  2014  and
    that "the record says that the  particular  suspect  was  arrested  and
    detained by the Special Task  Force  Unit  and  then  was  released  on
    condition  to  report  upon  request".   The  renewed  application  for
    permission to appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on  13th
    January 2015.  He granted permission to appeal stating:

         "I am persuaded that all  three  challenges  in  the  ground  raise
         properly arguable issues which may disclose errors of  law  on  the
         part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge."

16.  In response to the grant of permission the  Respondent  wrote  on  23rd
    January 2015 arguing that it was not necessary for the Judge to make  a
    finding on all of the documents in an appeal only to give  reasons  for
    rejecting documents which the Judge had done in this case.  It was  for
    the Judge to make findings in whatever order he chose as long as all of
    the evidence was considered and the Judge had given ample  reasons  why
    the Appellant's claim had been damaged by the late asylum claim.  As to
    the medical evidence it was for the Appellant to make his case and  the
    adverse finding on the lack of medical evidence along  with  the  other
    findings were open to the Judge to make.  If the Appellant said he  had
    scars he should have produced evidence to show  that  he  was  in  fact
    scarred.

The Hearing Before Me

17.  In consequence the matter  came  before  me  to  decide  in  the  first
    instance whether there was an error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision such that it fell to be set aside  and  the  decision  remade.
    Counsel argued in relation to the Judge's treatment of Section  8  that
    the Judge had not properly considered the case of JT, what was required
    was a global assessment whereas the Judge had made his findings without
    considering the matter in the round.  The Judge had looked at the claim
    through the prism of his negative findings under Section 8.

18.  As to the medical evidence the  appeal  was  heard  in  July  2014  and
    concerned events in 2007, 2009 and 2010.  There was no obligation on an
    individual to provide medical evidence and it was not clear how several
    years  later  such  evidence  could  take  matters  any  further.   The
    Appellant suffered from a painful knee  but  a  letter  from  a  doctor
    pointing that out would be dismissed as making no difference.

19.  The Judge had not rejected  all  of  the  documents  submitted  by  the
    Appellant from Sri Lanka,  he  had  analysed  them  and  made  positive
    findings.  He had fallen into error by concluding that the letter  from
    the Superintendent of Police was a standalone document.  It was not and
    the Judge had not properly appreciated  where  the  document  had  come
    from.  It had been authenticated by the Appellant's representatives  in
    the United Kingdom liaising with lawyers in Sri Lanka.   A  lawyer  had
    gone to the police  station  to  verify  the  letter.   The  Judge  had
    confirmed in the determination that he had received the  authentication
    letter from Mr. Karikalan and yet overlooked it. The appeal  should  be
    allowed, the determination set aside and the matter  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier to be heard again.

20.  In reply the Presenting Officer  placed  reliance  on  the  refusal  of
    permission to appeal by Judge Astle which it was submitted had come  to
    the correct conclusion.  The Judge had not said he  did  not  find  the
    Appellant credible because of the operation of Section 8 but rather  he
    said that Section 8 damaged the Appellant's credibility.  The Judge was
    looking at matters in the round, giving valid  reasons  to  reject  the
    letter from the Superintendent of Police.

21.  In response Counsel argued that while a  Judge  might  be  entitled  to
    disregard the letter from the police station what could not be answered
    was the fact  that  the  Judge  had  found  the  letter  had  not  been
    authenticated when it had been.  Credibility was key in this particular
    case.  The Appellant's solicitors had written to the Tribunal  on  22nd
    July 2014  stating  that  due  to  the  quality  of  the  document  the
    translation company were unable to translate the copy of  the  document
    and they had requested the  Home  Office  to  send  them  the  original
    document.   The  original  of  the  letter  from  the  Office  of   the
    Superintendent of Police in Trincomalee was still in the court file and
    Counsel argued that it looked like something had been overlooked.  This
    was more of a procedural error, the solicitors should have  been  given
    the original letter to be translated.

Findings

22.  The issue in this  case  at  first  instance  was  the  credibility  or
    otherwise of the Appellant's account to have  been  detained  and  ill-
    treated by the authorities due to his family connections to  the  LTTE.
    The Appellant produced certain documents to support that claim and  one
    document in particular which referred to him directly namely  a  letter
    said to  be  from  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Police  in
    Trincomalee.  The Judge had a number  of  concerns  about  this  letter
    including the fact that the translation he had been  given  was  not  a
    word for word translation of the original since the  date  27th  August
    2007 appears in the original document but not in the  translation  that
    was given to the Judge.  The Judge also had a number of concerns  about
    the document to do with its appearance.  He was not  impressed  by  the
    solicitor's request for a further copy of and/or the  original  of  the
    letter from the police to put to their translation  company  again.  He
    declined to send the original to the solicitors as the printed sections
    of the document concerned were (in the Judge's view) perfectly legible.
     That was a matter for the Judge and I have  seen  nothing  since  then
    which would confirm that the translators had been unable  to  translate
    the document or that the Judge  was  therefore  wrong  to  decline  the
    request to send the original document back to the solicitors.

23.   Rather  the  debate  about   this   particular   document   from   the
    Superintendent of  Police  centres  on  whether  the  document  can  be
    accepted as genuine (notwithstanding the reasons given by the Judge why
    he did not accept it so to be) because of what is  said  to  have  been
    authentication of the document by Mr. Karikalan, an  authentication  it
    is said which was missed by the Judge.

24.  The important point about  the  document  is  less  the  way  that  the
    document is laid out but rather the matters raised at paragraph  31  of
    the determination by the Judge which were  that  the  contents  of  the
    letter were inconsistent with the Appellant's account (see paragraph  9
    above).  If the Appellant was a credible witness then it was reasonable
    to have expected a genuine letter to  have  supported  the  Appellant's
    account of events.  However that was not the case here.  Given that the
    Appellant claimed to have been arrested by groups  allied  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities in 2009 and 2010 if the letter from the  police  was
    correct and the Appellant had not reported since 2007 that was a matter
    which would have drawn him to the adverse attention of the authorities.
     As the Judge put it at paragraph 31, the delay in doing anything about
    the Appellant's failure to report after  2007  was  wholly  lacking  in
    credibility.  If he had been required to sign on in 2007  but  had  not
    done so he would have been sought and  detained  soon  after  any  such
    failure but it wholly lacked credibility that the  Appellant  was  only
    being sought on the grounds of  such  failure  some  four  years  after
    hostilities ceased.  This concern led the Judge to  conclude  that  the
    Superintendant's letter was just the sort of letter that  could  easily
    be obtained by a relatively minor example of corruption.

25.  The Appellant's  case  to  overturn  the  determination  turns  on  the
    evidence in the form of a  letter  from  Mr.  Karikalan  which  is  put
    forward as an  authentication  of  the  Superintendent's  letter.   The
    letter from Mr. Karikalan dated 1st May 2014 which the Appellant relies
    heavily upon is rather strangely worded.  It  refers  to  "the  record"
    that the Appellant was arrested and detained and then confirms that the
    letter is genuine "according  to  the  relevant  authority's  records".
    What the letter from Mr. Karikalan does not say is what  those  records
    are that leads him to that conclusion.  This is to be  contrasted  with
    the case of PJ where as found by the Court of Appeal,  two  Sri  Lankan
    lawyers on two separate occasions had gone to  the  Magistrates'  Court
    and obtained the court records.   That  is  not  the  case  here.   Mr.
    Karikalan says he  has  been  to  the  police  station  and  they  have
    confirmed according to their records that the letter is genuine.   That
    does not answer the point made by the Judge  at  paragraph  32  of  his
    determination that  such  a  letter  could  easily  be  obtained  by  a
    relatively minor example of corruption.  The case is perhaps  analogous
    to that of someone who is released on payment of a bribe.  The official
    record would not show that the person was  released  on  payment  of  a
    bribe as that might get officers at the police  station  into  trouble.
    Similarly if such a letter has been obtained  through  bribery  as  the
    Judge found, it is reasonable to assume that the police station records
    would not show that but that the police would  be  willing  to  say  to
    someone coming along in  the  position  of  Mr.  Karikalan  that  their
    records showed that the Appellant had indeed been released on condition
    to report etc.  The problem was that the  condition  to  report  was  a
    nonsense for the reasons given  by  the  Judge  and  nothing  has  been
    produced since from Mr. Karikalan or anyone else to explain the obvious
    difficulty in the Superintendent's letter.

26.  It was not necessary for the Judge to set out each and every  piece  of
    evidence he was taking into  consideration.   He  was  aware  that  Mr.
    Karikalan had written a  letter  because  he  referred  to  it  in  the
    determination.  He was also aware of the difficulties about the  letter
    from the Office of the Superintendent of Police and the  fact  that  an
    earlier attempt to verify the document had failed  because  the  person
    concerned Ms. Sundari had never been  entrusted  with  the  task.   The
    criticism of the Judge in this case is a relatively narrow one in  that
    he did not specifically deal in terms with Mr. Karikalan's letter  said
    to be a verification of the document.  In my view it was not  necessary
    for the Judge to do that given that he had  analysed  the  document  in
    some detail and given sound cogent reasons why he did  not  accept  the
    letter as genuine. The letter from Mr Karikalan raised  more  questions
    than it answered but it was not the  case  that  he  had  obtained  the
    records,  it  was  that  he  was  reassured  the  letter  was  genuine.
    Ultimately the question of whether the letter could be accepted as such
    was a matter for the trial Judge.

27.  The Appellant also argues that  if  the  Appellant  has  produced  some
    documents which are accepted as  genuine  the  Judge  should  not  have
    placed weight upon the letter from the Superintendent of Police.   That
    mis-states what the Judge's duty was.  The Judge's job was to  consider
    all of the relevant evidence in the round.  He  could  not  necessarily
    conclude that  because  the  documentation  regarding  the  Appellant's
    brother's credit card fraud problems was genuine therefore  the  letter
    from the Superintendent of Police must be genuine.  Similarly he  could
    not find the opposite, the  fact  that  he  placed  no  weight  on  the
    Superintendent's letter  meant  therefore  that  he  had  to  find  the
    documents relating to the credit card frauds to  be  bogus.   What  the
    Judge had to do was to look at each of the documents in the context  of
    the case as a whole and make his findings on what  were  and  were  not
    reliable documents.  This the Judge did and he gave sound reasons  both
    as to why he found the credit card documents valid and why he found the
    letter from the Superintendent of Police not to be valid.

28.  The other matters raised in the grounds of  onward  appeal  I  find  to
    mere disagreements with the Judge's findings.  If indeed the  Appellant
    had scars which he said came from ill-treatment it was  reasonable  for
    him to have brought those scars to  the  attention  of  the  Respondent
    and/or the Tribunal.  In submissions to me it appeared that Counsel  in
    fact was leaving aside the argument that the Appellant had scars at all
    referring instead  to  the  Appellant  having  an  injured  knee  (also
    referred to by the Judge at paragraph 21 of the determination).  It  is
    not of course necessary for an Appellant in an asylum claim to  produce
    evidence in support but where it is reasonable to expect such  evidence
    to be produced and it is not produced it is then open  to  a  Judge  to
    draw an adverse conclusion.  That is what happened in this  case.   The
    Appellant claimed that he had scarring on his arm but  he  produced  no
    evidence to show that scarring.  The Judge's comment  at  paragraph  21
    was that there was no medical evidence  that  the  Appellant  bore  any
    scars as a result of ill-treatment "despite  the  claimed  severity  of
    it".  Whilst it might not be  possible  to  accurately  date  scarring,
    scarring would either exist or it would not.  If the Appellant said  he
    had scarring but then did not produce it or evidence of it, it was open
    to the Judge to draw an adverse conclusion.

29.  Similarly I do not find there is anything in the  Appellant's  argument
    that the Judge has allowed his findings on general credibility to taint
    his findings on specific aspects of the case.  The Judge  of  necessity
    had to set out his conclusions in some form  of  order.   He  chose  to
    begin his analysis of the Appellant's credibility with general  matters
    including but not limited  to  the  Appellant's  unexplained  delay  in
    making a claim for asylum.  What is clear from  the  remainder  of  the
    Findings section of the determination is that the  Judge  proceeded  to
    analyse the other evidence in some detail.  The falsity of the argument
    that the findings under Section  8  infected  everything  else  can  be
    demonstrated by reference to the Judge's positive findings in  relation
    to the Appellant's brother's documents.  If the  Judge's  findings  had
    been tainted generally by his Section 8 findings, one would  expect  to
    find the Judge saying that none of the documents the Appellant produced
    could be relied upon but that is not what the Judge did.  This  was  an
    experienced Judge who was well aware of the need to look at all matters
    in the round.  He dismissed the appeal for sustainable reasons and  the
    grounds of onward appeal for all their length amount to no more than  a
    mere disagreement with  those  findings.   They  do  not  disclose  any
    material error of law.  I therefore  dismiss  the  appeal  against  the
    Judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 15th day of April  2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As there was no fee payable and the appeal has been dismissed there  can  be
no fee award.


Signed this 15th day of April  2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
