

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01517/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Determination Sent       |
|On 1 October 2014                      |On 6 October 2014        |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     ZG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitty (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.   She  appeals  with
          permission against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Heynes
          dated 24 April 2014 in which he  dismissed  her  appeal  on  inter
          alia, asylum grounds.

       2. In his grounds of appeal and orally Mr  Brown  relied  upon  three
          grounds to support his submission that Judge Heynes'  decision  is
          erroneous  in  law.   I   deal   with   those   submissions,   the
          respondent's response and my own conclusions in relation  to  each
          in turn.

   1) Port interview


       3. I entirely accept that an asylum seeker is not expected  when  she
          first arrives to fully set out the basis of her claim for  asylum.
           However, asylum seekers  are  expected  to  tell  the  truth  and
          discrepancies can legitimately be deployed in  the  assessment  of
          credibility, provided that decision-makers take into  account  all
          relevant matters including that the asylum  seeker  may  be  tired
          after a long journey and the record will be  a  summary  only.   I
          have taken into account and accept  the  summary  of  the  various
          authorities helpfully set out in the grounds of  appeal  including
          in particular KD (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1384.


       4. I accept that Judge Heynes was particularly  concerned  about  the
          inconsistency between the appellant's answers at the initial  port
          interview.  The Judge made clear  allowances  that  the  appellant
          may  have  been  tired  and   emotionally   exhausted   [27]   but
          nevertheless regarded the inconsistency to be a glaring  one  [29-
          30].  The Judge took into  account  the  appellant's  explanations
          including the alleged difficulties with  the  interpreter  [23-24]
          but was entitled  to  find  the  explanation  incredible  for  the
          reasons he has outlined [28].

       5. Mr Brown submitted that the Judge should have taken  into  account
          that later that same day at the screening interview the  appellant
          was able to provide a  more  accurate  basis  for  the  claim  for
          asylum.  However  the  Judge  was  well  aware  of  the  screening
          interview and noted that the appellant failed to make any  mention
          of being physically assaulted in the initial port interview or  at
          the screening interview [74-75].  The Judge  was  entitled  to  be
          concerned about the failure to mention such  an  important  aspect
          of her later account for the reasons that he has provided.

       6. Judge Heynes  comprehensively  disbelieved  the  majority  of  the
          appellant's account and gave detailed  and  numerous  reasons  for
          this.  This is not limited to the inconsistency between  the  port
          and screening interviews and  what  was  later  claimed  but  also
          included  a  number  of  other  matters  [31-83].    The   Judge's
          credibility findings might be described as harsh but they  do  not
          disclose an error of law.

   2) Expert report / credibility findings


       7. The grounds of appeal submit  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in
          considering the expert report after he had  reached  his  findings
          on credibility, rather than  consider  all  the  evidence  in  the
          round.


       8. The Judge has given a clear reason for not expressly referring  to
          the detail within the expert evidence when making his  credibility
          findings.  He did not regard it necessary to turn to  that  detail
          because he regarded the  events  described  by  the  appellant  as
          plausible  [73]  or  as  he  put  it  "capable  of  happening   in
          Afghanistan" [88].  Mr Brown accepted that the two expert  reports
          from Mr Giustozzi were only relevant in so far as  they  described
          the appellant's account as plausible and  described  the  risk  on
          return for the appellant if  her  account  was  accepted.   Having
          accepted the appellant's  account  as  inherently  plausible,  the
          Judge was entitled to approach his  credibility  findings  in  the
          manner that he did.

   3) Risk on return


       9. Mr Brown correctly submitted that  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
          appellant played a minor role in the organisations she  worked  in
          [69] and those would  be  perceived  as  Western  and  liberal  in
          Afghanistan and that she was employed as claimed [89].   Mr  Brown
          submitted that the Judge erred in law in failing to  address  risk
          on  return  in  light  of  these  limited   positive   credibility
          findings.


      10.  Judge  Heynes  neatly  summarised  his  findings  including   his
          acceptance that the appellant was  employed  as  claimed  and  his
          rejection that she or her husband had  received  threats  and  she
          was beaten [89] before concluding that  "there  is  no  basis  for
          concluding that the  appellant  and  her  daughters  would  be  at
          risk".  I asked Mr Brown to take me to the  expert  or  background
          evidence available to the Judge to support the proposition that  a
          woman with the appellant's employment  history  but  who  had  not
          been  threatened  or  ill-treated  up  to   her   departure   from
          Afghanistan in 2010, would be at risk if  returned  in  2014.   Mr
          Brown relied upon the passages in the expert  report  set  out  at
          [14] of his grounds of  appeal.   These  address  the  generalised
          risks for those viewed as collaborationists  and  those  perceived
          as westernised and liberal, and the general  situation  in  Kabul.
          There was in reality very little before the Judge or before me  to
          suggest to the lower standard of proof that  the  appellant  would
          be at risk in 2014 when she had not worked  in  Afghanistan  since
          2010 and had worked without (on the Judge's findings) any  threats
          or material incident between 2008 and 2010.  The  paucity  of  the
          evidence of risk to a woman with that  history  is  relevant  when
          considering whether  the  Judge  properly  engaged  with  risk  on
          return.  Although the Judge dealt with the issue  very  briefly  I
          am  satisfied  he  has  provided  sufficient  reasoning  that  the
          appellant would not be at risk on return.


      11. Even if I am wrong on this,  I am satisfied that any error on  the
          part of the Judge in giving reasons why the  appellant  would  not
          be at risk in light of his  limited  positive  findings  regarding
          her past employment, cannot be said to  be  a  material  error  of
          law.  On the background evidence available  no  Judge  would  have
          found the appellant to be at real risk in 2014 by  reason  of  her
          past employment in Afghanistan when she  worked  without  (on  the
          Judge's findings) any threats or material  incident  between  2008
          and 2010.

Decision

      12. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
          involve the making of an error on a point of law.


      13. I do not set aside the decision.

      14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order but  I  do
          so  because  this  determination  refers  to   sensitive   matters
          relevant to the appellant's asylum claim.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
1 October 2014

