
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01957/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 30 May 2013                                |On 28 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                             malyar asif niazai

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Brakaj, Counsel instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, claiming to  be  born  on  1
    January 1978.

2.   The appellant claims to have left Afghanistan in mid  2008,  travelling
    to Pakistan, thence to France and onward  to  the  United  Kingdom,  he
    being arrested on 29 April 2009 and claimed asylum shortly thereafter.

3.   The respondent, by a decision of 3 February 2012, refused to grant  the
    appellant asylum or other protection in the United Kingdom.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sacks on 2 April  2012.   He  was
    found not to be a credible witness as to the circumstances of his claim
    and not to be at risk of ill-treatment upon  return  for  a  Convention
    reason.  The Judge went on to consider in the alternative Article 1F(a)
    concluding that the appellant's activities had placed  himself  in  any
    event outside the protection of the Refugee Convention.

5.   The appellant seeks to appeal against that decision, which  appeal  has
    been granted.

6.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that leave.

7.   Miss Brakaj, who represents the appellant, addressed me  at  length  as
    to the grounds of appeal  and  invited  me  to  find  that  there  were
    material errors of law in the approach taken by the Judge to the issues
    in this case.  She invited me to set aside the decision.   Mr  Dewison,
    who represents the respondent, invited me to find that so  far  as  the
    decision relating to asylum is concerned that that was properly open to
    be  made  in  all  the  circumstances.   He  agreed  that  the  Judge's
    conclusions as to Article 1F(a) were not sustainable,  given  that  the
    Judge had taken little account of the risk factors as  set  out  in  JS
    (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD  [2010]  UKSC  15.   He  submitted,  however,  that
    although that finding was in error and should  not  stand  it  did  not
    adversely affect the overall finding that was made as to asylum.

8.   In summary, it is the case for the  appellant  that  he  comes  from  a
    family who gave wholehearted support  to  Hezb-e-Islami.   His  father,
    brothers and uncle were  all  active  supporters  of  that  party.   He
    produced a membership card for the party, saying that that was obtained
    for him by his father when he was around 14 to 16 years old.  Over  the
    years he has lost his father, brother and uncle in  the  conflict.   He
    himself was involved with three battles  on  behalf  of  Hizb-e-Islami,
    receiving shrapnel injuries on the last occasion.

9.   He was arrested  by  the  authorities  and  detained  but  subsequently
    released on bail.  He  was  permitted  to  cross  the  borders  between
    Afghanistan and Pakistan, particularly for treatment, on  a  number  of
    occasions.

10.  He contends that because of his political  profile  with  Hizb-e-Islami
    he will be at risk upon return from the Afghan authorities.  It is  his
    case that he has been charged with committing war  crimes  against  the
    Afghanistan authorities.

11.  Essentially, the Tribunal Judge  did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be
    credible as to that claimed profile.  The findings  as  to  credibility
    were essentially those as set out in some detail  in  paragraph  43(a)-
    (o).  The Judge found  that the appellant's evidence  was  inconsistent
    as to the involvement of himself and members of his family.   He  noted
    the ignorance  of  the  appellant  as  to  the  Kalashnikov  rifle  and
    inconsistencies in the evidence as to the  appellant's  involvement  in
    the three battles were noted.  The Judge did not find it credible  that
    the appellant received no formal training.  He did not  find  that  the
    account of his detention, bail and treatment was credible in the  light
    of the allegations which  the  appellant  maintained  were  being  made
    against him.  There  are  other  matters  also  that  were  considered,
    undermining credibility.

12.  The first criticism made of the Judge is that  his  criticisms  of  the
    appellant, as having given inconsistent evidence  and  vague  evidence,
    was  ill-founded  because  there  had  been  a  significant  difficulty
    encountered by the appellant at the hearing in terms of interpretation.
     It was  a  matter  of  some  concern  that  such  a  feature  was  not
    acknowledged by the Judge in the determination.  Such difficulties  may
    well have contributed to the impression of vagueness or inaccuracy.

13.  A request had been made in advance  of  the  hearing  for  the  Judge's
    Record of Proceedings to be examined to detect whether or not  possible
    interpretation difficulties had been  recorded.   Examination  of  such
    records  in  the  file  did  not  reveal  any  reference  at   all   to
    interpretation difficulties.

14.  It was stated  in  the  course  of  correspondence  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, particularly  in  a  letter,  that  indeed  the  appellant's
    representative at the hearing had made an application  to  adjourn  the
    case on that basis.

15.  It is a matter of concern that if such an application was made  it  was
    not duly recorded.

16.  It is however a matter of some concern that no mention of  any  request
    for an adjournment is made in the grounds of appeal.  Any reference  to
    interpretation difficulties is that set out in paragraph 10 which reads
    as follows:-

         "The appellant raised concerns regarding his ability to  understand
         the court  interpreter.   No  reference  is  made  to  the  alleged
         interpreter difficulties experienced by the  appellant  within  the
         determination.  It would have been in the interest of  justice  for
         the hearing to be adjourned in light of this."


17.  Mr Dewison most helpfully assisted in that regard by reference  to  the
    detailed notes of his colleague who represented the respondent  at  the
    previous hearing.  It was acknowledged that from time to time the issue
    of  interpretation  difficulties  was  raised.   It  was  said  by  the
    appellant that on occasions he did not fully understand the interpreter
    who  spoke  with  a  different  accent.   Questions  were  raised,   in
    particular by the appellant, as to where the interpreter was from.

18.  From the note Mr Dewison was  able  to  detect  that  the  question  of
    interpretation difficulties was raised  on  several  occasions  in  the
    course of cross-examination.  When the matter was raised the Judge made
    further enquiries and sought  to  resolve  the  particular  problem  of
    translation.  The Judge had indicated that, generally  speaking,  there
    had been little difficulty with interpretation.

19.  As Mr Dewison submitted, many questions were asked of the appellant  in
    the course of the hearing.  There was only a relatively  few  occasions
    when  difficulties  with  interpretation  or  accuracy  of   what   was
    interpreted  was  raised.   Overall  he  submits   the   interpretation
    difficulties as alleged were not such as  to  have  made  any  material
    difference to the accuracy of what was recorded.

20.  Miss Brakaj also had the notes of Miss Rasoul who had  represented  the
    appellant.  She agreed that the note as  outlined  by  Mr  Dewison  was
    generally correct.  I invited her to indicate what details of  evidence
    as set out in the determination were inaccurate  by  reason  of  faulty
    interpretation.  She was unable to give any particular example from her
    note and  indeed  none  has  been  cited  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Nevertheless the burden of her argument was to the effect that it would
    be unsafe to consider that the Judge's  comments  about  vagueness  and
    inconsistencies should stand in the light of  potential  interpretation
    problems.

21.  The difficulty of course facing both Miss  Brakaj  and  Mr  Dewison  is
    that they were not present at the hearing  itself  but  were  operating
    from notes made by colleagues.

22.  Clearly it was an error of the Judge not to record  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings  the  interpretation  difficulties   which   were   raised.
    Nevertheless,  there  is   no   evidence   that   such   interpretation
    difficulties have led the Judge to fundamentally misunderstand  aspects
    of the appellant's evidence.  It would seem that there were  relatively
    few occasions when the difficulties with interpretation were raised and
    seemingly the Judge addressed that problem at the time.  It was clearly
    in the mind of the Judge that overall there was proper  interpretation.
    In the absence of any clear indication that there were material  errors
    arising from that difficulty I do not find that that factor  by  itself
    renders the findings of the Judge unsafe.

23.  The other matter which is strongly relied upon by Miss  Brakaj  is  the
    failure of the Judge to give adequate weight or attention to the expert
    report of Peter Marsden of 26 March 2012.  It is a report  of  some  79
    folios.

24.  The Judge deals with that report at paragraph 43(k).   It  may  perhaps
    be convenient to set out that paragraph which reads as follows:-

         "I have not ignored the very detailed report of the expert in  this
         matter which runs to 80 pages.  I have read that  report  carefully
         and I do not ignore the expert's knowledge of the situation  within
         Afghanistan.  However his report is to a large  extent  based  upon
         what he has read within the documentation that has  been  presented
         for him to enable him to  prepare  the  report.   I  have  had  the
         opportunity of taking direct evidence from the appellant and whilst
         I respect the conclusions that the expert has come  to  I  consider
         that my ability to assess the appellant's evidence  on  a  face-to-
         face basis enables me to be able to  assess  his  credibility  more
         accurately than is contained in a report based upon what the expert
         ha been told rather than what he has been able to extract by way of
         observations and questioning of the appellant direct."


25.  Miss Brakaj submits that that is a wholly inadequate approach  to  take
    to that lengthy report.

26.  It is right to note however that the  bulk  of  the  report  is  indeed
    reviewing the historical background within Afghanistan speaking  as  to
    the nature of the conflict.

27.  At paragraphs 28 to 33 in particular there is a discussion  as  to  the
    role of Hizb-e-Islami with the relevant dates and  activities  of  that
    particular party.

28.  A number of reports are considered in the course of that report.

29.  Perhaps the passages which are more closely aligned to the  appellant's
    case are those at paragraphs 57 to 65 of the report.

30.  Such speaks of the fact that  the  ill-treatment  referred  to  by  the
    appellant at the hands of the police and that the National  Directorate
    of Security is consistent  with  the  practice  of  actively  targeting
    members of the Taliban and the Hizb-e-Islami.   It  said  that  if  the
    appellant had joined Hizb-e-Islami at the age of 15 or 16 he would have
    been regarded as too young to be an active fighter and  at  best  would
    have played a support role.  The opportunity  to  be  a  fighter  would
    arise more in 2001 and in 2005-2006.  The expert  says  that  he  would
    expect the absence  of  documentation  to  lead  the  appellant  to  be
    questioned by the police or intelligence service, if deported to  Kabul
    Airport.  He said that the appellant would come under pressure  arising
    from his previous membership of Hizb-e-Islami and that his  father,  to
    play an active role again and to be approached indeed by the Taliban.

31.  Largely the report is a generic report, seeking  to  comment  upon  the
    risks to the appellant were he indeed to be that which he claims to be,
    namely an active member of Hizb-e-Islami.

32.  Miss Brakaj invites me to find that it is a report that  is  supportive
    of what the appellant had to say as to his involvement  and  that  with
    his family, such that greater weight should have been placed upon it by
    the Judge.

33.  One matter of particular  importance  in  the  report  is  highlighted,
    namely what is said at paragraph 61 in relation to  the  likelihood  or
    otherwise of a bail arrangement with the police in the manner which the
    appellant describes.  The expert comments, "it should be noted, in this
    regard, that the Afghan National Police, operating at the local  level,
    are closely linked to local power interests.  The police referred to in
    Malyar  Niazai's  account  may,  therefore,  have  felt  a  degree   of
    obligation to respond positively to pressure from local elders,  albeit
    on the basis of a national bail arrangement.

34.  Dealing with that matter specifically Mr Dewison  invites  me  to  find
    that that is speculation.  The operative word in that is "may".  It may
    provide  one  view  of  how  the  appellant  gained  bail  but  is  not
    determinative of the situation.  He invites me to find that  the  Judge
    is best placed, having regard to all the evidence,  to  make  a  proper
    evaluation of that evidence on that point which indeed he has  done  at
    paragraph 43(f).  It defies commonsense Mr Dewison submits that if  the
    appellant is suspected  of committing war crimes that they will  permit
    that person frequently  to  leave  Afghanistan  across  the  border  to
    Pakistan and return.  Particularly if someone was on bail it  would  be
    surprising indeed that they would be allowed to leave the  jurisdiction
    as claimed by the appellant.  Mr Dewison invites me to  find  that  the
    conclusions of the Judge, on a central feature of the appellant's whole
    case, were properly made  and that the report at paragraph 61, even  if
    being considered would only present one view  and  not  the  definitive
    view.

35.  As I have indicated it is a very lengthy report and for the  most  part
    is seen by the Judge  to  be  giving  an   assessment  of  the  overall
    situation.

36.  That report, together with the background material which was  presented
    in abundance at the hearing, are of course matters that must  be  borne
    in mind by a Judge in coming to a  conclusion.   There  is  nothing  to
    indicate from the determination, and indeed from the passage  to  which
    reference has been made at paragraph 43(k),  that  the  Judge  has  not
    borne such matters in mind.  Often indeed credibility arises  from  the
    details given at a hearing and the way in which the claim is presented.
     I do not interpret the Judge in that passage  to  be  saying  anything
    other than that.

37.  Issue was taken at the Judge's rejection of the appellant's  experience
    on the basis that he knows little about the Kalashnikov because it  was
    clear that the appellant knew that it held 30 bullets.  Whether that is
    so  the Judge noted that he seemed to be ignorant as to  its  range  or
    its operation, which would be surprising if he had indeed been used  to
    it in combat.

38.  There would seem to be a matter raised  in  the  grounds  that  at  the
    interview the appellant had stated that his  cousin  and  brother  were
    killed during the war with the Russians whereas  in  fact  it  was  not
    correct, it was his uncle.  The appellant indicated that it was  either
    a  mistake  in  interpretation  or  that  the   answer   was   recorded
    inaccurately. It is contended that it was wrong for the Judge in  those
    circumstances to pick up that matter to the detriment of the appellant.



39.  It is clear from paragraph 43 that the Judge  looked  at  a  number  of
    matters in the assessment of credibility.  Such included the nature  of
    the identity card and the failure to  claim  asylum  en  route  to  the
    United Kingdom as well as other matters more particular to the evidence
    which were given.  Central to the appellant's appeal was of course  his
    claimed membership of Hizb-e-Islami and of his contention that he was a
    fighter for it and also that he was accused by reason of  his  activity
    of committing war crimes in Afghanistan.

40.  The Judge, having considered the evidence as a  whole,  concluded  that
    the appellant was not so involved as claimed and was not  somebody  who
    had been arrested  or  was  wanted  on  the  aspect  of  his  terrorist
    activities.

41.  Although the report by Mr Marsden speaks of  the  plausibility  of  the
    account, essentially it is for the Judge,  having  heard  all  material
    matters to come to that conclusion in the  analysis  of  the  evidence.
    Central to the matter, argues Mr Dewison, is the stark fact that if the
    appellant were wanted accused of what he claims to have been, it defied
    commonsense for him to have been released on bail and  more  so  to  be
    allowed to come and go without hindrance across borders.

42.  Having considered the opposing arguments I do not find there  to  be  a
    material error of law in the assessment as to the asylum claim  itself.
    Due regard has been had by the Judge to the expert report and to  other
    background material.    It was clearly an error for the  Judge  not  to
    have recorded the issues of problems of interpretation.  I accept  what
    Mr Dewison says from his note that such were isolated matters and  were
    resolved in the course of the hearing.  Without any particular examples
    to  be  presented,  it  is  difficult  to  conclude  that  problems  of
    interpretation lay at the heart of inconsistency or inaccuracy.

43.  Thus I do not find that the Judge's conclusion that the  appellant  was
    not a refugee to be fundamentally flawed or inaccurate  to  a  material
    extent.

44.  Clearly as has been accepted  that  the  Judge  was  in  error  in  the
    approach to Article 1F(a).  That particular finding should  not  stand.
    That  does  not,  however,  undermine  the  overall  finding  that  the
    appellant is not a refugee and can be safely returned.

45.  Thus the decision of the Judge will stand, namely that  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds is  dismissed  and  that  in  relation  to  humanitarian
    protection is also dismissed as is the  appeal  in  relation  to  human
    rights.





Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

