
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01980/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2016                            |On 06 April 2016              |
|Prepared 27 January 2016                      |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [C M]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Ahmad, Counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of  Sri  Lanka,  date  of  birth  [  ]  1978,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated  23  January  2015  to
    refuse a claim for Refugee and Humanitarian Protection status dated  23
    January 2015.

2.   The centrepiece of the Appellant's claim  was  a  fear  of  persecution
    because of his suspected  involvement  with  the  LTTE  based  on  past
    events.  His appeal came before a panel of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish and Garbett (the panel).  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Garbett
    wrote the decision promulgated on 24 April 2015.

3.   What is plain is that a number of positive findings were made that  the
    Appellant had been subject to an arrest warrant which was  regarded  as
    reliable and yet the panel failed to identify a Robinson obvious point,
    namely that the Appellant in those circumstances  fell  within  GJ  and
    Others (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT  00319,  paragraph  356(7)(d),  as  a
    person whose name appears on a computerised stop list accessible at the
    airport: Comprising a list of those against whom  there  is  an  extant
    court order or arrest warrant.  Individuals whose  name  appears  on  a
    stop list will be stopped  at  the  airport  and  handed  over  to  the
    appropriate Sri Lankan authorities,  in  pursuance  of  such  order  or
    warrant.

4.   For reasons that are  unexplained,  it  appears  that  the  Appellant's
    representative did not address category (7)(d)  although  as  Mr  Mills
    accepted it was a Robinson obvious point.  It was,  he  said,  a  point
    which an experienced  Immigration  Judge  would  have  picked  up  when
    following the required exercise of considering the risk categories  for
    those on a return to Sri Lanka.   There  was  no  dispute  between  the
    parties and the findings unchallenged that there  was  a  valid  arrest
    warrant and in those circumstances  it  is  a  matter  which  not  only
    reflected  on  the  assessment  of  risk  but  also   the   Appellant's
    credibility.

5.   Accordingly the parties were agreed, with which  I  also  agreed,  that
    the Original Tribunal's decision could not stand.  On the basis of  the
    findings of  fact  and  information  provided  it  is  clear  that  the
    Appellant was to be regarded as on a stop list  and  therefore  falling
    within  sub-paragraph  (7)(d).   Accordingly  in  the  light   of   the
    submissions made I was satisfied that the Original Tribunal's  decision
    in terms of an assessment of risk on return were flawed.  The  parties'
    submissions invited me to remake the decision on  the  basis  that  the
    appeals should be allowed on Refugee Convention grounds because of  the
    risk of persecution faced by  the  Appellant  and  of  proscribed  ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

6.   In the circumstances I agree that the other findings of fact stand  and
    that notwithstanding the somewhat historic events of some longevity now
    the Sri Lankan Authorities have not given up their  pursuit  of  former
    LTTE members particularly those identified as LTTE fighters or  current
    actual or perceived LTTE or secessionist  tamil eelam supporters.

7.   In the circumstances therefore the following decision  is  substituted.



8.   The appeal of the  Appellant  is  allowed  on  Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.

9.   No anonymity order is made.

Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation due to  the  case  file  being  mis-
    located.


