
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01541/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 29th October 2015                         | On 18th November 2015        |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                    F M B
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Webb of NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The Appellant has previously been granted  anonymity.  Unless  and  until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or
any member of her family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Woolley, promulgated on 23rd  June  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  her
    claim for asylum and to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 2. The judge found that the Appellant had been trafficked by an individual
    called "Mama G" and that she was not at risk from "Mama G" in the event
    of a return to her home area in Zambia, or of being re-trafficked.  The
    judge found that there was in any event a sufficiency of protection  in
    Zambia, including in her home area.  The judge found no  merit  in  the
    Appellant's claim that her removal breached Article 8 rights of her  or
    her children, even allowing for the fact that she was HIV positive.

 3. Permission was expressly granted on the ground:

      i) that the judge had  arguably  erred  in  law  by  applying  country
         guidance case law relating to Nigeria when the place of return  was
         Zambia and being apparently unaware  that  the  case  that  he  had
         referred to of PO (Trafficked Women) Nigeria CG [2009] UKAIT  00046
         had successfully been appealed to the Court of Appeal.

     ii) had failed to take account that the Appellant  remained  vulnerable
         to re-trafficking in order to support her children because  of  her
         lack of education and of work experience.

    iii) the conclusion that the best interests of the two children  in  the
         United Kingdom are met by remaining with  the  Appellant  fails  to
         address what  their  position  would  be  in  the  event  that  the
         Appellant was not able to afford to obtain medication so  that  her
         health deteriorated and  she would no longer be able  to  care  for
         them.

 4. I find that Judge Woolley self-misdirected when he referred to the 2011
    case of PO.  The case was not relied upon by  either  of  the  parties.
    There is no reference to the Court of Appeal decision on the same case.
    On appeal to the Court of Appeal,  whilst  aspects  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision were upheld as being useful guidance, the decision itself  was
    found to be flawed for failing to apply the test the very same Tribunal
    had found to be appropriate in the context  of  Nigeria,  in  assessing
    whether or not trafficking had been by a gang.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    also found procedural  unfairness  in  respect  of  the  assessment  of
    evidence as to  the  availability  of  shelters  because  the  Tribunal
    adopted e-mail evidence submitted by the Respondent from the Embassy in
    Nigeria as the basis for factual  findings  when  the  author  was  not
    subject to cross-examination. It was found contrary to  the  principles
    of natural justice that the Appellant's expert  had  been  required  to
    submit for cross-examination when the Respondent's expert/e-mail author
    was not. There was country information, as  well  as  expert  evidence,
    which contradicted the evidence of the email.

 5. Leaving aside issues of fairness, the matters which were the subject of
    criticism in the  Court  of  Appeal  related  specifically  to  country
    conditions  in  Nigeria.   I   have   looked   at     Judge   Woolley's
    extrapolation of the guidance of PO. On the face of his decision it  is
    limited to the general principle that when assessing the  risk  of  re-
    trafficking it is necessary to investigate the  original  circumstances
    of trafficking, being alert to  the  whether  or  not  there  was  gang
    involvement and factors including  age  (in  the  case  of  PO  it  was
    suggested that the age of 40 was a relevant factor), as well as needing
    to evaluate, in  the  context  of  a  sufficiency  of  protection,  the
    availability of hostel accommodation.

 6. The grounds take no issue with the findings of  fact  and  although  in
    submissions Mr Webb articulated that, in his view (and he did not write
    the grounds), there was evidence upon which the judge could have  found
    that the Appellant had  been  trafficked  by  a  gang,  as  he  readily
    recognised that is not a sufficient  basis  upon  which  to  assert  an
    error.   The judge  has  given  clear  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant was trafficked by an individual.  In terms of assessing  risk
    on return  the  judge  notes  that  the  Appellant's  sister,  who  was
    allegedly trafficked by the same woman,  has  returned  to  Zambia  and
    there has been no further contact by "Mama G" with  her  to  the  point
    that she has not been subjected to any ill-treatment or been exposed to
    being re-trafficked by "Mama G".  The Appellant had not seen "Mama G  "
    since 2006 when she ran away from her, and in  the  context  of  having
    lived in the same locality as "Mama G", and having  been  living  among
    other members of the Zambian community the judge concludes:

         "If Mama G was as powerful as the Appellant maintains then  I  find
         she would have been  able  to  use  her  contacts  in  the  Zambian
         community in the UK to track the Appellant  down.   The  fact  that
         there has been no contact for nearly nine years is I find  powerful
         evidence that Mama G is no  longer  interested  in  the  Appellant.
         There is indeed no evidence that Mama G  is  still  alive,  and  no
         evidence as to the country in which she is living.  I find from the
         lack of contact over the last nine years that the Appellant  is  of
         no interest to Mama G and that she is not  at  risk  of  being  re-
         trafficked by her, whether in the UK or in Zambia. Mama G  in  fact
         sent her sister back to Zambia and showed no  further  interest  in
         her thereafter, and I find that the same attitude will  prevail  in
         respect of the Appellant."

 7. Judge Woolley addressed his mind to the issues raised in PO and reached
    conclusions rooted in the evidence of  the  personal  circumstances  of
    this particular Appellant.  Plainly it  was  right  for  the  judge  to
    decide  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  had  been  trafficked  by  an
    individual or by a gang because that must be a circumstance relevant to
    risk on return.

 8. With regard to the issue of risk of re-trafficking generally  in  light
    of the Appellant having already been the victim of trafficking, and the
    circumstances in which she is likely  to  find  herself  on  return  in
    Zambia, the grounds' assertion that having been  trafficked  once,  and
    returning to a life poorer than that  which  she  left,  the  Appellant
    would be likely to be vulnerable to trafficking, is dealt with  in  the
    judge's decision. The Judge finds  that  having  the  protection  of  a
    family  network  in  Zambia,  her  sister  still  looking   after   the
    Appellant's remaining two children in Zambia, there will be  a  general
    level of protection.  The judge concludes that the Appellant  would  be
    able to obtain employment in Zambia having found that she has worked in
    the United Kingdom albeit in the context of casual jobs,  and  that  he
    has the benefit of having  developed  English  language  skills  whilst
    here, and that she will have the benefit of wider family support.

 9. Crucially  Judge  Wooley  has  not  constrained  his  consideration  of
    relevant factors by his erroneous consideration  of  the  case  of  PO.
    Whilst Judge Wooley's reference to the 2011  PO  case  was  unwarranted
    absent some reference to the  2014  Court  of  Appeal  decision,  I  am
    satisfied that the failure did not skew the judge's findings or vitiate
    his conclusions, so that the error is of little consequence.

10. The Grounds of Appeal argue that the judge's conclusions in respect  of
    sufficiency of protection  are  predicated  upon  the  availability  of
    shelters and such like and criticise them because of PO, because in the
    context of that Nigerian case, that  had  been  a  matter  of  disputed
    evidence, to the point that the findings had not sustained the scrutiny
    of the Court of Appeal.  There is no merit in this ground  because  the
    Appellant is not a Nigerian citizen,  so  that  the  difficulties  that
    arose in respect of the evidence in that case have no  bearing  on  her
    position.

11. The judge was duty-bound to consider  the  country  information  as  it
    pertained to Zambia and to reach his conclusions in that  context.   At
    paragraph  30  the  judge  makes  specific  reference  to  the  country
    information  that  he  has  been  provided  with  in  the  context   of
    sufficiency of protection so that, contrary to the  bold  assertion  in
    the grounds, his findings are rooted in evidence which was  before  him
    and which was relevant to the issue.

12. Turning to the position of the best interests of the  children  it  was
    argued before me that when assessing the best interests of the children
    the judge was too quick to find that their best interests  were  to  be
    with their mother.  Mr Webb argued that in the event that the  children
    return to Zambia with their mother and she was unable to care for  them
    because of difficulties in obtaining medication it would plainly not be
    in their best interests.

13. I find no merit in this speculative ground.  The  submissions  fail  to
    recognise the difficulties  in  the  adverse  credibility  findings  in
    respect of the Appellant, and in any event exceed  the  evidence.   The
    Appellant told the judge that whilst there was free treatment available
    in Zambia she was not sure that she would be  able  to  access  it,  in
    particular she was concerned because the fact that she  had  contracted
    HIV whilst in the UK would act as a bar to the receipt of treatment  in
    Zambia so that she would not be able to access the medication which  is
    keeping her healthy. That was a position which  was  not  supported  by
    country  information.   Judge  Wooley  in  any  event  found  that  the
    Appellant would not be alone, and reliant on NGO's  providing  shelters
    and such like, but have the support of her family, and able  to  obtain
    employment and, if necessary,  to afford medication.

14. Reading the judge's decision in the round I am satisfied that  he  took
    into account all relevant factors in assessing the  best  interests  of
    the children, and that his decision that it was in their best interests
    to be with their mother, and  so  to  return  to  Zambia  with  her  on
    removal, reveals no material error.

15. For all the reasons set out above I  am  satisfied  that  although  the
    judge made an incorrect reference to the case of PO the error does  not
    vitiate the factual findings and his conclusions are  safe.   In  those
    circumstances I find that the decision dismissing all Grounds of Appeal
    is not vitiated by legal error so as to warrant me  setting  it  aside,
    and it stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            Davidge
     17 November 2015


