
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/01532/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TK
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Cecilia Hulse, Counsel, instructed by Duncan
Lewis Sols.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the  appellant  is  a  lone
    female asylum seeker who might be at  risk  just  by  reason  of  being
    identified.

 1. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  respondent's  appeal
    against a decision taken on 13 January 2015 to refuse to  grant  asylum
    and to remove the respondent from the UK.

Introduction

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Cameroon born in 1978.  She  arrived  in
    the UK on 12 July 2013 with a visit visa valid until 3  December  2013.
    She claimed asylum on 26 November 2013. She stated that her husband was
    a police officer and he died on 3 December 2010. She was then pressured
    by her husband's family to marry one of his relatives. She went to stay
    at her father in law's house and was repeatedly raped by her  husband's
    cousin,  from  January  2011  until  June  2013.  When  she  tried   to
    investigate her husband's death the cousin beat her and  threatened  to
    stab her. She did not tell anyone because she was  scared  of  what  he
    would do to her and the children. She later discovered that the  cousin
    had also raped her eldest daughter. Her children went to live with  her
    family in June 2013. She was too frightened to go back to  Cameroon  to
    live with her family. The cousin was also a policeman. Her brother told
    her by letter in November 2014 that he had been attacked by a gang  who
    were looking for her and that her house had been burned down.

 3.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that her account was not credible and in  any
    event she could move to another part of  Cameroon.  Her  problems  were
    very local.

The Appeal

 4. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 19 May  2015.  She  was  represented  by  Ms
    Hulse. The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent  was  credible
    but was not satisfied that the cousin would  have  any  possibility  of
    finding her and subjecting her to further ill treatment if she returned
    to Cameroon. However, the judge also found that she had  little  option
    of places to go in Cameroon and there was a real risk  that  she  would
    fall into the hands of her family  once  again.  The  judge  had  great
    concerns about her mental health and physical health if  she  returned.
    The appeal was allowed on humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  under
    Articles 2 and 3  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed under the Refugee Convention.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the respondent was  at  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence
    simply by reason of being present in Cameroon because no  reasons  were
    given  for  that  finding.  No  factors  or  objective  evidence   were
    identified by the judge that would indicate that the  respondent  would
    succeed on a stand-alone Article 2 or 3 claim. There was  no  reference
    as to why the respondent's mental health problems reached the Article 3
    threshold nor any consideration of medical facilities in Cameroon.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  on
    8 July 2015 because it was arguable that there was  no  basis  for  the
    judge  to  find  that  the  respondent  was  in  need  of  humanitarian
    protection or that return  would  breach  her  protected  rights  under
    Articles 2 and 3. The brief explanation  at  paragraphs  33-34  of  the
    decision  was  arguably  inadequate  and  incompatible  with  the  law,
    particularly having regard to earlier findings.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 8. Ms Isherwood submitted that the appeal was dismissed under the  Refugee
    Convention and the findings  are  otherwise  quite  unusual.  There  is
    reference to internal relocation at paragraph 19 but no findings on the
    submissions. The findings at paragraphs 25 are conceded  but  paragraph
    34 is confused and there are no findings about the submissions made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State. Cameroon is a large country and there
    is no finding that the respondent cannot go anywhere else. There was no
    evidence that her abusers would find her elsewhere and the reference in
    paragraph 34 to "little option of places to go" is not based  upon  the
    evidence. There is no explanation as  to  how  the  objective  material
    helps the respondent's claim and no  consideration  of  the  protection
    available to the appellant in Cameroon. There was certainly no evidence
    that the cousin had influence over the whole country. There was nothing
    about medical facilities in Cameroon in the objective material.

 9. Ms Hulme submitted that the hearing lasted one hour and fifty  minutes.
    The interviews, witness statement and oral evidence were all before the
    judge. The  judge  dismissed  the  asylum  claim  because  the  Refugee
    Convention was not engaged. The judge found the appellant's evidence to
    be consistent throughout. There was  a  jigsaw  of  evidence  including
    independent medical evidence. The facts  were  all  found  as  claimed.
    Three different professionals were involved in the medical reports. The
    objective evidence was not explicitly dealt with by the judge  but  the
    evidence in the bundle justifies the conclusions reached by the  judge.
    The judge clearly considered that  evidence  at  paragraph  34  of  the
    decision. It is doubtful that the respondent could  exist  on  her  own
    because women in Cameroon do not live on their own unless they  have  a
    strong position in  society.  The  judge  has  given  reasons  and  his
    conclusions are based upon the medical reports. There is  a  formidable
    risk on return and the respondent does not have the ability to take the
    option of internal relocation. The judge was not required to  refer  to
    every element of the evidence.

10. Ms Isherwood replied that the situation in Cameroon had to be looked at
    by the judge.  There  was  no  evidence  about  medical  facilities  in
    Cameroon. Paragraph 34 does not refer to  non-government  organisations
    or any other support that might be available in Cameroon.

11. The judge was not satisfied at paragraph 31 that the cousin would  have
    any  possibility  of  finding  the  respondent  should  she  return  to
    Cameroon. However, at paragraph 34 the judge found that the  respondent
    had little option of places to go and that there was a real  risk  that
    she might fall into the hands of her family once again. Those  findings
    are essentially unexplained and difficult to reconcile with each other.
    If there is no possibility of the cousin finding the respondent then no
    other risk of ill treatment has been identified there appears to be  no
    risk of  further  abuse.  However,  if  the  respondent  is  unable  to
    internally relocate and there is a real risk that she  will  fall  into
    the hands of her husband's family then there might be a risk of further
    ill treatment from the cousin or others. The findings  in  relation  to
    risk of further abuse are wholly unclear and that is a  material  error
    of law.

12. The finding in relation to humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C
    of the Immigration Rules is equally unexplained. No  consideration  has
    been given to the level of protection  in  Cameroon  and  there  is  no
    explanation as to why  the  respondent  would  be  at  risk  simply  by
    returning to Cameroon. The judge has failed to give adequate reasons in
    relation to the humanitarian protection finding and that is  a  further
    material error of law.

13. Ms Hulse has referred to the extensive medical evidence  and  objective
    evidence that was put before the First-tier Tribunal. However, there is
    no analysis of that evidence and the  judge  simply  refers  to  "great
    concerns about her mental health and her  physical  health  should  she
    have to be returned to Cameroon". That is not  an  adequate  basis  for
    finding that return  would  breach  Articles  2  and  3.  There  is  no
    consideration of support that might be available  in  Cameroon  or  the
    objective evidence relating to the position of women in  Cameroon.  The
    judge has failed to give adequate reasons for the findings in  relation
    to Articles 2 and 3 and that is a further material error of law.

14. None of that means that the respondent cannot succeed  on  any  of  the
    grounds  raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,   anxious
    scrutiny of the evidence is required to  properly  assess  the  various
    claims as well as proper consideration of the law and adequate  reasons
    for findings and conclusions. None of that is evidence from  paragraphs
    31-35 of the decision.  Given  the  general  absence  of  analysis  and
    sustainable conclusions (other than in relation to the respondent's own
    credibility) I do not preserve the finding in relation to  the  Refugee
    Convention.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under Articles  2  and  3
    involved the making of an error of law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

16. Ms Hulse invited me to order a rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal  if
    I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph 7.2 of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statements I consider that  an  appropriate
    course of action.  Ms  Hulse  submitted  that  I  should  preserve  the
    credibility findings whereas Ms Isherwood submitted that the re-hearing
    should be de novo with all issues to be considered again by the  First-
    tier Tribunal. I note that the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    do not challenge the positive credibility findings.  I  have  therefore
    decided to preserve the findings.

17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other  than  the  previous  First-tier  judge.  I
    preserve the findings of fact made at paragraphs 25-30 of the  decision
    of the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date  27 October 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
