
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01551/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2020                     |On 14 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'PA'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

By virtue of the appellant appealing an asylum decision, unless and until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

These are a written record of the oral reasons given for my decision at the
hearing.

Introduction

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge T Brown (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 13 November 2019, by
which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal
on 24 February 2014 of his protection claim. The FtT allowed the
appellant's appeal solely by reference to article 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR'), on the basis that he would be at risk
of prosecution for illegal alcohol smuggling, and the consequences of such
prosecution risked torture, so as to breach the appellant's rights under
article 3.

The appellant arrived in the UK on 4 August 2008, aged 17 years old, as
recorded in the judgement of Haddon Cave LJ, in a previous decision of the
Court of Appeal: R (PA (Iran) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum
Chamber) [2018] EWCA Civ 2495.  Without reciting the background in full,
which is referred to in that judgment, there is a previous unimpugned
decision of Asylum and Immigration Tribunal Judge JF W Phillips promulgated
on 18 March 2009, which dismissed the appellant's previous asylum claim on
the basis that the appellant was not credible or truthful. Further
submissions were lodged on 1 March 2011 which were considered and rejected
by the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, but in response to which the
Court of Appeal set aside the earlier findings, on the basis that there had
been a failure to consider that a plausible explanation for the
inconsistencies in the appellant's account were his relative youth and
impaired cognitive function.

Judge Phillips had, in his unimpugned decision, noted that the appellant's
fear was of prosecution for smuggling, not persecution, which the appellant
conceded as much.  Judge Phillips had rejected the protection claim on that
basis.

The FtT, whose decision is challenged in this appeal, took Judge Phillips's
decision as his starting point, and considered the different basis on which
the Refugee Convention was said to be engaged ([18]). In particular, it was
claimed that there was a risk because of the appellant's imputed political
opinion, as a smuggler involved in illegal activity; or in the alternative,
on grounds of race or ethnicity, as someone having contravened the law and
illegally exited Iran. Further, it was claimed that the appellant was at
enhanced risk of questioning and ill-treatment on return to Iran.

The FtT concluded at ([33]) that despite concerns about the appellant's
credibility, and taking into account country information about the
prevalence of smuggling in border areas in Iran, the appellant's account
was sufficiently credible to meet the lower standard of proof in a
protection claim. The FtT found that that the appellant was involved in
illegal smuggling activity as a child in Iran, and left Iran in or around
May or June 2008. The FtT further concluded, despite significant concerns
about scarring evidence, at [38] that the appellant was subject of adverse
attention from the Iranian authorities before he left Iran, in the form of
the police visit to his home. However, the FtT did not accept that it was
reasonably likely that the appellant remained at risk of active interest by
the Iranian authorities on return some 11 years later. First, the appellant
been smuggling alcohol rather than drugs and by implication, alcohol
smuggling was regarded as less serious. Second, he was not a leading
smuggler. Third, there was no evidence of any outstanding issues relating
to the appellant some 11 years later. The FtT was highly critical of the
expert evidence relied on by the appellant of Dr Kakhki, regarding it is
not updated, unhelpful in its format, and without adequate explanation for
why the appellant would remain at real risk on return. The appellant had
not been involved in Kurdish political activities in Iran or the UK; had
not lived in the KRI; nor was he perceived by the Iranian authorities of
falling into either of these categories.

The FtT did however accept that on his return, it was likely that the
appellant would be questioned by the Iranian authorities and he would, as a
result of his cognitive impairment, say things which would give the
impression he was 'hiding something'. This would not lead to the Iranian
authorities concluding that the appellant had been engaged in Kurdish
political activities or that he supported Kurdish rights, but there was a
real risk that he would be detained, with the risks that that posed of
torture and inhuman treatment.

 1. In the FtT's analysis, he concluded that  the  appellant  was  excluded
    from a grant of humanitarian protection under paragraph 339D(v) of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that  the  appellant  left  his  country
    solely in order to avoid sanctions resulting  from  a  crime,  in  this
    case,  the  smuggling  of  alcohol.  That  would  be  punishable   with
    imprisonment in the UK and therefore the appellant  was  excluded  from
    the grant of humanitarian protection but his claim under article 3 ECHR
    succeeded.

The FtT additionally considered the claimed risk that having missed
military service, it was possible for the appellant to buy himself out of
any liability ([52]), which undermined Dr Kakhki's evidence on that risk.
The FtT also, by reference to the country guidance authority of SSH and HR
(illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC),
concluded that those who had not been in Iran would not face the risk of
prosecution for failing to perform military service. Whilst the FtT
accepted that Iranians of Kurdish ethnicity faced discrimination there is
no real risk of imputation of political motives to the appellant on the
facts before the FtT.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially as follows:

   1. Ground (1) - the FtT's analysis of risk to the appellant on the basis
      that he was a leader, not involved in drug smuggling and that there
      was no evidence suggesting that he would remain of interest 11 years
      after his departure from Iran, was erroneous.  Alcohol smuggling was
      still regarded serious; there was no evidence to support the
      contention that the authorities would only have interest in leading
      smugglers; and that an absence of evidence, particularly when the
      appellant left as a minor was insufficient to justify the conclusion
      that he would not be at risk on return. In particular, Dr Kakhki had
      given evidence that young Iranians of Kurdish ethnic origin would
      face particular risk and that the Iranian authorities' interest would
      be aroused on the basis of the appellant as a Kurdish man, hailing
      from the Iraqi border, who was previously been apprehended by the
      Iranian authorities and had left Iran illegally. The FtT had failed
      to consider the combination of those factors.

   2. Ground (2) - The FtT failed to consider, on the basis of the findings
      at [46], that the appellant might say things which could intensify
      the interest in him, which might lead to the suspicion that he was
      involved in Kurdish political activities, bearing in mind the low
      threshold of suspicion.

   3. Ground (3) - the FtT had erred in concluding that the appellant was
      excluded from protection by virtue of paragraph 339D(v), on the basis
      that the appellant was a child when engaging alcohol smuggling and
      there was a strong mitigation of economic deprivation. The crime
      committed by the appellant may not in fact be one that was punishable
      by imprisonment for this appellant were it committed in the UK.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission on 17 January 2020,
concluding that all of the grounds raised arguable errors of law.  The
grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

In terms of the hearing before me, a preliminary issue arose at the
beginning of the hearing which, as I have indicated to the representatives
verbally, I was very grateful for the representatives' swift and pragmatic
way of resolving the issue and I record that appreciation.  The issue was
this: on 19 February 2020, the respondent had in fact granted the appellant
humanitarian protection.  Ms Everett did not seek to go behind or resile
from that grant and the position was therefore how matters were left in
respect of the claim of asylum.  Ms Brown indicated, and I make no
criticism of her at all whatsoever, that whilst her instructing solicitor
had been aware of the correspondence, the appellant had regarded the grant
as a mistake, particularly in light of the earlier FtT determination, and
on taking instructions, there was an important difference in the rights
granted by reference to humanitarian protection as opposed to asylum.

I discussed with the representatives the reported authority of MSU
(S.104(4b) notices) Bangladesh [2019] UKUT 00412 (IAC) and the effect of
the grant of humanitarian protection on the continuation of this appeal
under Section 104(4B) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
Having taken instructions from her instructing solicitors, Ms Brown agreed
with me the proposition that it would be necessary for a notice to be
served in order for this Tribunal to have jurisdiction to consider the
continuing appeal and there was still time to serve such a notice.  As a
consequence, during an adjournment, Ms Brown drafted a copy of that notice,
which was handed to Ms Everett and Ms Everett agreed that she was content
to proceed with continuing consideration of the question of whether there
was an error of law in relation to the asylum claim.  In other words, the
procedural issue posed by the authority of MSU was resolved swiftly by the
representatives.

Dealing then with the substance of the submissions, firstly, they were
necessarily brief as I invited neither representative to recite their
grounds in full and indeed, the grounds were ones that I have already set
out.

The appellant's submissions

In essence, ground (1) asserted that the FtT's reasoning was inadequate,
particularly in light of the expert report of Dr Kakhki. While its format
was criticised, the content had not been rejected in its entirety.  Second,
the FtT's decision was irrational, particularly in circumstances where the
FtT had concluded at paragraph [46] that the appellant would be questioned
and was likely to invite the interest of the Iranian authorities because of
his impaired mental health functions.  Bearing in mind the combination of
factors already outlined of the appellant as a young man of Kurdish ethnic
origin having lived near the border with Iraq, the FtT's conclusion that
there was not a real risk that the appellant would be perceived as being an
active supporter of Kurdish ethnic rights, was irrational.

The respondent's submissions

Ms Everett, on behalf of the respondent, accepted that the appellant's
ethnicity would be relevant to an assessment of the risk but whether that
was causative of the appellant's adverse interest, for the purposes of the
Refugee Convention, was a different matter.  In these particular
circumstances, what would ignite the interest of the Iranian authorities
was, upon questioning, because of the appellant's mental health impairment,
namely his propensity to get himself into trouble by saying things which
would give the impression that he was attempting to conceal matters, rather
than his ethnicity.

Discussion and conclusions

I conclude that the FtT's reasoning on Refugee Convention grounds did
amount to an error of law for the following reasons.  On the one hand, the
FtT was clear at [46] that it was reasonably likely that the appellant
would face questioning on arrival, which would intensify the interest of
the Iranian authorities in him.  The FtT at [46] continued:

         "This risk, in my judgment, would be reasonably likely to relate to
         the appellant's criminal activity but after very careful
         consideration, I am not satisfied that it would be reasonably
         likely to relate to any conduct, or suspicion about conduct, which
         would be perceived by the Iranian authorities as relating to
         involvement by the appellant in Kurdish political activities or
         support for Kurdish rights.  This is too far removed from the
         appellant's case to be even a real risk."

At [47], the FtT went on to consider that the appellant had never been
involved in Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish rights.

At [48] of the FtT continued:

"It follows that I accept that there is a real risk that the appellant
would be arrested and detained (with the risks that this poses of torture
and inhuman and degrading treatment) but I am not satisfied that it is
reasonably likely that this would be because of his ethnicity or his
perceived or imputed political opinion or any other Refugee Convention
reason."

The FtT's discussion at [48] is important because having analysed the risk
to the FtT on the basis of perceived political opinions at [47], the FtT
then went on to reach a conclusion by reference to the appellant's
ethnicity at [48].  The FtT needed to reach a conclusion on that separate
convention ground, because the Convention reasons relied on by the
appellant were set out at [18]:

"(i) imputed political opinion as a smuggler involved in illegal activity;
and

(ii) race or ethnicity as a Kurd who has contravened Iranian law...

(b)  having illegally exited Iran."

In other words, whilst the FtT considered the first ground, namely imputed
political opinion, and effectively concluded that because it related to
smuggling rather than imputed political opinion that no risk would
therefore arise, the FtT did, in my view, fail to adequately explain why
the appellant would not face a risk of persecution on the basis of his race
or ethnicity as a Kurd who had contravened Iranian law, in particular by
having illegally exited Iran, which was accepted.  This was in the context
that it was accepted at [46] that the appellant would be interviewed; would
excite the interests of the Iranian authorities because of his impaired
mental impairment; and in particular, where at [46] the FtT had not
disregarded the expert evidence of Dr Kakhki although criticising parts of
it, Dr Kakhki's report had expressly referred at page [387] of the
appellant's bundle before the FtT to the following:

"The reason for providing the brief description of the Kurds' smuggling
activities is to show that such illegal activities are very common as a
result of economic deprivation, the government approach members of this
ethnic group with a particular level of suspicion, especially when they
fall within the demographic group of young, rural Kurds.  This economic
circumstance leads the local population to turn to opposition activities
and results in widespread suspicion towards this ethnic group."

It is unnecessary for me to recite further details of the report, as the
contents of it clearly require an analysis by the FtT as to why the
appellant would not be at risk of persecution because of his ethnicity, in
combination with other factors.  That was a gap in the FtT's analysis which
amounted to an error of law.

I further accept that in relation to the separate Convention reason relied
upon, namely by reference to imputed political opinion, the FtT did, in my
view, stray into the error of speculation in distinguishing between drug
and alcohol smuggling, particularly in the context of Dr Kakhki's evidence.
  Bearing in mind, as Ms Brown rightly submits, that this was an analysis
that required an assessment of a combination of factors, this undermined
the FtT's conclusions in relation to imputed political opinion as well, and
therefore that is a further reason that the FtT's decision is unsafe.

Decision on error of law

I find that the FtT's decision did contain errors of law such that it is
unsafe and will need to be remade.  However, I do so, preserving the FtT's
findings about the extent to which the appellant has previously been the
subject of adverse interest, in particular at paragraphs [33] and [34] to
[38] of the FtT's decision.

Remaking hearing

I agreed with the representatives that it was appropriate in accordance
with the Senior President's Practice Statements that the remaking of this
appeal be retained in the Upper Tribunal, given the narrowness of the
issues and in particular the sole question of whether the appeal should be
remade on the basis of the appellant as a refugee rather than by reference
to humanitarian protection.  I did so, noting that I had already preserved
a number of findings of fact, as already set out.  The submissions from
both representatives were, as a consequence, brief but, once again, were
succinct and to the point.

The respondent's submissions on remaking

In terms of the respondent's submissions, Ms Everett acknowledged that the
appellant had particular vulnerabilities, which may mean that he would
arouse suspicion on being questioned but this was a case where I should
consider whether somebody who was not of Kurdish ethnicity would have had
the same fear of persecution; or whether in fact the fear was because of
the appellant's behaviours, on being questioned, as a result of his
vulnerabilities.

The appellant's submissions on remaking

Ms Brown submitted that this was a classic case of multiple risk factors
and that by analogy with the tort of negligence, one had to take one's
'victim' as one found them, sometimes referred to as the "egg-shell skull"
principle. The appellant needed to be considered with all of his
vulnerabilities and then the question needed to be asked of whether he had
a well-founded fear for a Convention reason.  Whilst there were criticisms
of the report of Dr Kakhki, nevertheless the FtT had relied at least in
part on conclusions in the report and, as identified already, at pages
[284] and [387] of the appellant's bundle, the appellant's particular risk
profile as somebody of Kurdish ethnic origin was described as a causative
factor in relation to persecution, albeit in conjunction with a number of
risk factors.

Discussion and conclusions on remaking

I agree with Ms Brown that the appellant has to be considered and to be
taken on the basis of his personal characteristics.  It is acknowledged
that he does have vulnerabilities which would lead to him answering
questions during interview which would arouse the interest and suspicion of
the Iranian authorities.  That treatment would be sufficient to breach
article 3, as already previously found, and, I find, would therefore be
sufficiently serious to amount to persecution beyond mere discrimination.
The question then was whether the well-founded fear would be for a
Convention reason.  What was said by Ms Everett was that in essence I
should apply a "but for" test whereby I should compare him with somebody
who was not of Kurdish ethnic origin and it was said therefore in these
circumstances that he might still similarly arouse suspicion and ill-
treatment.

I accept the force of the argument that one cannot in these circumstances
divorce one particular characteristic of an individual fearing persecution
and then identify a hypothetical comparator, of different ethnic origin,
who would still have a fear, but not on grounds of race or imputed
political opinion.  In these circumstances, and whilst I accept that being
of Kurdish ethnic origin alone was not sufficient to be the basis of a well-
founded fear of persecution and the same applied in relation to illegal
exit from Iran, nevertheless it is quite common for an assessment in
relation to persecution to be based on multiple factors and that in
circumstances, where at least one of those factors is a material cause of
that well-founded fear for a Convention reason, that that is sufficient in
the circumstances to engage the protection of the Refugee Convention.  I
have already referred to the report of Dr Kakhki at page [387] of the
appellant's bundle and in particular what was referred to as "a particular
level of suspicion".  This was also considered earlier by Dr Kakhki at page
[284] where an Iranian male without identification documents to prove his
identity and having left illegally would arouse further suspicion:

"He would be questioned by Iranian officials and the general suspicion
towards Kurds and the level of scrutiny of their background would extend to
this application too."

The same analysis for risk based on race applies to imputed political
opinion.  The appellant would be perceived as a rule-breaker, from a
marginalised and politicised racial group, viewed with deep suspicion.  His
actual lack of involvement or support for Kurdish political groups would
not mitigate the risk, where he may be perceived by those questioning him
as concealing matters, on the lower evidential standard.  In summary, the
risk factors are linked with the appellant's vulnerability and cannot be
divorced from that vulnerability.  I therefore conclude that the appellant
does have a well-founded fear of persecution which engages the Refugee
Convention on the basis of the appellant's race and imputed political
opinion, and therefore the respondent's decision is in breach of his rights
as a refugee.

Remaking decision

I remake the decision by upholding the appellant's appeal on asylum
grounds.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  19 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

While the appeal has  succeeded,  the  appellant  had  the  benefit  of  fee
remission.  In the circumstances, I make no award of fees.

Signed J Keith                  Date:  19 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



