

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01753/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 30th January 2015                         |On: 2nd February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                    Mohamed Ibrahim Eldessouki Ali Ismail
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of Egypt date of birth 7th September 1978.
       He appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
      Brookfield) who on the 22nd August 2014 dismissed his asylum and human
      rights appeal[1].


   2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he has a well-founded fear
      of persecution in Egypt for reasons  of  his  political  opinion.  The
      Appellant stated that  he  was  a  long-time  supporter  of  the  pro-
      democracy movement "Kifiya" and that this had resulted in  his  facing
      persecution including a three-month period of detention and severe ill-
      treatment in 2011. As a result of this detention  the  Appellant  lost
      his job and permit to stay in Dubai, where he had been living. He  had
      returned to Egypt but because the authorities were looking for him  at
      his family home in Cairo he stayed with an  aunt  in  Alexandria.  The
      Appellant has also been an active supporter of the "6 April" movement.
       He came to the UK on a visit visa in April 2013 and was  prompted  to
      claim asylum after three of his friends were arrested and  the  police
      continued to visit to his family home looking for him.


   3. The refusal letter is dated 17th March 2014. The Respondent  does  not
      accept the Appellant's account is true.  It  is  noted  that  he  gave
      inconsistent evidence about dates and his travel history. At the  time
      that the claim was considered there was no supporting  documentary  or
      medical evidence.


   4. By the time the appeal came before Judge Brookfield the Appellant  had
      obtained such evidence. He relied on original documents issued by  the
      police and prosecutors in Egypt, country background material,  medical
      evidence and a report by  Hugh  Miles,  an  award-winning  author  and
      freelance journalist who has lived and worked in Egypt for many years.
       Mr Miles has contributed pieces to the BBC and Al-Jazeera. He was The
      Daily Telegraph's stringer in Cairo between  2004  and  2007.  In  the
      preface to his report he explains that in his work he has had personal
      contact with  numerous  figures  in  the  "Kifiya"  movement  and  has
      personally  witnessed  members  of  that  group  being   attacked   on
      demonstrations. Mr Miles was asked to consider the facts as they  were
      put forward by the Appellant and comment on their plausibility in  the
      context of the political situation in Egypt. He was further  asked  to
      examine the documents relied upon by the Appellant. His expert opinion
      in respect of the former was that Kifiya and 6th April  activists  can
      expect to be on the wrong end of the "most severe  security  crackdown
      in recent memory". He gives background and context to this comment and
      concludes: "if I was him I would be frightened".  In  respect  of  the
      documents Mr Miles gave several reasons why  he  concluded  that  they
      were most likely genuine.


   5.  The  determination  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   summarises   the
      Appellant's evidence. The findings begin by addressing the  report  of
      Mr Miles. His opinion that anyone perceived to be politically  opposed
      to the government could face detention and  torture  is  not  accepted
      because he has not provided any  recent  examples  of  Kifiya  members
      being arrested or detained.  The determination returns  to  the  Miles
      report at  paragraph  10(xvi)  where  his  views  on  the  documentary
      evidence are noted, along with some of the reasons he advances  as  to
      why he has reached the conclusion that he does. Of this  the  Tribunal
      concludes: "I note the appellant's expert has not offered any  reasons
      for concluding that the copy documents he saw are genuine. I found the
      expressed opinion by the appellant's expert to be unreliable as he had
      not had sight of the original documents and gave  no  reason  for  his
      conclusions. I placed no weight on this opinion".   As to his evidence
      that Kifiya and 6 April are regularly denounced in the Egyptian media,
      the determination apparently rejects it on the basis that the examples
      cited were from Twitter and YouTube, which are neither  "impartial  or
      independent".   Overall  the  Tribunal  is  not  satisfied  that   the
      Appellant is at risk in Egypt or that he  has  any  political  profile
      that will bring him to the attention of the authorities. The appeal is
      dismissed.


   6. The grounds of appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
      failing to reach findings, failing  to  take  evidence  into  account,
      failing  to  give  reasons  for  findings  and/or  irrationality.   In
      particular:


      i) The finding that Mr Miles  had  failed  to  give  reasons  for  his
         conclusion was demonstrably incorrect  as  he  had  given  numerous
         reasons why he found the documents were likely to be genuine;


     ii) It was irrational to place "no weight" on his opinion when  neither
         his  expertise  nor  objectivity  had  been   challenged   by   the
         Respondent, nor by the Tribunal itself during the hearing;


    iii) The mention of Twitter and YouTube illustrates a misunderstanding -
         these are not sources of information, but means of  communications.
         The sources cited by Mr Miles were in fact mainstream Egyptian news
         outlets;


     iv) The rejection of Mr Miles' opinion on the basis that he had offered
         no examples of Kifiya activists being recently arrested  failed  to
         take into account the instances that he has cited  in  the  report,
         including the arrests of persons personally known to him;


      v) There was overall  a  failure  by  the  Tribunal  to  evaluate  the
         evidence of Mr Miles and the Appellant "in the round".


      Error of Law


   7. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety for the Respondent  conceded  that
      determination could not stand. He agreed that the  errors  alleged  in
      respect of the report of the expert were made out, and that these were
      material. I do not therefore need to set out in  great  detail  why  I
      agree.


   8. Mr Miles was an  expert  whose  expertise  and  objectivity  were  not
      subject to challenge. He had produced a detailed report,  drawing  not
      just on his own experience of living and  working  in  Egypt,  but  on
      academic  and  media  sources,  and  his  own  consultation  of  other
      Egyptians, including  lawyers.  He  was  entitled,  for  instance,  to
      mention arrests he had seen with his own eyes,  or  the  detention  of
      people that he knows personally, in the course of  his  commentary  on
      the general political situation in Egypt today. As to the documents he
      had given a good number of reasons why he considered them likely to be
      genuine. These reasons included the fact that the style,  content  and
      layout was consistent with the "hundreds" of  documents  that  he  has
      collated in his "bespoke library"; that colleagues including a  lawyer
      had agreed that they looked genuine; that the signature, stamp etc all
      appeared in the correct place. He - and indeed his lawyer friend - had
      specifically considered whether these documents might be  high-quality
      forgeries and had concluded  that  they  were  not.    The  First-tier
      Tribunal was not bound to accept the conclusion reached  by  Mr  Miles
      about the documents, or  indeed  the  potential  risk  faced  by  this
      Appellant. It could not however properly conclude  that  his  evidence
      attracted "no weight".  Mr McVeety correctly points out that this  was
      not a straightforward case and that there were a number of reasons why
      the  Tribunal  could  legitimately  have  rejected   the   Appellant's
      evidence. He conceded however that in this case it is difficult if not
      impossible  to  extricate  any  'safe'  findings  of  fact  from   the
      determination. That is because the Tribunal was bound to take  all  of
      the evidence in the round; if the Tribunal has erred in  its  approach
      to the expert evidence  it  follows  that  the  remaining  credibility
      findings are tainted.   The determination is therefore  set  aside  in
      its entirety.


   9. The parties agreed that this must be a de  novo  hearing.  Since  this
      will require extensive fact finding, the  parties  were  in  agreement
      that this would most appropriately be done in the First-tier Tribunal.
      The matter is therefore remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  I
      will hear it.


      Decisions


  10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does contain an error  of
      law and it is set aside.


  11. The matter is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           30th January 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Appeal brought against a decision dated 17th March 2014 to remove from
the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999


