
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01636/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR. DAT VAN NGUYEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss. C. Record of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Barker who allowed Mr.  Van  Nguyen's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave to remain  on
    the basis of human rights.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent and Mr. Van Nguyen as the Appellant, reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission was granted on the ground that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge erred in allowing the appeal under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR  and  in
    relying on GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.  It  was  arguable  that  the
    judge erred  in  finding  that  there  was  a  real  possibility  of  a
    transplant within a short space of time if the Appellant's brother  had
    been given entry clearance.

Submissions

 4. At the hearing Mr. Wilding submitted that the  decision  lacked  proper
    engagement with Article 3.  I was  referred  to  paragraph  [34].   The
    judge found that the difficulty obtaining treatment  in  Vietnam  would
    not breach Article 3.  However he  then  identified  other  factors  in
    relation to Article 3, but  there  was  no  evaluative  exercise  under
    Article 3.

 5. Secondly,  he  submitted  that  the  finding  that  there  was  a  real
    possibility of a transplant in a short space of time was not a  finding
    available  to  him  on  the  evidence  [35].   He  submitted  that  the
    possibility of a transplant was not anything  to  do  with  Article  3.
    There was no evidence that the Appellant's brother had been  tested  to
    see if he was compatible and it was wrong to say that he would be.  The
    evidence was that the Appellant's brother  was  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom in order to be tested.  The  details  of  the  refusal  of  the
    brother's appeal were not before the First-tier Tribunal but he had not
    made an application to come for the transplant operation but for tests.
     He submitted that the analysis of Article 3 was unlawful  in  the  way
    that it had been carried out.

 6. He submitted that the judge appeared to allow the appeal under  Article
    3 but then went on to consider Article 8.  Paragraph [35]  included  an
    analysis of Article 3 as  well  as  the  commencement  of  the  judge's
    consideration of Article 8.  In relation to Article  8,  there  was  no
    consideration of sections 117A-D.  There was no  consideration  of  the
    strong public interest in such cases.  I was referred to the case of MM
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 729.  I was also referred to paragraphs [45]
    and [46] of Akhalu (health claim:  ECHR  Article  8)  [2013]  UKUT  400
    (IAC).  There was no engagement with the levels of treatment  available
    in Vietnam or an acknowledgement that Article  3  not  been  made  out.
    There was no engagement with paragraph [46] of Akhalu in the Article  8
    analysis.

 7. Little weight should have been given to the Appellant's private life as
    he had never had lawful leave.  I was referred to [47] of Akhalu.  Rose
    Akhalu had been lawfully in the United Kingdom and had been entitled to
    medical treatment from the  NHS  on  that  basis.   There  was  a  very
    different factual matrix here and the judge had not engaged with  these
    issues.

 8. In conclusion he submitted that, having found that Article 3 would  not
    be breached by the  fact  that  the  Appellant  would  have  difficulty
    obtaining treatment in Vietnam, consideration of Article 3 should  have
    stopped there.  The other factors to which the judge referred  in  [34]
    should have gone to his consideration under Article 8 not under Article
    3.

 9. Miss. Record submitted that the judge had been entitled to  reach  this
    conclusion.  I was referred to [22] which showed  that  the  judge  was
    aware of the Appellant's circumstances and  had  considered  everything
    including treatment in Vietnam.  The country of origin information  was
    before the judge.  In relation to Article 3 it was  submitted  that  he
    had correctly applied the most up-to-date authority.  I was referred to
    [70] and [71] of GS  which  discuss  transplant  in  the  case  of  the
    appellant GM.  The transplant was considered in the context of  Article
    3.  The difference was that GM's  donor  was  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    whereas here the Appellant's brother would have to travel to the United
    Kingdom.

10. It was submitted that the Appellant's brother was offering himself as a
    donor and therefore there was a "real  possibility  of  a  transplant",
    which accorded with [70] of GS.  It was submitted that  Article  3  had
    been correctly handled in [34].  The real possibility of  a  transplant
    was a relevant factor as set out in the test in GS from  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  The finding that Article 3 had been  violated  had  been  made
    applying the correct law [35].

11. In respect of Article 8, the judge had taken into account every  nuance
    and his findings were sustainable.  In [36]  he  made  clear  that  any
    grant of  leave  would  only  be  limited  leave  as  it  was  for  the
    investigation of the potential donor.  In relation  to  Akhalu  it  was
    submitted that she had already had the transplant, and it  was  ongoing
    treatment that was  required.   This  was  not  a  case  where  medical
    treatment would be continually required as the Appellant  could  return
    to his family in Vietnam after the transplant.

12. In conclusion she submitted that the judge was aware of the  fact  that
    the donor was in Vietnam but he still  found  that  there  was  a  real
    possibility of a transplant, which finding was open to him.  Had  entry
    clearance been granted to the Appellant's brother, the Appellant  would
    have had the transplant and would have returned to Vietnam.  The  judge
    had made no error of law in finding that there was a  real  possibility
    of a transplant.

13. In response Mr. Wilding submitted that [70] of GS stated that it  "may"
    be a question of whether removal would violate Article 3 and was not  a
    definitive test.  He submitted that there was no  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the brother's presence in the  United  Kingdom
    would have led to a transplant.  There was no evidence that  they  were
    compatible.  The notice of decision refusing entry  clearance  was  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal but financial issues had been raised and
    it was not just the case that the application had been refused  because
    the Appellant did not  have  leave  in  the  United  Kingdom.   If  the
    Appellant were granted leave it did not follow that his  brother  would
    be able to gain entry clearance.  In the absence of evidence  that  the
    Appellant and his brother were a match, the finding  that  was  a  real
    possibility of a transplant was irrational as there was no evidence  on
    which such a finding could be based.

14. In relation to proportionality under Article 8 he relied on the case of
    Akhalu regarding the very strong public interest in medical cases.

Error of law decision

15. I have carefully considered the case of GS, in particular [70] and [71]
    relating to the appellant GM.  I find that the  facts  relating  to  GM
    were significantly different in two  important  respects.   First,  the
    proposed donor was in the United  Kingdom  and  secondly  it  had  been
    established that the proposed donor was compatible.

16. In the Appellant's case, the Appellant's brother is in Vietnam, not  in
    the United Kingdom.  The evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that his application for entry clearance had been refused.

17.  Secondly,  while  there  was  evidence  before  the  judge  that   the
    Appellant's brother had offered to donate his kidney, there had been no
    investigations as to whether he was a compatible donor.  He had  sought
    entry clearance in order to be tested to find out whether he  would  be
    compatible with the Appellant. There was therefore no  evidence  before
    the judge that the proposed donor was compatible.

18. In [70] of GS it states "it was clear that the proposed donor [...] was
    compatible" before going on to state "If there is a real possibility of
    this transplant in the near  future  [...]  there  may  be  a  question
    whether GM's removal from the United Kingdom before it is  carried  out
    would violate Article 3 on the specific footing that to deprive him  of
    such an imminent and transformative medical recourse amounts to inhuman
    treatment "(my  emphasis).   There  is  no  indication  here  that  the
    Appellant's brother is a compatible  donor.   Therefore  to  find  that
    there is a real possibility of a transplant given  that  there  was  no
    evidence of a compatible donor is a finding which is not  open  to  the
    judge.

19. GS also refers to the real possibility of the transplant "in  the  near
    future" [70].  It refers to a possible violation of Article 3  "on  the
    specific footing" of depriving him of an "imminent"  medical  recourse.
    Given that the Appellant's brother has been refused leave to enter, and
    given that there is no evidence that he  is  compatible,  a  transplant
    cannot be described as "imminent".  The judge finds in  [35]  that  the
    treatment was imminent but this finding is  not  open  to  him  on  the
    facts.  He also  states  that  there  was  a  "real  possibility  of  a
    transplant in a short space of time had the visa been  granted  to  the
    Appellant's brother".  However, the visa was not granted, and there was
    no evidence of compatibility, so it cannot be said  either  that  there
    was a real possibility of a transplant or that it would be "in a  short
    space of time".

20. While I find that [70] and [71] of  GS  show  that  the  possibility  a
    transplant can be considered in the context of Article 3, I  find  that
    the finding that there was a real possibility of a  transplant  in  the
    near future was not a finding open to the judge on the evidence  before
    him.  Having found that the decision did not breach Article 3 by virtue
    of the difference in health care available in  Vietnam,  which  finding
    was not challenged by the Appellant, the consideration of a  transplant
    in the context of Article 3 was predicated on a finding  of  fact  that
    was not open to him.  I find that this is an error of law in respect of
    a material matter.

21. In relation to the judge's consideration of Article  8,  this  is  also
    based on the finding that there is the  real  possibility  of  imminent
    treatment [35].  Further, the consideration of the public  interest  is
    inadequate, especially given that this  is  a  case  involving  medical
    treatment.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

The Appellant is directed to provide up-to-date  medical  evidence  for  the
rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 14 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
