
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01299/2008


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 April 2014                              |On 29 April 2014             |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                            SENTHILNATHAN KABILAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The history of this appeal  is  unfortunate.   Mr  Kabilan,  who  is  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born on 22 July 1987, first  applied  for
    asylum  in  December  2007.   That  application  was  refused  by   the
    respondent in February 2008 and the  appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision.

 2. His appeal was apparently heard by Immigration Judge Jones  sitting  at
    Hatton  Cross  but,  following  an  application  to  the   Asylum   and
    Immigration  Tribunal,  a  reconsideration  was   ordered   by   Senior
    Immigration Judge Perkins and the matter came  back  for  rehearing  at
    Hatton Cross.

 3. The appeal was then reheard by Immigration Judge M A Khan  who,  again,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 4. Although this is not altogether clear from the papers, it appears  that
    thereafter the appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision but permission to appeal was  refused  by  Senior  Immigration
    Judge Jarvis at some time later in November 2009.

 5. The appellant then was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal and, by consent, it was agreed that the matter  be  remitted  to
    the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration, pursuant  to  paragraph  12  of
    Schedule 4 to the Transfer of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal Order
    2010  (SI2010/21)  and  Section  14  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

 6. Thereafter, the file came before Senior Immigration Judge  Perkins  who
    directed, on 30 September 2010, that the appeal should  be  listed  for
    mention.  In the listing instructions which he gave, Judge Perkins said
    as follows:

         "I have asked for a mention hearing as it is  not  clear  what  the
         Court of Appeal intend us to do and the decision is rather old."

 7. Nothing has been done with this file since then.  It is not  clear  why
    not.  It should be  noted  that  it  would  have  been  open  to  those
    representing the appellant at any time thereafter to have  raised  this
    matter and enquired as to the progress of this appeal but it  does  not
    appear that any such request was  made.   Ms  Anzani,  who  appears  on
    behalf of the appellant today, does not suggest that  anyone  made  any
    enquiries on behalf of the appellant as to the progress of his case.

 8. The appeal was  then  listed  before  me  for  hearing  today  so  that
    directions could be given as to the progress of this appeal and I  have
    heard submissions on behalf of both parties.

 9. The position now is that it is common ground that  the  effect  of  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal, which  had  been  agreed  between  the
    parties prior to the order, is that there will have to  be  a  de  novo
    hearing in which all issues will be open.   Both  parties  agree  that,
    given the lapse of time, and given also that the situation in Sri Lanka
    has undoubtedly altered since the initial hearings, although  precisely
    what country guidance will be applicable is  at  the  moment  uncertain
    pending the decision of the Court of Appeal in GJ  &  Others  which  is
    anticipated shortly, the appropriate course  would  be  to  remit  this
    appeal for rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross.

10. Having regard to paragraph 7 of the President's Guidance, I agree  that
    this would be the appropriate course and so order.

Decision

The determination of Judge M A Khan is set aside as  containing  a  material
error of law and the Tribunal  orders  that  this  appeal  be  remitted  for
rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross.



Signed:                                 Date: 22 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


