
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01461/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2016                            |On 5 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           Mohamoud Abdi Al-Amudi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sills, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mohamoud Abdi Al-Amudi, was  born  on  2  May  1987  and
    claims to be a citizen of Somalia.  The appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hindson) against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State to revoke his protection status and to  deport  him  to  Somalia.
    That decision was taken on 15 January 2015.  The First-tier Tribunal in
    a decision promulgated on 26 August  2015,  allowed  the  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There is one ground of appeal which  contains  a  number  of  different
    elements.  In particular, the Secretary of State asserts that the judge
    failed to make proper findings and also  perpetrated  legal  errors  in
    respect of his application of MOJ  and  Others  (return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), in particular at head note (xi).

 3. At [28] Judge Hindson summarised his findings as follows:

         "I accept the following. The appellant is from a minority clan  and
         fled Mogadishu in 2004 with his younger brother.  He is from a sib-
         ship of nine and none of his brothers and sisters are  in  Somalia;
         they are in the UK or Yemen.  He does not know  where  his  parents
         are. He was four years old when the war in Somalia started  and  it
         is unsurprising that he has had no education,  though  he  has  had
         some education in prison. His family in the UK have  provided  some
         financial support  to  him  here  but  could  not  support  him  in
         Mogadishu.  This is because, they say, there is no practical way to
         get funds to someone in Somalia, and because they cannot afford to.
          I accept the latter point, it is one thing to meet the small extra
         cost of feeding and housing an extra person in the household, it is
         another to provide sufficient funds to support him with all of  his
         living costs, even in a lower cost economy. His  sister  has  seven
         children and relies on benefits and his brother  has  two  jobs  in
         order to manage financially.  The appellant has been in the UK  for
         over 10 years, from age 16 to 27 and has no skills that would  help
         him to find work in Somalia. His journey to the UK was funded by  a
         family member to whom he no longer has access."

 4. The appellant had been convicted of the particularly serious offence of
    attempted rape.  The judge noted  [23]  that  the  "commission  of  the
    attempted rape, serious though it certainly is, is  sufficient  without
    more to lead to a finding that [the  appellant]  is  a  danger  to  the
    public."  The judge noted that the  offence  had  occurred  whilst  the
    appellant was a minor and he had not subsequently been convicted of any
    offence.  The judge was "therefore not satisfied that  he  is  excluded
    from international protection by virtue of this provision  (Section  72
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).   That  finding  is  not
    challenged in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Rather,  it
    was the question of whether  the  appellant  would  be  destitute  (and
    therefore in need of humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom)  if
    he returned to Somalia which particularly  concerned  the  judge.   The
    grounds assert that the judge had before him evidence from a Mr  Hashim
    Mohamed ("who claims to be secretary  general  of  the  Somali  Benadir
    Welfare Society").  This individual was also identified as "a friend of
    the family"  and  who  had  in  the  past  been  able  to  contact  the
    appellant's father albeit through third parties.   The  grounds  assert
    that  the  judge  had  not  considered  whether  Mr  Mohamed   or   his
    organisation  would  be  able  to  assist  the  appellant  financially.
    Further, the judge  had  not  made  proper  reference  to  any  of  the
    appellant's eight siblings  and  their  ability  to  provide  financial
    assistance to the appellant.  Further, that the appellant seems to have
    made no effort to contact his parents  or  find  out  where  they  were
    living in Somalia.  The grounds assert that the  judge's  finding  [21]
    ("I am satisfied it would be at best difficult for the appellant to re-
    establish contact with his family in Somalia, even  if  that  is  where
    they are.") was insufficiently supported by reasons.  The likelihood of
    the appellant becoming destitute had not been established; the MOJ head
    note from [x] was "predicated upon the appellant having  been  accepted
    as having 'no nuclear family or close relatives in the city  to  assist
    him in re-establishing himself on return.'"  That premise had not  been
    established in the appellant's case.  There  remained  the  possibility
    that the appellant's parents continue living in Mogadishu.

 5. I find that the Secretary of State's appeal should be dismissed.  I  am
    satisfied that Judge Hindson has considered  all  the  evidence  as  he
    indicated he would do in reaching his decision [9].   The  judge  found
    that the appellant was a credible witness and accepted inter alia  that
    the appellant was simply unable  to  contact  his  family  in  Somalia,
    assuming that they continue to live there.  The judge  clearly  had  in
    mind the lengthy period during which the appellant had been absent from
    Somalia whilst living in the United Kingdom.  I do not accept that  the
    challenge to the judge's analysis on the basis of inadequate  reasoning
    has been made out in this instance.  Further, as the judge noted, there
    was no evidence that family members of  the  appellant  living  outside
    Somalia would be able to continue to support him whilst he  was  living
    there in the medium to longer term.  The suggestion that Mr Mohamed and
    his Somali Benadir Welfare Society  should  support  the  appellant  is
    without any foundation in the evidence.  Ultimately, I  find  that  the
    judge reached a conclusion which was available to him on the  evidence.
    The  grounds  of  appeal  ultimately  amount  to  little  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's conclusion.

 6. The judge also was asked to  consider  whether  the  cessation  of  the
    appellant's refugee status by the Secretary of State was lawful [24]  -
    [26], he wrote as follows:

         "24. I turn now to the cessation decision made under the  following
         provision of the Immigration Rules;-

             '339A. A person's grant of asylum under paragraph 334 will  be
             revoked or not renewed if the Secretary of State is  satisfied
             that:

              (v) he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection
             with which he has been recognised as a refugee have ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of nationality;'

         25.  In finding that these  requirements  are  now  satisfied,  the
         respondent  claims  that  the   situation   in   Somalia   is   now
         substantially different from when the appellant was granted asylum,
         relying in particular on the current Country  Information  and  the
         decision in MOJ & Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014].

         26.  I note that MOJ deals with the changed situation in Mogadishu,
         rather than the country as a whole and that the test for  cessation
         of protection is not the same as that for international  protection
         for  an  asylum-seeker,  I   have   nevertheless   considered   the
         appellant's position in the light of the decision in  MOJ,  as  the
         respondent has."

 7. Because he went on subsequently to find that the  appellant  would,  in
    effect, be destitute upon return to Somalia,  the  judge  has  (perhaps
    understandably) not dealt with this issue in any depth.  I have to say,
    however, that I accepted the  force  of  Mr  Sills'  submissions  (made
    before both Tribunals) that the appellant's criminal offending was  not
    a reason to bring his refugee status to an end and, further,  that  the
    requirements  set  out  in  the  UNHCR  Guidelines   on   International
    Protection  No.  3:  Cessation  of  Refugee  Status  are  clearly   not
    established in the case of Somalia, a geographical area which continues
    to have no proper functioning unitary government or system of  law  and
    justice.  It  remains  difficult  to  see  how  the  cessation  of  the
    appellant's refugee status can have been made in accordance with  those
    guidelines and also the decision in Abdulla (C-175/08) [2008].

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

