
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW/sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01515/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2017                            |On 07 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW



                                   Between

                                KAJANTHAN [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  on  1  December
    1992.  He applied for a Tier 4 Student visa  on  24  January  2012  and
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 May 2012.  On 26  November  2013  he
    made an application for asylum.  On  16  December  2013  his  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom was curtailed because  he  had  failed  to
    attend the institution where he was studying.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is that if he were to  be
    returned to Sri Lanka he would face persecution  as  a  result  of  his
    political opinion.  He  fears  the  Sri  Lankan  Army  because  of  his
    involvement with the LTTE.  On 13 January 2015 the  respondent  refused
    the appellant's claim for asylum.  The respondent did  not  accept  the
    appellant's account and considered that he would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated  on  5
    October 2016 dismissed the appellant's appeal. The First-tier Tribunal,
    Judge Abebrese, found that the appellant's claim was not  credible  and
    that he would not be at risk of persecution on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.
    The First-tier Tribunal also found that the appellant's  activities  in
    this country with regard to his support for the British Tamil Forum did
    not give rise to a risk on return.  With  regards  to  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated that  no  evidence
    was produced on this point and dismissed  the  appeal  on  that  ground
    also.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On 8 December  2016  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Baker granted the appellant permission  to  appeal.
    Thus, the appeal came before me.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal set out four grounds of appeal.  Ground 1 asserts
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach to consideration  of
    the  medical  evidence.   It  is  submitted  that  this  has   impacted
    significantly on the approach  taken  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    credibility. At paragraphs  33  to  44  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision the appellant's account is comprehensively  rejected  and  the
    appellant is found not to be credible.  It is argued that  it  is  only
    after that point that the First-tier Tribunal  considered  the  medical
    evidence.  At that point the judge found that the corroborative medical
    reports of Dr Hajioff, Dr Martin and the NHS do not assist  because  he
    did not find that the appellant was a credible witness.  It is asserted
    that this approach is contrary to the case law of Mibanga  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  It is  submitted
    that the judge fell into the very error cautioned against in Mibanga by
    reaching a conclusion by reference only to the appellant's evidence and
    then if that conclusion was  negative  to  ask  whether  it  should  be
    shifted by the expert evidence.

 6. The appellant relies also on the cases of HE  (DRC  -  Credibility  and
    psychiatric reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321and SA (Somalia) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302.   The  appellant
    relies also on JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145
    (IAC).  The appellant's case is essentially that  the  Judge  used  the
    findings of adverse credibility as a justification for  dismissing  the
    medical evidence.  Reference is made to paragraph 40  of  the  decision
    where the judge states:

         "Based on the fact ... the appellant's evidence of his  arrest  and
         detention is not credible I also make the finding that his evidence
         in relation to his physical injuries which he claims he received is
         not credible."

 7. Reference is made to various  findings  and  conclusions  made  by  the
    various experts  which  it  is  asserted  corroborate  the  appellant's
    evidence.  It  is  submitted  that  the  judge  was  required  to  have
    considered this evidence as part of the whole package of evidence going
    to the question of credibility and not simply treated these as  an  add
    on or separate exercise.  It is also submitted that the judge failed to
    look at the medical evidence with  regard  to  the  appellant's  mental
    health problems and thereby failed to take into account the appellant's
    ability  to  recall  certain  facts  in  his  account  when   assessing
    credibility.

 8. Ground 2 asserts that it was a material error for the  judge  to  begin
    and focus his assessment on credibility with an assessment  on  matters
    arising under Section 8 rather than taking this into account as part of
    a global assessment on  credibility.  The  Tribunal's  finding  on  the
    appellant's credibility commenced at paragraphs 33 and 34 and that  the
    findings of the judge that the delay in claiming asylum was adverse  to
    his claim failed to take into consideration the appellant's explanation
    that the trigger for his claim was his father's arrest  on  10  October
    2013.  The judge failed to take into consideration that  the  appellant
    tried to commit suicide on 18 October 2013 and was admitted to  Lambeth
    Hospital.  He claimed asylum on 26 November 2013  after  seeing  Social
    Services - these events occurred prior to 16  December  2013  when  his
    leave was curtailed.  Reliance is placed on the case of JT (Cameroon) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 87.

 9. It is asserted that the judge failed to consider the credibility of the
    appellant's claim against the background evidence and country guidance,
    that the First-tier Tribunal did not consider that the appellant's home
    area was an LTTE controlled area.  The appellant's  account  of  having
    joined the LTTE was consistent  with  what  was  said  in  the  country
    guidance case of GJ.  The appellant's account in relation to escape  on
    payment of a bribe and exit from the country was completely  consistent
    with GJ.  The appellant refers to the witness statement provided by the
    appellant's father and submits that the judge failed to  take  it  into
    account  when  reaching  the  finding  that  the  evidence   that   the
    appellant's father was arrested in 2013 was not credible.

10. It is asserted that the judge failed to consider properly the range  of
    documentary  evidence  which  addressed   the   appellant's   political
    activities and views when reaching the finding that he did  not  accept
    that the appellant assisted a Tamil National Alliance ("TNA") MP in his
    campaigns in the parliamentary election before he left Sri  Lanka.   It
    is submitted that the appellant's political activities and opinions  in
    the UK are consistent with his activities in Sri Lanka and that as such
    they should have been considered holistically.

11. In relation to ground 3, risk on return, it is argued  that  the  judge
    erred materially in his approach to risk.  The appellant argued that he
    had been involved with diaspora activities in the UK and  that  he  had
    produced evidence.  Reference is made to the case of GJ and the ability
    of the Sri Lankan authorities to penetrate the diaspora and the use  of
    technology to identify Tamils who are working  to  promote  separatism.
    It is also argued that  the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    submissions made on the basis of MP (Sri Lanka) and Anor v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829  and  whether  the
    appellant fell under the list of risk  categories.   It  was  submitted
    that the judge failed to consider paragraphs  288  to  294  of  GJ  and
    whether the appellant fell within a risk  category  of  a  person  with
    family links or otherwise closely related to persons with the  profiles
    of former LTTE supporters who may have been involved in  sheltering  or
    transporting LTTE personnel.  It was further asserted  that  the  judge
    failed to consider that the appellant is from the north  of  Sri  Lanka
    and that this too arguably places him  at  heightened  risk  given  his
    accepted family links and militarisation in the area.

12. Ground 4 argues that the judge erred in the approach to the appellant's
    health claim.  It is submitted that the skeleton  argument  set  out  a
    detailed health claim at submissions 4 and 5.  The judge failed to make
    any findings upon these issues.

13. In oral submissions Ms Jones submitted that there  were  extensive  and
    unprincipled  credibility  findings.   In  relation  to  ground  2  she
    submitted that the flawed credibility findings of the judge flowed from
    the erroneous approach to the Section 8 question where the judge  found
    that the asylum claim was opportunistic.  She submitted that there were
    two mistakes.  Firstly the curtailment of leave was after the appellant
    had made his claim for asylum.  The judge has failed to  consider  that
    the appellant provided a reasonable explanation as to why his claim for
    asylum was delayed.  She submitted that  there  was  a  trigger  factor
    which was the father's detention.  She submitted that a suicide attempt
    had been made by the appellant shortly after he heard of  his  father's
    detention.  He was seen by Social Services and advised by them to claim
    asylum.  There was no indication that the Home Office was  notified  of
    his failure to attend his educational course and she submitted that the
    logical conclusion was that the curtailment of leave followed from  the
    appellant's claim for asylum were he frankly admitted that he  had  not
    been attending his course.

14. Ms Jones submitted that the judge  believed  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was released on the payment of a bribe and was able to  leave
    Sri Lanka on his own passport without any difficulties  was  indicative
    of the fact that the authorities no longer had any interest in him  was
    in complete conflict with the expert evidence provided in GJ.

15. She submitted that the judge has misunderstood the  appellant's  claim.
    She asserts that the judge considered that because  the  appellant  was
    able to leave the camp in 2009 it must necessarily  follow  that  there
    was no interest in the appellant.  The  appellant's  account  was  that
    there must have been some intelligence that came  to  the  authorities'
    notice after 2009 which is why he was arrested in 2011.  She  submitted
    that the judge's view appears to be that if the appellant  was  not  of
    any interest in 2009 he  could  never  been  of  any  interest  to  the
    authorities subsequently.

16. Ms Jones submitted that Mibanga is still good law and that in the  case
    of S the medical evidence  was  not  unequivocal.   In  this  case  she
    submitted that the medical evidence, whilst not at the exceptional  end
    in Mibanga, did not give rise to any suggestion that the expert was not
    confident that  the  injuries  were  likely  to  have  been  caused  in
    accordance with the appellant's account.

17. With regard to the fourth ground she submitted that  the  judge  simply
    records that she heard no evidence on this issue.  She  submitted  that
    the Article 8 claim was thoroughly canvassed in the  skeleton  argument
    which had been produced for the purpose of the hearing.  She  submitted
    that it was not sufficient for the judge to say that she had  heard  no
    evidence and to dismiss the claim under Article 8.

18. Mr Tufan relied on the Rule 24 response.  He  submitted  that  although
    the judge had placed medical evidence last in the decision it is  clear
    from the case of S that if the only real complaint was that  the  judge
    ought to have set out the consideration at  an  earlier  point  in  the
    determination that this would not  amount  to  an  error  of  law.   He
    submitted that the judge had fully addressed the medical evidence.   He
    referred to paragraph 39 of the decision where the judge refers to  the
    medical evidence submitting that it is simply a  structure  adopted  by
    the judge and is not indicative that the judge did not have in mind the
    medical  evidence  when  assessing  credibility.   The  judge   clearly
    considered the claim in light  of  the  country  guidance  case  of  GJ
    finding that the appellant is not of any significant  interest  to  the
    Sri Lankan authorities to bring him within any of the  risk  categories
    of GJ.  He referred to  the  headnote  at  7  and  submitted  that  the
    appellant's activities do not come anywhere near the  activities  which
    would give rise to  a  risk  in  accordance  with  GJ.   He  relied  on
    paragraphs 335, 336 and 351 of GJ and submitted  that  the  appellant's
    activities are at a very low level.  He  submitted  that  there  is  no
    evidence of an arrest warrant so as to put the  appellant  at  risk  of
    being on a stop list.

19. He referred to the case of KH Afghanistan [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1354  with
    regard to the risk of suicide and submitted that  the  appellant  could
    not succeed in a case under Article 3 or Article 8.  He submitted  that
    the United Kingdom's obligations in a  foreign  case  are  limited  and
    submitted that there was nothing that  would  advance  the  appellant's
    case regarding the medical evidence.

20. In reply Ms Jones submitted that the issue was whether the  person  was
    perceived to be a risk by the Sri Lankan  authorities.   She  submitted
    that it was vital to assess the claim on the basis of  whether  he  was
    perceived to be a threat.  With regard to the sur place activities they
    were not relying on attendance at demonstrations and rallies alone  but
    that this ought to have been considered together with the  claim  as  a
    whole and the fact  that  the  appellant  would  be  returning  to  the
    northern part of Sri Lanka.  She submitted the totality of the evidence
    should have been considered by the judge before  reaching  findings  on
    credibility.  With regard to suicide risk  she  referred  to  submitted
    that there are a dearth of facilities for people with mental illness in
    Sri Lanka.

21. Both parties agreed that if I were to find a material error of law  the
    matter ought to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.



Discussion

22. With regard to the first ground of appeal i.e. that the  judge  reached
    his  conclusions  on  credibility  prior  to  considering  the  medical
    evidence it is  necessary  to  consider  whether  this  is  simply  the
    adoption of a structural approach to setting out the evidence that  was
    considered overall by the judge or whether in fact the judge appears to
    have reached findings on credibility and only then turned  to  consider
    the medical evidence.

23. There must always be a structure to decisions.  In this  case  it  will
    help  to  set  out  substantive  parts  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  The judge's findings commenced from paragraph 34 which  sets
    out the following:

         "34. The appellant claims that the reason why he delayed in  making
             his asylum application was because he had been  instructed  by
             the agent not to claim  asylum  on  arrival  in  this  country
             because he has a two and  a  half  year  visa.   Further,  the
             appellant's evidence is that his father was reporting  to  the
             authorities in his absence from Sri Lanka.  On 10  October  he
             was arrested and released on 24 April 2014.  I have  formed  a
             view based on the totality of the evidence before me that  the
             appellant's claim for asylum was precipitated and triggered by
             the fact that he had not been attending college and  had  been
             in the United Kingdom in  breach  of  his  visa  requirements.
             Furthermore, I have formed the view  that  the  appellant  has
             sought to bolster his claim by producing evidence in  relation
             to his mental state of mind and that if he did have a  genuine
             claim for asylum that he would have made that claim for asylum
             at an earlier date as his claim  if  it  indeed  were  genuine
             would have been assessed on the  merits  by  the  respondents.
             The fact that he delayed in my view is indeed adverse  to  his
             claim to fear persecution in Sri Lanka from the authorities."

24. Clearly the judge did take into account the appellant's assertion  that
    his father was reporting to the authorities had  been  arrested  on  10
    October when reaching the conclusions on why the appellant  delayed  in
    claiming asylum.  However, the judge has not set out specifically  that
    he took into consideration the fact that  shortly  after  the  asserted
    date that the appellant's father was arrested the  appellant  attempted
    to commit suicide.  The judge clearly refers to  the  medical  evidence
    with  regard  to  the  appellant's  mental  health  because  the  judge
    considered that the appellant 'sought to bolster his claim by producing
    evidence in relation to his mental state of mind'.   Whilst  the  judge
    might have been clearer in his analysis of the  reasons  given  by  the
    appellant I do not consider that the judge did in fact fail to consider
    those alternative explanations as asserted by the appellant.

25. Although the judge has considered Section 8 and the delay  in  claiming
    asylum at the beginning of the findings it is clear, as set out by  the
    judge, that the view was formed based on the totality of  the  evidence
    before the judge.  It is not correct to  say  that  the  judge  made  a
    finding that the appellant made his claim for asylum  after  his  leave
    was curtailed.  What the judge found was that the judge formed  a  view
    that it was precipitated and triggered by the fact that he had not been
    attending college and had been in the United Kingdom in breach  of  his
    visa requirements.  That is the view that was open to the judge on  the
    evidence.

26. In relation to ground 1, that the judge considered the medical evidence
    only after reaching a view on the appellant's  credibility,  the  judge
    set out findings on credibility from paragraph 35.  The judge  set  out
    the following:

         "35. I do not find the core  of  the  appellant's  account  of  the
             events which had led him to leave Sri Lanka  to  be  credible,
             neither do I find his evidence that the basis for  making  the
             asylum claim was due to the  arrest  of  his  father  for  the
             following reasons."

27. It is clear that the judge considered the basis for making  the  asylum
    claim in light of other evidence and has set out in some detail why  he
    did not consider that the basis for making the asylum claim was due  to
    the arrest of his father. The judge goes on in paragraph 35 to identify
    the current situation in Sri Lanka as identified in  GJ  and  sets  out
    reasons as to why the appellant he  does  not  accept  the  appellant's
    claim is credible.  It is clear therefore that the judge did not ignore
    the alternative explanations provided by the appellant for the delay in
    claiming asylum.  The judge continued in paragraph 35:

         "35. The legal position as set out in the country guidance case  of
             GJ shows a marked  difference  now  in  the  approach  of  the
             government of Sri Lanka in cases such as this.  The  focus  of
             the Sri Lankan government concerned since the  civil  war  was
             ended in May 2009 is that the LTTE is a spent  force  in  that
             they have no terrorist incidents since the end  of  the  civil
             war.  The government's present objective is to identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan State  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lanka Constitution  in  1983,  which
             prohibits the violation of a  totalitarian  integrity  of  Sri
             Lanka.  The  Sri  Lankan's  government's  focus  is  two-fold.
             Firstly, to prevent resurgence of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar
             Tamil separatist organisation  and  secondly  to  prevent  the
             revival of the civil war  within  Sri  Lanka.   The  appellant
             claims in his evidence that he was not a member  of  the  LTTE
             but that the authorities had suspicions that he was a  member.
             The thinking of the authorities  he  claims  would  have  been
             based on the fact that after  2002  his  father  worked  as  a
             driver for the LTTE and that he himself  had  been  threatened
             and had become scared of the Sri Lankan Army  and  other  pro-
             government armed groups that operated in the Jaffna area.   In
             2006 his family moved to Vanni and  his  father  continued  to
             work as a farmer on somebody else's land.  He claims that  his
             father did not drive for the LTTE any more.  The appellant  in
             his evidence and at paragraph  21  of  his  witness  statement
             states that he heard that his father  had  been  arrested  and
             that he was held for about two months at Point Pedro Army Camp
             and questioned again about the appellant's whereabouts.  I  am
             not satisfied on the low standard of proof that the  appellant
             had such a profile in Sri Lanka or had indeed developed such a
             profile outside of Sri Lanka so as to  bring  himself  to  the
             attention of the authorities in Sri Lanka.   Therefore,  I  do
             not find the evidence that his father was arrested in 2013  to
             be credible.  I  also  note  that  from  the  appellant's  own
             evidence that he was able to leave Sri Lanka with the help  of
             an agent but with his own identification and passport  without
             the intervention of the authorities.   The  appellant  in  his
             evidence also details his involvement with the LTTE from  June
             2006 until May 2009 and again I do not find his evidence to be
             credible for the following reasons.   He  claims  that  having
             moved to Vanni on 20 December 2008 the LTTE came  and  rounded
             up some boys and girls.  None of the  families  were  able  to
             object to this because of the fact that they feared the  LTTE.
             The appellant claims that he was involved in training with the
             LTTE during this period of time.  He claims  that  the  person
             who was in charge of the training was a person known as  Vanan
             and that at this time there was no formal structure  and  that
             he was given the role  of  supplying  food  and  attending  to
             injured fighters.  The appellant during cross-examination  was
             vague in relation to the training itself  and  he  could  only
             remember the name of one person this being the person  who  is
             responsible for the training.  I do not find this credible  on
             the basis that the appellant claims to have been  detained  at
             the camp on 20 December 2008 until mid January 2009  according
             to his witness statements at paragraphs 6 to 8 and therefore I
             would have expected him to have  remembered  more  information
             and also more names than just one name of a person who was  at
             the training camp.   The  appellant's  evidence  also  at  the
             substantive asylum interview indicates that he was not able to
             provide not only names of  individuals  but  also  the  actual
             machinery that was used and the  training  regime  itself  for
             example he was asked at question 58 what else  he  was  taught
             about the AK-47 and he responded by saying  how  to  dismantle
             and fix, however when he was asked to  give  more  information
             about how he was taught to dismantle he  answered  by  stating
             that he could not remember.  I note and accept the  submission
             of Mr Scarisbrook that the appellant having  been  interviewed
             by the respondents in  2013  and  providing  vague  and  short
             answers was however able in his witness statement prepared for
             the appeal to give more information on the events despite  the
             fact that more than two years  had  passed  since  his  asylum
             interview.

         36.  I also do not find that the appellant's escape from  the  LTTE
             camp in 2009 to be credible for the  following  reasons.   The
             appellant at paragraphs 10 and 11  of  his  witness  statement
             states that the basis of his escape and that he  was  assisted
             by a neighbour in the area where  he  was  residing  with  his
             family prior to their capture.   The  appellant  at  interview
             states that they managed to get away, not on a motorbike but a
             tractor.  It is clearly inconsistent with  his  evidence  that
             they managed to escape on a motorbike.  I also  did  not  find
             the account provided by him in relation to his  escape  to  be
             credible because of the relative ease upon which he  was  able
             to escape from the camp in which he had been  detained  for  a
             considerable period of time without his consent and one with a
             thought that such an area would have  been  well  policed  and
             guarded.

         37.  I also considered the  appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to
             involvement with an MP called Shritharan in his  campaign  for
             parliamentary elections.  The appellant claims that he  worked
             for him and  that  he  was  assigned  the  role  of  gathering
             information about missing persons who had  been  affected  and
             displaced as a consequence of the war.  He states that he  was
             not employed but that he was assisting the MP and that he paid
             him travel expenses.  I have taken into consideration all  the
             questions and answers which were provided by the appellant and
             note in particular question 91 when he was asked  that  if  he
             was working for such a person that surely he  would  have  his
             own staff and why was it that the appellant  and  others  were
             working for him as that would have  put  them  at  risk.   The
             appellant answered that he does not know and that he could not
             say no to the MP.  I found the evidence of the appellant to be
             inconsistent with his profile that he was not a member of  the
             LTTE.  He claims to have had a low profile  in  the  LTTE  and
             that he never sought to take a greater involvement in them and
             in actual fact his involvement with the LTTE according to  his
             evidence was because of  the  area  that  he  lived  and  also
             because of his father's  involvement  in  the  LTTE  as  their
             driver.  I have already made a finding  that  the  appellant's
             claim was formulated in order  to  facilitate  his  continuing
             residence in this country and I make a  further  finding  that
             the letter which is in the appellant's bundle at page 40  from
             the MP  has  also  been  provided  in  order  to  portray  the
             appellant as a person who is active politically in Sri  Lanka.
             This was  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  the  appellant  at
             question 87 of  his  asylum  interview  was  asked  after  the
             elections if he had any further contact with  the  MP  and  he
             stated that yes this was  a  good  friendship.   He  does  not
             suggest that he continued to be politically active even though
             he was not working for the MP.

         38.  I have also made a finding that the appellant's profile in Sri
             Lanka and the interest that the authorities would have had  on
             him is further undermined by the fact that his family and  the
             appellant himself on 16 May 2009 claimed to  have  surrendered
             the Sri Lankan Army.  During the  detention  he  informed  the
             army that he had no association  with  the  LTTE  and  he  was
             subsequently released as the army had no interest in  him.   I
             make a finding that if the authorities suspected the appellant
             of being a member  of  the  LTTE  that  they  would  not  have
             released him and that he would have been subjected to  further
             interrogation  by  the  authorities.   The  appellant  in  his
             witness statement at paragraph  12  states  that  he  and  his
             family were taken to a large ground in Kilinochchi and then on
             to Omanthai Camp the next day.  Their details were  taken  and
             transferred to a camp in Vavuniya.  He claims that at the camp
             there was a public announcement that any LTTE  members  should
             surrender separately but he did not come forward and pretended
             that he was not one of them.  They were kept in the  camp  for
             about six months and then  brought  back  to  Point  Pedro  in
             Jaffna where they were released.  Upon his release  he  states
             that he continued in the cultivation of his father's land.

         39.  The appellant's claim is also that he was arrested on 23 March
             2011.  I again did not  find  this  to  be  credible  for  the
             following reasons.  The appellant does  not  provide  credible
             evidence to support the basis of this arrest, as stated  above
             he had already been kept in a camp for a period of six months.
              He had returned  to  the  assisting  of  his  father  in  the
             cultivation of his land and it is not apparent on the evidence
             that the appellant had continued to have any  links  with  the
             LTTE at the time of the writing of the refusal letter  by  the
             respondents.  They state at paragraph 30 of the refusal letter
             that the appellant had claimed that his  arrest  in  2011  had
             resulted in him being burned on his back with a  heated  metal
             rod and cigarettes and also chilli powder was  thrown  in  his
             eyes.  No independent medical evidence had  been  provided  to
             the respondents at that particular time.  It is however  noted
             by the Tribunal that the appellant has  subsequently  obtained
             medical evidence.  I have taken into  consideration  that  the
             fact that ultimately,  even  if  it  were  credible  that  the
             appellant was arrested that he was released on the payment  of
             a  bribe  which  may  be  indicative  of  the  fact  that  the
             authorities no longer had any interest in him.  The  appellant
             in his evidence states that as a consequence of the  treatment
             which he received that he signed a document presented  to  him
             confirming that he was involved with the LTTE.   Despite  this
             he was still released on the payment of a bribe.  Based on the
             fact that I make no finding that the appellant's  evidence  of
             his arrest and detention is  not  credible  I  also  made  the
             finding that his evidence in relation to the physical injuries
             that he claims that he received is also not credible."

28. It  is  clear  from  the  above  paragraphs  that  when  assessing  the
    credibility of the appellant the judge has taken into consideration the
    medical evidence.  The medical evidence is set out  separately  in  the
    decision is at paragraphs 45 to 47 where the judge  set out:

         "45. The appellant provided medical evidence at the hearing of  the
             appeal from South London and Maudsley NHS where he was seen in
             relation to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).   There  is
             also a report from a consultant psychiatrist  Dr  Hajioff  who
             has made  an  assessment  of  the  appellant  in  relation  to
             depression and chronic PTSD.  There is also evidence  from  Mr
             Martin who has found that the  scarring  which  the  appellant
             claimed was caused by the burning  with  hot  metal  rods  are
             typical of the account given and the scars caused by cigarette
             burns  are  consistent  with  the  appellant's  account.   The
             appellant also provided evidence by way of  a  report  from  a
             Melissa Edwards dated 7 June 2016.   The  appellant  confirmed
             during examination-in-chief that he does see  Ms  Edwards  for
             counselling.  He also stated that  he  has  been  accepted  by
             Freedom for Torture and that he is due to have an  appointment
             with them.

         46.  I note from the refusal letter  that  there  was  no  evidence
             provided to the respondents in  relation  to  the  appellant's
             medical condition and therefore that the respondents have  not
             had the opportunity to made a decision in  this  respect.   At
             the haring neither party made  representations  to  me  as  to
             whether the  medical  evidence  of  the  appellant  should  be
             admitted or that the matter should be adjourned  or  that  the
             matter  should  not  proceed  for  any  other  reasons.    The
             conclusions of Dr Martin is that he scars are unlikely  to  be
             self-inflicted because of  the  position  of  the  scar.   The
             likely cause is by a third party but that from  inspection  of
             the injuries it is scientifically impossible to  differentiate
             self-infliction of injuries by proxy from injuries  caused  by
             torture.  It does not dismiss self-inflicted injury  by  proxy
             but he forms the view that the injuries  are  more  likely  to
             have been caused by the appellant  being  held  in  a  certain
             position for some time and the slightly  undulated  and  wider
             margins may have  been  caused  by  the  appellant  moving  or
             flinching his body.

         47.  I have considered the report of Dr Martin very  carefully  and
             in the context of the totality of the evidence and I do make a
             finding  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his  arrest  and
             detention when he claims is not  credible  and  therefore  his
             claim that he was tortured is also not accepted.   The  report
             of Dr Martin falls in favour of the  account  being  plausible
             but it also acknowledges that there is a possibility that they
             could have been caused by some other means."

29.

29. It can be seen at paragraph 47 that the judge  sets  out  that  he  has
    considered the report of Dr Martin in the context of  the  totality  of
    the evidence and makes a finding that the appellant's  account  of  his
    arrest and detention is not credible and that his  claim  that  he  was
    tortured is not accepted.  The judge prior to this  paragraph  had  not
    made a finding of credibility in relation to the claim that he received
    injuries as a result of torture - clearly that claim  was  assessed  by
    taking into account the evidence of Dr Martin.

30. I consider that this in this case the judge has  assessed  the  overall
    credibility of the appellant's various aspects of his claim  by  taking
    into consideration the totality of the evidence including  the  medical
    evidence.  The  judge  has  adopted  a  structured  approach  and  when
    assessing the claim to have been tortured he considered that  claim  as
    part of a consideration of the medical evidence and has taken  that  in
    the context of the claim overall.  I do not  consider  that  this  case
    falls within the approach that  was  warned  against  in  the  case  of
    Mibanga.

31. It is argued that the judge failed to take  the  findings  in  GJ  into
    account in respect of the appellant's claim to have  been  released  on
    payment of a bribe and was able  to  leave  Sri  Lanka  using  his  own
    passport without  difficulty.  The  judge's  conclusion  was  that  the
    payment of a bribe 'may be indicative of the fact that the  authorities
    were no longer interested in him' and 'the appellant was able to  leave
    the country on his own passport going through the internal controls  at
    the airport in Sri Lanka without  any  difficulties'.  The  context  in
    which the judge was considering these factors was the findings  on  the
    overall credibility of the  appellant's  account  and  the  appellant's
    claim to have remained in Sri Lanka in hiding for more than a year  but
    to have applied for a visa in person. The judge does  not  definitively
    find that being released on payment of  a  bribe  must  mean  that  the
    authorities were not interested in the  appellant.  However,  I  accept
    that it is not clear that the judge took into account the assessment of
    the witness evidence in  GJ  at  paragraphs  262  and  275.  The  Upper
    Tribunal accepted the evidence as to current high levels of bribery and
    corruption in Sri Lanka, that the seriousness of any charges against an
    individual are not indicative of whether a bribe can be paid  and  that
    it is possible to leave through the airport even  when  actively  being
    sought. I consider that it is impossible to determine how  much  weight
    the judge placed  on  these  factors  as  undermining  the  appellant's
    credibility and therefore whether these factors might have infected his
    overall findings on credibility. Although  I  consider  it  borderline,
    given the need to assess asylum claims with anxious  scrutiny,  I  find
    that this amounts to an error of law.

32. I have considered whether this error might not be  material  given  the
    current categories of those at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  I  do  not
    consider that the judge erred in the approach to risk on  return  based
    on his credibility findings. However, as those findings are  no  longer
    entirely safe the assessment of risk on return is  no  longer  safe.  I
    find that the error of law is therefore material. It is not clear  that
    the judge would have arrived at the same conclusion had  he  considered
    the 'bribery and leaving on his own passport issues' in  light  of  the
    assessment of the evidence on these points in GJ.

33. With regard to the ground of appeal on Article 8 I have considered  the
    appellant's  skeleton  arguments  that  were  before   the   First-tier
    Tribunal. There appear to have been two  separate  skeleton  arguments,
    one rather short skeleton and a further skeleton of 27 pages  dated  23
    August 2016.  The 23 August 2016 skeleton argument  sets  out  in  some
    detail submissions on Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights on health grounds.  These run from paragraph 61 to 70 with
    a further paragraph at paragraph 71 dealing with  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The only record in the Tribunal's  decision  is
    at paragraph 32 where the judge set out:

         "32. It was submitted that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  and
             further if returned because he would be subjected  to  inhuman
             and degrading treatment under Article  3  and  that  his  life
             would be at a risk under  Article  2.   Furthermore  that  his
             removal, because of his health would also breach Article 8  of
             the European Convention on Human Rights".

34. Very lengthy submissions were set out in the skeleton argument and some
    further oral submissions were  made  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    health risks in terms of Articles 3 and 8.  The  judge  has  failed  to
    consider those arguments at all. I find that this is an error  of  law.
    Whilst the threshold that the appellant must meet for a  finding  of  a
    breach of his rights under articles 3 or 8 is very high in respect of a
    'medical claim' it  is  not  certain  that  the  claim  would  fail.  I
    therefore find that this is a material error of law.

35. I have considered carefully whether or not  some  of  the  findings  on
    credibility can be preserved. I find that it would be very difficult to
    isolate specific findings. As substantial  evidence  will  need  to  be
    considered I remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
    at Taylor House on the next available date before any judge other  than
    Judge Abebrese.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  at
Taylor house  to  be  heard  de-novo  before  any  judge  other  than  Judge
Abebrese.

No request for an anonymity order was made. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                       P                   M                   Ramshaw
Date 5 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

