
IAC-CH- CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01367/2014
                                                               AA/01368/2014
                                                             & AA/01369/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26th November 2014                |On 11th December 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                                  SJHA (1)
                                  ANGA (2)
                                  ANGA (3)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Simmonds of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DETERMINATION AND REMITTAL

 1. In this document I will refer to the parties by the style in which they
    appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are female citizens of Iraq and are respectively  mother
    and two daughters.   All  three  appellants  originally  left  Iraq  in
    December 2011 and sought entry clearance into the United  Kingdom  from
    Jordan.  It is understood that the first  appellant  then  returned  to
    Iraq to collect  belongings,  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  7
    February 2012.  She then returned to Iraq on at least two occasions  in
    February and March 2013, returning to the United Kingdom in  June  2013
    and then claimed asylum on 6 August 2013.

 3. A decision was taken in February 2014 to refuse to grant asylum and the
    appellants all appealed the decisions taken by the respondent.

 4. The appeals were heard before  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  NJ
    Osborne sitting at Newport on  3  April  2014.   An  oral  hearing  was
    conducted and both parties were represented (the appellants again by Mr
    Simmonds).

 5. In a  determination  dated  10  April  2014  Judge  Osborne  found  the
    appellants account to be credible as to the account of  persecution  in
    the home area of the three appellants,  but  found  that  there  was  a
    reasonable internal relocation  alternative.   The  appellant's  asylum
    appeal  was  accordingly  dismissed,  as  was  the  appeal  in  respect
    humanitarian protection.

 6. Judge Osborne then went onto consider Article 8 ECHR  and  allowed  the
    appeals of all three  appellants  based  upon  the  academic  situation
    involving one of the daughters of the first appellant.

 7. Each party then sought leave to appeal.  Through  administrative  error
    only the grounds lodged on behalf of the respondent were considered.

 8. The respondent alleged that the judge had erred in  law  by  not  first
    applying  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  had  not
    considered whether  there  were  any  compelling  circumstances  before
    embarking upon a free-standing Article 8 consideration.  Paragraph 4 of
    the grounds state as follows:

         "4.  The judges finding that the family was entitled to  remain  in
         the UK solely on the basis of the elder daughters academic progress
         during the 2 years she has spent in this country as a dependent  of
         her student father is perverse and fails to have sufficient  regard
         to the wider public interest in removing those  with  no  claim  to
         remain here".


   9. In granting the respondent leave to appeal another judge of the First-
      Tier Tribunal gave the following as reasons:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
         decision of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  who,  in  a
         determination promulgated on  14  April  2014,  allowed,  on  human
         rights grounds, the appeal of the appellant against the refusal  of
         her asylum claim.


         2.   The grounds of appeal complain that the judge erred in failing
         to take account  of  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  or  of  the
         guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
         [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and gave  disproportionate  weight  to  the
         academic achievements of the appellant's elder daughter.


         3.   The grounds do reveal an arguable error of law".


10. Hence this matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal in August  2014,
    when again Mr Richards appeared for the respondent.  Neither appellants
    nor representative attended.  I noted that notice of  the  hearing  had
    been served, but I also noted that contained in the file  were  grounds
    seeking leave filed on  behalf  of  the  appellants.   These  had  been
    overlooked.

11. I therefore considered it appropriate not to proceed,  but  to  adjourn
    matters.

12. After the hearing and acting as a judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  I
    considered the appellants grounds seeking leave.  I will refer to  this
    document in detail below, but I granted leave in decision notice  dated
    22 August 2014.  In that document I noted that I found it arguable that
    Judge Osborne had erred on the question of internal relocation.

13. By coincidence this matter was relisted before me in the Upper Tribunal
    on 26 November 2014.  Neither party raised any objection to me  sitting
    on what was now a cross appeal with leave having been granted  to  each
    party.

14. At the commencement of the hearing I indicated that I intended to  deal
    with the hearing in two parts.  Firstly to  consider  the  respondent's
    application by way of submissions by the two representatives  and  then
    secondly to deal with the appellant's  application,  again  by  hearing
    separate representations from each party.

15. Mr Richards relied upon the grounds seeking leave with  regard  to  the
    Article 8 aspect of the appeal.  In essence the judge had  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis of the academic progress of one of the  appellants.
    He had made  irrational  findings  and  the  determination  lacked  any
    meaningful balancing exercise.

16. Mr Simmonds referred to  a  response  under  Rule  24.   That  document
    supported the decision of Judge  Osborne  in  allowing  the  Article  8
    appeal.  Reliance in placed on Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules - Correct
    Approach) [2013] UKUT  00640  and  it  was  further  submitted  in  the
    response that application under the rules would have been "an  academic
    exercise in the circumstances of this case".

17. In his verbal submission Mr Simmonds argued that the judge had given  a
    detailed response when considering Article 8.  Both he and Mr  Richards
    referred to the case of EV (Philippines) & Others v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874.

18. Mr Richards then responded by indicating that the best interests of the
    children in this case were to remain with the parent.

19. I then invited Mr Simmonds to  make  submissions  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's application arising from the refusal of the asylum appeal.

20. Mr Simmonds relied upon the grounds seeking leave, which in  turn  drew
    on the case of HF (Iraq) [2013] EWCA Civ 1276 and paragraph 116 of that
    decision.  The appellant had been found to be credible, but  the  judge
    had not considered the need to return to her home area  to  renew  food
    subsidy provisions.

21. Mr Richards in response indicated there was little before the judge  as
    to information as to the appellant obtaining  food  subsidy  advantages
    and supported the judge's decision.

22. At the end of the hearing I announced that I found no material error of
    law in the judge's determination with regard to asylum and humanitarian
    protection, and that the  appeal  of  the  appellants  was  accordingly
    dismissed.  I did however find a material error of law in the  way  the
    judge dealt the Article 8 appeal  and  that  his  decision  in  respect
    thereof could not stand.  In the circumstances it  was  appropriate  to
    set aside that part of the decision and for the  case  to  be  remitted
    back to the First-Tier Tribunal to deal with the Article 8  aspects  of
    the appeal before a judge other than Judge Osborne.

23. In respect of the appellant's appeal on  Judge  Osborne's  decision,  I
    find no material error of law.  In granting leave I found  it  arguable
    but having heard from Mr Simmonds I do not consider that the allegation
    of error has been made out.  Mr Simmonds has  simply  relied  upon  the
    grounds which in turn rely heavily upon HF.  Mr Richards makes a  valid
    point as to exactly what evidence was before the judge with  regard  to
    food subsidies.  Paragraph 27 of Judge Osborne's  determination  refers
    to that.  Although that  paragraph  relates  to  a  submission  by  the
    Presenting Officer, when read as  a  whole  the  determination  clearly
    reaches a conclusion in support of that submission.  The  determination
    of Judge Osborne in dealing with the asylum  claim  is  very  full  and
    there is nothing to suggest that there was  evidence  before  him  with
    regard to the need for  food  subsidies.   The  determination  is  full
    enough to suggest that if there was such evidence it  would  have  been
    mentioned.   Certainly  there  is  no  suggestion  that  evidence   was
    overlooked.

24. From paragraph 27 through to  33,  Judge  Osborne  has  very  carefully
    analysed the situation of the appellants in the light  of  HF  and  has
    reached conclusions at paragraph 33 that he was perfectly  entitled  to
    reach.  There is no error and certainly no material error.

25. Dealing now with the respondent's appeal.  Paragraphs 35  onwards  deal
    with the  question  of  human  rights  in  general  and  Article  8  in
    particular.   The  judge  has  indeed  embarked  upon  a  stand   alone
    consideration of Article 8 without reference to the  Immigration  Rules
    in general or the public interest in particular.  In short Mr  Richards
    is correct, the judge was wrong in failing to acknowledge the existence
    of any Immigration Rule could be applied  before  allowing  the  appeal
    outside  the  rules  without  finding  compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under such rules.

26. The judge quite rightly considered the best interests of the  children,
    as set out in  paragraph  39  of  the  determination.   However  it  is
    appropriate for due regard to be had to  the  views  expressed  by  the
    Court of Appeal in EV (above).  This is particularly relevant given the
    basis upon which Judge Osborne came to  the  conclusion  to  allow  the
    appeal.  Additionally there is little or no consideration of the public
    interest that must be balanced in an appeal such as this. There  is  no
    consideration of the jurisprudence that exists in deciding when a stand
    alone consideration of Art 8 can be conducted.  In these  circumstances
    I conclude that there is an error of law in the  manner  in  which  the
    judge dealt with Article 8 and it is material to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal, and therefore falls to be set aside.

27. Given the need to establish facts with regard to the  three  appellants
    in their Article 8 appeals, it  is  appropriate  that  this  matter  be
    remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal in line with the Senior President's
    direction.

28. By reason of the above the First-Tier Tribunal judge who hears the case
    will restrict him or herself to the appeal in respect of Article  8  in
    line with current jurisprudence once the facts have been established.

Decision

29. The appeal by the appellants in  respect  of  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection is dismissed.  The appeal of the respondent is allowed.



Signed        Date 10th December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
