
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/01261/2015

                                                AA/01263/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 September 2015                     |                                  |
|                                         |On 20 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                     HAA

  ST
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:    Mr E Waheed, of Counsel, instructed by Magna Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                  DECISION AND REASONS


ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an Anonymity Order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellants.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


INTRODUCTION

 1. These appeals have their origins in decisions made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 09 January 2015, whereby the claims of the Appellants for refugee
    status were refused. There were  associated  decisions  to  remove  the
    Appellants from the United Kingdom. Their ensuing appeals to the First-
    tier Tribunal (the "FtT") were dismissed.

THE ASYLUM CLAIMS

 2. The Appellants claim to be  citizens  of  Bangladesh,  mother  and  son
    respectively. The first Appellant, HAA, claims to  have  been  born  on
    26th January 1989.  The Secretary of State maintains that her  date  of
    birth is 03 January 1986. There is a  third  possible  date  of  birth,
    namely 01 October 1988, which appears on a passport. The date of  birth
    of the second Appellant, ST, is uncontroversial, being 24 October 2002.
    He is now aged 13 years.

 3. The asylum claims were based on the mother's asserted fear that in  the
    event of enforced  return  to  Bangladesh  she  would  be  at  risk  of
    mistreatment by reason of having escaped from a people trafficker.  She
    claimed to have given birth to her son when aged 13, having been raped.
    Some twelve years  later  both  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  by
    arrangement, accompanied by a male  adult  who  organised  the  travel.
    Thereafter he forced the mother into  sexual  relations  with  him  and
    others. There was also physical abuse. Both Appellants escaped  through
    a window seven days later.

 4. The first  reason  for  refusal  was  based  on  the  decision  maker's
    assessment that the Appellant's professed name and date of  birth  were
    inconsistent with other information. Further, her  assertion  that  she
    had not had her fingerprints taken was  not  considered  credible.  Her
    account of how she obtained a passport upon which she relied  was  also
    not considered credible.  Next, it was noted that the professed date of
    birth of her son differed  from  that  contained  in  an  earlier  visa
    application.

 5. Inconsistencies in the Appellant's account  of  events  in  the  United
    Kingdom were  also  highlighted.  Her  explanation  for  declining  the
    opportunity offered to her of reporting her treatment to the police and
    making a trafficking claim were treated with  scepticism.  The  several
    differing dates which she provided  regarding  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom were highlighted. Her claim that she had been held in captivity
    in the United Kingdom was rejected. Her evidence relating  to  her  age
    and the age at which she became pregnant was considered unreliable. Her
    inconsistent statements that she was raped when  unmarried  and  became
    pregnant following marriage  were  also  noted.  The  decision  maker's
    assessment was that the second Appellant is not the biological  son  of
    the first Appellant.  Her  evidence  concerning  previous  unsuccessful
    visa applications made by both of them was considered unreliable.

 6. Fundamentally, the key elements of the Appellants' claims were rejected
    as untruthful or unreliable.

DECISION OF THE FtT

 7. The FtT, in essence, endorsed the Secretary of State's  decisions.  The
    first Appellant's story was considered implausible in its entirety. The
    Judge, in reaching this omnibus conclusion, made a series  of  findings
    on discrete issues adverse to the  Appellants.  Significantly,  one  of
    these findings was that the first Appellant had failed to establish  as
    a reasonable likelihood that she is the biological mother of the second
    Appellant.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the express ground that  the  FtT's
    treatment of the DNA evidence had been procedurally unfair.  The  grant
    of permission is silent on the second ground, which complains that  the
    adverse credibility findings are irrational.

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

 9. I shall address firstly the procedural fairness ground, which forms the
    centrepiece of this appeal. It is based on an account, contained in the
    grounds of appeal, of what occurred at two separate stages of the first
    instance hearing. The author of the grounds is Counsel who  represented
    the Appellant. The following are the relevant passages:

         "At the outset of the hearing the IJ discussed preliminary  issues.
         The original of the DNA report was  shown  and  the  IJ  asked  the
         Respondent's representative ... if there was any issue with the DNA
         report so that she  could  narrow  the  issues.  [The  Respondent's
         representative] indicated that he didn't have  any  issues  arising
         and the IJ gave an indication after looking at the original that it
         will be given due weight ....


         [Later] the Respondent made submissions and .....  made  criticisms
         of the DNA report in terms of lack of information on  the  sampling
         .....


         I intervened and said that the hearing [had] proceeded on the basis
         that the report had no objections [sic] and an indication that  the
         relationship was no longer an issue. If these objections were [sic]
         made at the outset with no indication given by the IJ then I  could
         have led evidence on the issue and asked questions relating to  the
         sampling which could have been part of oral evidence or  asked  for
         an adjournment as this was a material issue involving  a  child.  I
         asked for an opportunity to re-examine the Appellant on the  issues
         newly raised but was assured that this was unnecessary and that the
         DNA report will be given due weight (giving the impression that the
         report was satisfactory)."


    I juxtapose this account with the Secretary of State's Rule 24  Notice.
    The only notable aspect of this is the statement, in  terms,  that  the
    presenting officer's "Hearing  Note"  is  silent  on  this  issue.  The
    account contained in the grounds is not challenged  in  any  meaningful
    way. I have also considered the submissions of the Secretary of State's
    representative at the hearing before me. While I have  done  so  these,
    self evidently, were not capable of adding  anything  material  to  the
    Rule 24 response. Counsel's account is in  essence  uncontested  and  I
    have no reason for not accepting it. I  shall,  therefore,  decide  the
    appeal on this basis.

10. In [34] of the FtT's decision one finds the following passage:

         "As for the DNA report, [the  presenting  officer]  relies  on  the
         absence from the report of the continuity trail of the samples. The
         accompanying information which is usually attached to such  reports
         regarding the samples and identification process [is  missing  ??].
         As such, he submits, there is no proof that the sample said  to  be
         from the Appellant is in fact from her. He  asks  that  I  make  an
         adverse credibility finding against the Appellant with  the  result
         that I cannot rely upon the Appellant's account as to the truth  of
         what she claims without more."

    Next, the Judge recorded the submission of Counsel for  the  Appellants
    to the effect that -


         "...   the DNA Report is sufficient evidence to prove maternity  in
         this  case  given  that  the  report  states  the  samples  arrived
         together."

         In a later passage the Judge makes the following assessment of  the
DNA report:

         "[It] .... describes the two samples as  mouth  swabs.  The  report
         does not state from whom or where the mouth swabs were received and
         it does not attach any documentary evidence as to the taking of the
         samples or any identification seen at the  time  the  samples  were
         taken ...


         [The Consent Form] has not been provided to me and I was  not  told
         whether it was in the Appellant's possession."

         Next, the Judge quotes from the conclusion of  the  report,  namely
that it is -

         "...  20450 times more  likely  that  the  alleged  mother  is  the
         biological mother of the child with a probability of  maternity  of
         99.998%."

         The Judge then noted the caveat in the report:

         "If there is a possibility that a close  relative  of  the  alleged
         mother  may  be  the  biological  mother  of  the  child  this  may
         invalidate the results of this test."


11. In order to determine this issue  it  is  necessary  to  reproduce  the
    following passages from the decision of the FtT in full:

         "53. I have to consider whether it is reasonably  likely  that  the
             core of the Appellant's claim is true. I  bear  in  mind  that
             this is a low threshold for the Appellant to meet.


          54. On the face of it the DNA evidence is more than sufficient  to
             cross this threshold on the issue  of  maternity.  However,  I
             share the Respondent's concern as to the absence from the  DNA
             report of information as to the taking of the samples.  It  is
             my experience that  such  information  is  regularly  included
             within  the  reports  together  with   confirmation   of   the
             identification documents provided at the time the samples were
             taken and often photos of those  from  whom  the  samples  are
             taken. The significance of the omission is clear, there is  no
             evidence upon which I  can  be  properly  satisfied  that  the
             sample said to be from the Appellant is,  in  fact  from  her.
             This point, although raised in submissions was not put to  the
             Appellant in cross-examination and as such, she did  not  have
             the chance to address it. I bear this in mind when considering
             the weight to be attached to this aspect of the case.

          55. However, even if the  evidence  was  sufficient  to  show  the
             sample came from the Appellant, I have considered  the  caveat
             in the report which I have set out [48] in the  light  of  the
             evidence that the Appellant's son's visa applications sets out
             his parents as being the  same  parents  as  the  Appellant's.
             Although those were not named  as  her  parents  in  her  visa
             applications, it is not disputed that the  names  and  details
             given in her son's applications  are,  indeed,  those  of  her
             parents. This was an issue which troubled the  Respondent.  If
             it is the case that the Appellant may in fact be the sister of
             the child rather than the mother, then the caveat  effectively
             'invalidates' the result of the report and  hence  the  report
             inevitably carries far less weight than it otherwise would.

          56. I have also considered  the  report  in  the  context  of  the
             significant discrepancies arising from the Appellant's date of
             birth ([46] above) and the fact that,  at  no  time,  has  she
             claimed to have a date of birth which makes it chronologically
             possible for her to be the mother even on her own  version  of
             his age (and in fact particularly on her version). Whilst  the
             Appellant has explained  that  date  of  birth  is  of  little
             consequence  in  Bangladesh  and  she  did  not  realise   its
             significance in the United Kingdom, I do not find this  to  be
             adequate. If what she said is correct or, at  least  the  true
             explanation for her inability to be sure  about  her  date  of
             birth, I would expect her simply to say that she is  not  sure
             about it. However, in evidence before me she was adamant  that
             her date of birth is 26 January 1989 which makes her 26  years
             old. If she is right, and if she was 12 at the time  she  gave
             birth (based on her consistent evidence of being 11  when  she
             became pregnant),  her  son  would  be  14  and  there  is  no
             evidential basis to conclude that this is reasonably likely to
             be the case.

         57.  The evidence,  taken  together,  paints  a  picture  which  is
             sufficiently inconsistent,  confusing  and  incomplete  as  to
             force me to the conclusion that the Appellant  has  failed  in
             her attempt to satisfy me that it is reasonably likely  to  be
             the case that she is  the  biological  mother  of  the  second
             Appellant and I do not find her to be so."

         The Judge's omnibus  conclusion  is  expressed  in  [69]  in  these
terms:

              "Taken together, the Appellant is unable to  satisfy  me  that
             there is reasonable degree of likelihood that the core of  her
             claim is true. I have not  found  her  to  be  the  biological
             mother of the second Appellant for the reasons I have given. I
             cannot identify any aspect  of  the  Appellant's  claim  about
             which the evidence is sufficiently clear and  reliable  as  to
             make any positive findings of fact about her case  or  in  her
             favour."

    As [54] of the FtT's decision makes clear, the discrete issue concerned
    the form and composition of the DNA report and  it  was  not  canvassed
    with the first Appellant in cross examination. Thus no  questions  were
    put to her relating to the point of concern, namely where, when and  in
    what circumstances the samples upon which the report was based had been
    provided by her and her son. Furthermore,  it  would  appear  that  the
    issue concerning the availability  of  the  consent  form,  which  also
    troubled the Judge, was not ventilated at the hearing. The question  to
    be addressed is whether,  given  these  factors,  the  Appellants  were
    denied their fundamental right to a fair hearing.

12. The governing principles were rehearsed in extenso in the  decision  of
    this Tribunal in MM (Unfairness: E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  105  (IAC)  at
    [14] - [23].  Giving effect to  these  principles  I  conclude  without
    hesitation  that  the  hearing  at  first  instance  was  unfair.   The
    unfairness consisted of the ventilation in closing  submissions  of  an
    issue of unmistakable importance which had not been canvassed with  the
    first Appellant in cross examination, coupled with the Judge's  refusal
    to permit any form of modest case  management  adjustment,  such  as  a
    short  adjournment,  which  could  have  redressed  the  balance.   The
    materiality of this unfairness is beyond plausible dispute, given  that
    the issue features so prominently in the decision of the FtT and  forms
    one of the cornerstones for dismissing the appeal. In this  context  it
    matters  not  that  the  FtT  had  other  reasons  for  reaching   this
    conclusion. A manifest error of law is demonstrated in consequence.

13. There are two further troubling features of the decision  of  the  FtT.
    First, while the Judge appears to recognise, in [47], that samples were
    properly provided in the conventional way, this issue is not  revisited
    in the critical passages of the decision  and  no  finding  thereon  is
    made. Second, there is a clear and significant  error  in  the  Judge's
    understanding of the caveat expressed in the DNA report, noted in  [10]
    above. This caveat adverted to the "possibility that a  close  relative
    of the alleged mother may be the biological mother of the  child".  The
    first observation which this invites is that this did not form part  of
    either the Secretary of State's refusal decisions or the case  made  by
    the Secretary of State's representative at the hearing.  As  a  result,
    this issue was not raised. Second, relying on this passage,  the  Judge
    appears to have formed the view that the first  Appellant  may  be  the
    sister of the second Appellant. This was  clearly  influential  in  the
    Judge's reasoning and conclusions. However, there are two  difficulties
    here. The first is the procedural unfairness already noted. The  second
    is the Judge's failure to make any  clear  finding  about  this  issue.
    These further shortcomings in the  FtT's  decision  may  be  viewed  as
    fortifying my conclusion on  the  first  ground  or  constituting  free
    standing errors of law.

14. The second ground of appeal is an irrationality challenge.  As  I  have
    observed, the grant of permission is silent in relation to this ground.
    While this is regrettable, the appeal proceeded on the basis that  this
    is a permitted ground. I consider  the  specifics  of  this  challenge,
    rehearsed in [12] - [14] of the grounds of appeal,  to  be  lacking  in
    merit. They  involve  isolating  certain  parts  of  the  decision  and
    divorcing them from their full context.  They  ignore  the  assessment,
    findings and conclusions which surround them.   I  conclude  that  they
    have no substance. However, there is one discrete aspect of this ground
    which escapes  this  critique,  namely,  the  complaint  that  the  FtT
    evidently failed to  take  into  account  the  evidence  of  "....  the
    independent witness who speaks the Appellant's  language  [who]  stated
    that ST is her son ....": [15].  This ground is made  out  and,  in  my
    view, cannot be dismissed as something so minor or peripheral as to  be
    immaterial.

15. Finally, it is appropriate to draw attention to the  decision  of  this
    Tribunal in BW (Witness Statements  by  Advocates)  Afghanistan  [2014]
    UKUT 00568 (IAC). While Counsel who represented the Appellants at first
    instance, properly, did not conduct the appeals, I  consider  that  the
    account of the conduct of the hearing should have been contained  in  a
    witness statement. It will rarely, if ever, be appropriate for  grounds
    of appeal to be couched in the first person in the way  in  which  they
    were composed in this case.


DECISION

16. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated  above  the  appeals  are
    allowed. As the Appellants were denied a fair  hearing  remittal  to  a
    differently constituted FtT is  the  appropriate  course.   It  is  not
    appropriate to preserve any of the FtT's findings.



 Signed:                            Dated: 20 May 2016




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


