
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01340/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     BB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Hodson, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
       all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could  give
       rise to contempt of court proceedings.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  the  Congo
       ("the DRC") born on 12 February 1984. He first visited the UK  on  11
       July 2013, with a valid visa, and stayed for approximately  a  month.
       He came again to the UK on 9 December 2013 and claimed asylum  on  14
       February 2014.

    3. The appellant is appealing the decision of First tier Tribunal  (FtT)
       Judge Verity, promulgated on  19  June  2015,  in  which  his  appeal
       against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse  his  asylum/human
       rights claim was dismissed.

    4. From 2006 until coming to the UK in  2013,  the  appellant  lived  in
       South Africa, only returning to the DRC on  two  occasions:  in  June
       2012 and in February 2013.

    5. The essence of the appellant's claim is that, whilst living in  South
       Africa, from 2010 onwards, he became active  in  the  Union  pour  le
       democracie et le progres social (UDPS). His role in the UDPS included
       being in charge of publicity and he actively recruited  new  members.
       On his return to the  DRC  in  February  2013  he  was  arrested  and
       detained, having attended a  UDPS  march,  and  whilst  detained  was
       subject to beatings. He was released after three days  detention.  He
       has continued his activities for the UDPS and there is a warrant  out
       for his arrest. He fears that he will be killed if  returned  to  the
       DRC. He also fears return to South Africa  because  he  has  recently
       been subject to serious threats.

    6. In a letter dated 9 January  2015  refusing  the  appellant's  asylum
       claim ("the Refusal Letter"), the respondent stated the following:

        a. It was accepted that the appellant was a supporter of the UDPS
           but not that he was involved with the party to the extent
           claimed.

        b. It was accepted that he was arrested and detained as he claimed.

        c. It was not accepted that the appellant was subject to threats in
           South Africa, or brought to the attention of the authorities in
           South Africa or the DRC, from a man named Fabric "king zombie"
           Shungu.

        d. It was not accepted he was of continuing interest to the police
           authorities in the DRC or in South Africa.

  Decision of the FtT

    7. The judge did not consider the appellant's  account  of  having  been
       detained and subject to abuse as credible. At paragraph  [37(1)]  she
       states.

           "I have grave doubts as to the appellant's involvement with  the
           UDPS but I have accepted as a starting  point  the  Home  Office
           position. However, even though I have accepted the  Home  Office
           position I am not prepared to accept the appellant's account  as
           credible".

    8. The judge found that the appellant would not be at risk on return  to
       the DRC as an active member of the UDPS  for  a  number  of  reasons.
       These included:

        a. that the letter submitted on the appellant's behalf from the
           UDPS in the UK stated that he was appointed an officer at a UDPS
           branch in the DRC at a time when, according to the appellant's
           own evidence, he was living in South Africa and had been doing
           so for approximately four years.

        b. that the claim to have suffered sexual abuse was not mentioned
           to the respondent or otherwise raised by the appellant before it
           was put to him at the hearing and was being used to embellish
           his claim.

        c.  that the appellant did not apply for asylum when he first came
           to the UK in July 2013, which was after he had been imprisoned
           in the DRC.

        d. that, at most, the appellant has been involved in only one
           demonstration outside the DRC embassy since coming to the UK and
           there is no evidence the embassy staff noted his details or
           photographed him.

    9. The FtT referred  to  R(DRC)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin) and MM (UDPS members  -  risk  on
       return) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2007] UKAIT  00023  and  the
       finding in the latter case that there is not a real risk of return if
       the appellant is no more than a mere member of the UDPS.

  Grounds of appeal

   10. There are several grounds of appeal:

        a. Ground 1: Failing to properly consider the appellant's evidence
           in relation to the timing of his asylum claim. The FTT made
           adverse credibility findings arising from the failure of the
           appellant to apply for asylum when he first came to the UK in
           July 2013 without taking into account evidence that explains the
           delay, namely, that

             i. In July 2013 the appellant did not consider his life to be
                in danger in South Africa (the country in which he was
                residing and to which he would be returning), as it was only
                after returning to South Africa (in August 2013) that he
                began to receive threats and feel unsafe; and

            ii. It was only in December 2013 he was informed by his uncle
                about the issue of an arrest warrant. He then telephoned the
                respondent but was told he had to wait until after January
                for an appointment.

        b. Ground 2: Making findings incompatible with the respondent's
           concession that the appellant was arrested and detained as
           claimed in the DRC.   The respondent stated at paragraph 20 of
           the reasons for refusal letter that "your account of your arrest
           and detention has been largely internally consistent, and
           therefore it is accepted that you were arrested and detained in
           the way that you claim." This is an unqualified concession and
           the reference to "in the way that you claim" includes the abuse
           suffered. However, even though the FtT has said it accepts the
           respondent's concession, it is apparent that the appellant's
           account of the detention has been brought back into question and
           rejected.

        c. Ground 3: Failing to note the appellant's evidence in interview
           as to the sexual abuse suffered in detention. Contrary to the
           assertion by the FtT judge that sexual abuse was never
           previously mentioned, statements in the interview with the
           respondent are strongly suggestive of sexual abuse.

        d. Ground 4: failing to make findings as to risk on return arising
           from the appellant having his finger prints and photograph taken
           whilst in detention and having acquired a "political profile"
           such that he falls within the risk categories identified in the
           country guidance. There was a failure by the FtT to assess the
           appellant's profile and attendant risk including evidence of
           activity in South Africa.

        e. Ground 5: Making a finding that the appellant would not be at
           risk on return as he would not identify himself as a failed
           asylum seeker. This is contrary to the principle enunciated in
           RT (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2013] 1 AC 152 that it is not permissible
           for those at risk of persecution to be expected to dissemble or
           lie in order to protect themselves.

        f. Ground 6: Failing to make findings in relation to documents
           supporting the appellant's claim as to active UDPS membership in
           the DRC, South Africa and UK. The FtT was not entitled to
           exclude from consideration documents submitted by the appellant
           in support of his contention to be active on behalf of the UDPS
           on the basis that the presenting officer considered them "highly
           suspect."

  Submissions

   11. Mr Hodson focussed his submissions on the second ground of appeal. He
       argued that the  judge  improperly  went  behind  -  and  effectively
       reversed - a clear concession by the respondent  that  the  appellant
       had been arrested and detained in the way he claimed.

   12. Mr Wilding argued that the only concession made by the appellant  was
       that the appellant was arrested and detained - the concession did not
       extend  to  how  the  appellant  was  treated  when  detained.    The
       concession should also be considered in light of paragraph 17 of  the
       Refusal Letter, where it was not  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
       involved with the UDPS to the extent claimed. Moreover, the judge did
       not reject outright the appellant's account of being detained and the
       findings with respect to credibility of the  appellant's  account  of
       his detention need to be considered as a whole, taking  into  account
       the other findings about the appellant's credibility.

  Findings

   13. Failure to follow a concession can amount to legal error  (see  SS  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] CSIH 72F)  and  for
       the reasons set out below I find that the FtT made a  material  error
       of law in going  behind  an  express  concession  of  the  respondent
       without giving the parties notice that it was intending to do so.

   14. In the section of  the  Refusal  Letter  concerning  the  substantive
       consideration of the  claim  there  is  a  sub-heading  "Arrests  and
       detention: DRC" under which there are the following three  paragraphs
       (paragraphs 18-20):

           18.    Your claim that you were arrested and detained by  police
           authorities in the DRC in March 2013 is material to your  asylum
           claim because you fear persecution from the regime due  to  your
           activities as a member of the UDPS

           19.    When asked how many UDPS activists were  present  at  the
           demonstration, you  initially  claimed  that  "there  were  many
           people"....When asked if there were more policemen  than  people
           attending you stated that people attending the march  were  many
           and policemen were also many.

           20.    Despite this vagueness in your account, your  account  of
           your  arrest  and  detention   has   been   largely   internally
           consistent, and therefore it is accepted that you were  arrested
           and detained in the way that you claim. However, when  asked  if
           all the demonstrators had been  treated  in  the  same  way  you
           stated we were subjected to  the  same  fate;  it  is  therefore
           considered that you were not  specifically  targeted,  and  only
           arrested as part of a mass arrest.

   15. It is apparent from paragraphs 18 to 20 of the  Refusal  Letter  that
       the respondent conceded that the appellant was arrested and  detained
       in the way he claimed with the only qualification being that  he  was
       not specifically targeted and was arrested as part of a mass  arrest.
       In using the phrase "in the way that you claim"  the  respondent  has
       made it clear that the appellant's account of his detention and  what
       happened to him whilst detained is not disputed and falls within  the
       concession.

   16. Mr Stauton, in his submissions,  referred  to  paragraph  17  of  the
       Refusal Letter. However,  this  is  in  the  section  of  the  letter
       concerning UDPS Membership and does not pertain  to  the  arrest  and
       detention of the appellant.

   17. The FtT judge recognised that the respondent had  made  a  concession
       with respect to the appellant's  detention.  At  paragraph  [37]  she
       noted  "that  the  Home  Office  have  accepted  the  appellant...was
       detained for three days in March of 2013."  She  also,  in  the  same
       paragraph, stated that she accepted the respondent's position.

   18. However, despite the judge's comment at the start of  paragraph  [37]
       that she "accepted" the respondent's  position  in  relation  to  the
       appellant's detention, it is clear from her  decision  that  she  did
       not. There can be no doubt, in reading the decision, that the judge's
       view was that the appellant was not detained or abused and  that  his
       evidence in respect of this lacked credibility. The judge's  findings
       in this regard are set out in paragraph  [37(6)],  where  she  states
       (emphasis added):

           "When the appellant comes to the UK in July of that  year  again
           he makes no mention of the arrest, detention and assault to  the
           UK immigration  authorities.  If  the  appellant  seriously  had
           experienced this assault and detention then I am at a total loss
           as to why he made no application for asylum immediately [sic] he
           arrived in the UK ... When asked in cross examination why he had
           not claimed asylum during this visit the appellant  stated  that
           he had not seen the need and he hoped to return to South Africa.
           This explanation clearly  indicates  to  me  that  nothing  much
           happened in the DRC  during  his  visit  and  despite  the  Home
           Office's Statement that they accept  the  detention  occurred  I
           find it implausible that if the detention did  result  that  the
           appellant would state that he saw no need to claim asylum  three
           months later upon arriving in the UK (after as he  claims  being
           beaten and sexually abused). This evidence lacks credibility."

   19. The judge's findings in relation to the appellant's detention, as set
       out in paragraph [37(6)] of the decision, are incompatible  with  the
       concession made by the respondent and which she purports  to  accept.
       Having formed a view as to the detention of the  appellant  that  was
       contrary to the concession made by the respondent, it  was  incumbent
       on the judge to advise the parties and give them  an  opportunity  to
       make submissions accordingly and to not do so amounts to an error  of
       law.

   20.  Having  regard  to  Section  12(2)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts   and
       Enforcement Act 2007 and the President's Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
       as extensive findings of fact will be required in  a  reconsideration
       of the appellant's credibility, the matter should be remitted to  the
       First-tier Tribunal for re-making.

 Decision

   21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error  of
       law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and  the  appeal
       heard afresh.

   22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  afresh
       before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Verity.

   23. An anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 26 October 2015               |

