
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01864/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2015                            |On 02 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               BT (Sri Lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by H K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  a  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as
    otherwise requiring international  or  human  rights  protection.   The
    First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction,  and  I  am  satisfied
    that the appellant should be accorded anonymity for  these  proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date  of  birth  is  15
    November 1977.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on  6th  January  2009
    with a student visa valid until 31st October  2010.   He  extended  his
    student visa until 31 December 2013, but on 26 March 2012 the  decision
    was made to curtail his leave  because  the  licence  of  the  teaching
    institution at  which  he  was  studying  was  revoked.   However  this
    decision to curtail his leave was not served on the appellant,  and  so
    as far as he was concerned he had extant leave until 31 December  2013.
    On 11 December 2013 he made an appointment to claim asylum, and he  did
    so on 10 January 2014.

 3. The appellant's case was that he had joined the LTTE in the year  2000.
    For about four months he underwent training at a camp  in  Mullaittivu.
    He was taught how to handle an AK47 and to throw grenades, but was  not
    involved in armed combat.  He was then sent to an  administrative  unit
    for about four months, where he arranged transport facilities, food and
    clothing for LTTE cadets, and registered new LTTE members.

 4. The appellant then went to Jaffna University in or about October  2000.
    While attending university, he was involved in activities promoting the
    aims and objectives of the LTTE.  He completed his university course in
    2005.  The LTTE found the appellant a job with the World Food Programme
    in Kilinochchi.  He was meant to  inform  the  LTTE  about  Tamils  who
    worked with the army.  The appellant held this job until  about  August
    2006.

 5. From March to December 2007 the  appellant  worked  with  the  ICRC  in
    Jaffna.  Whilst working there, he informed the LTTE about what security
    there was on the Jaffna road, and told them whether or not it was  safe
    for them to travel.

 6. From December 2007 the appellant worked for an  architect  in  Colombo.
    While in Colombo, he assisted the LTTE by arranging accommodation,  and
    also by supporting member families with money which the LTTE  deposited
    into his bank account.  In 2008 the appellant was arrested  in  Colombo
    by the police during a roundup.  He was beaten  ten  to  fifteen  times
    with batons, rifle  butts,  sticks  and  wires  and  was  released  the
    following day after  his  fingerprints  had  been  taken.   During  his
    detention the appellant did not admit to being a member  of  the  LTTE.
    The appellant left Sri Lanka for the  UK  without  any  problems  on  5
    January 2009.

 7. In 2012 the appellant's mother informed the appellant that his  brother
    B had been arrested in January 2012 as a result of the appellant's LTTE
    involvement.  During a search of the family home, the  army  had  found
    the appellant's national identity card.  The appellant  also  spoke  to
    his brother, who told him that he had been detained for two weeks after
    being brutally tortured by the army.  He was shown the appellant's LTTE
    membership photograph  during  his  questioning.   His  brother  B  was
    released on condition that he reported every month  to  Elavali  Police
    Station.  The appellant had taken an overdose in November 2013  because
    he was so upset about his brother and his own future.  He suffered from
    depression.

 8. While living in the UK, the appellant  had  participated  in  UN  peace
    demonstrations about twice or three times a year.  He was a  member  of
    the British Tamil Forum which was banned by the Sri Lankan  Government,
    and he had assisted the British Tamil Forum since  May  2009.   He  had
    also been involved with the Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam and
    was a member of Tamil Youth Cultural Affairs.

 9. The appellant's screening interview took place on 10 January  2014  and
    his substantive asylum interview took place on 20 January 2014.   On  6
    March 2014 the respondent gave her reasons for refusing  to  grant  him
    asylum, and to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  She also  certified  the
    claim as clearly unfounded under  Section  94(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Eban sitting  at  Richmond  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on 11 July 2014.  The appellant was represented
    by Mrs Poynor of Counsel, and the  respondent  was  represented  by  Mr
    Vaghela, Home Office Presenting Officer.

11. In her subsequent determination, Judge Eban began by  setting  out  the
    respective cases  of  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.   She  then
    addressed the medical  evidence  relied  on  by  the  appellant,  which
    consisted of a psychiatric report from Dr Morrison dated 8 May 2014 and
    a scarring report by Mr Martin dated 6 December 2014.  At paragraph 15,
    she considered the background evidence in  the  Sri  Lanka  OGN  issued
    August 2009 as to what was happening in 2008 when the appellant said he
    was detained.

12. The judge's findings of credibility and fact begin at paragraph 16.  At
    paragraph 20 she said:

         I have considered the  evidence  as  a  whole.   This  includes  an
         assessment of the claimant's account  of  events  set  against  the
         relevant background in the  light  of  the  appellant's  individual
         position  and  personal  circumstances  as  well  as  the   medical
         evidence.  I have considered all the respondent's criticisms of the
         appellant's evidence which  are  said  to  go  to  the  appellant's
         credibility.

    After identifying those aspects of the account which she accepted,  the
    judge said  she  had  concerns  about  whether  other  aspects  of  the
    appellant's account of what occurred  to  him  were  reliable  for  the
    following cumulative reasons which were  set  out  in  no  particularly
    order, and some of which were overlapping.  The judge then proceeded in
    numbered subparagraphs running from subparagraph 1 to subparagraph  15,
    and ranging over four closely typed A4 pages, to set  out  her  reasons
    for reaching an adverse finding on the credibility of the core  of  the
    appellant's claim.

13. She summarised her findings at paragraph 21, page 14.  She accepted the
    appellant was detained during a general roundup in Colombo in 2008.  He
    was fingerprinted and released within 24 hours.  He had scarring on his
    back from  being  beaten.   But  she  did  not  consider  there  was  a
    reasonable likelihood that the scarring  was  the  result  of  beatings
    while the appellant was in detention in 2008.  He had left Sri Lanka on
    his own passport in January  2009.   He  had  attended  peaceful  Tamil
    demonstrations  in  the  UK.   He  was  not  an  organiser   of   these
    demonstrations or a fundraiser.  He  was  not  involved  in  separatist
    activities.  There was not a reasonable likelihood that his  brother  B
    was detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  described  by  the
    appellant.

14. The judge addressed the issue  of  risk  on  return  at  paragraphs  22
    following.  He had had a low level involvement with the LTTE, and there
    was no evidence that his family members are or had been associated with
    Tamil separatism; and he had not had a  significant  role  in  diaspora
    activities designed to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state and  to
    revive the internal armed conflict.  He found  the  appellant  was  not
    someone for whom there was a real risk of being stopped and  questioned
    at the airport or thereafter in the community.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. Extensive grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal were  settled  by  Ms
    Jegarajah of Counsel.

16. Ground (i) was that the judge had erred in failing to follow the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010  regarding  child,  vulnerable
    adult and sensitive witnesses.  In breach of the  guidance,  the  judge
    was required to classify the appellant as a vulnerable  person  and  to
    decide credibility in that context.

17. Ground  (ii)  was  that  the  judge  had  exhibited  a  disposition  to
    disbelieve at paragraph 20(2) of the determination.

18. Ground (iii) was the judge had misinterpreted the  background  material
    relative to ill-treatment in detention in Sri Lanka.

19. Ground (iv) was that it was irrational for the judge to place weight on
    the fact that the appellant had not reported  his  alleged  assault  to
    anyone.

20. Ground (v) was that  in  relying  on  the  absence  of  contemporaneous
    medical evidence of treatment for these scars, the judge was applying a
    standard of proof in excess of what was required.

21. Ground (vi) was that the judge had failed to give proper weight to  the
    appellant's attendance at demonstrations in the UK and to consider this
    in the light of relevant country guidance.

22. Ground (vii) was that the judge had failed  to  make  any  findings  on
    whether the appellant would face risk on return as a former  member  of
    an NGO.

23. Ground (viii) was that the judge had failed to make a specific  finding
    on the potential risk arising from mere membership  of  two  proscribed
    organisations.

24. Ground (x)  was  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account
    corroborating documents with respect to the appellant's brother R,  who
    had  been  arrested  by  security  forces  on  18th  April  2014.   The
    appellant's mother told a member of the Provincial Council that  R  was
    badly tortured and was questioned not only about his own  participation
    in LTTE activities, but also about  the  appellant's  participation  in
    LTTE activities.

25. I have left out ground (ix) as it does not identify a separate  alleged
    error of law, but appears to be a gloss on ground (viii).

The Initial Refusal of Permission

26. On 7 August 2014 Designated Judge Baird refused  permission  to  appeal
    for the following reasons:

         The determination in this case is comprehensive and  clearly  well-
         considered.  The medical evidence before the judge does not  in  my
         view indicate that the appellant was a vulnerable person and I  can
         see no record of any submission to that effect having been made  at
         the start of the hearing.  Ground (ii) has no  merit.   This  issue
         was dealt with adequately.  There may  be  some  merit  in  grounds
         (iii), (iv) and (v) but even if there is,  these  points  are  not,
         looking at the determination as a whole, material to the outcome of
         the appeal.  Contrary to what is said in the grounds the judge  did
         consider at length the appellant's attendance at demonstrations  in
         the UK, his membership of the two organisations and his account  of
         his  brother's  difficulties.   She  applied  the  correct  country
         guidance.  I can see no mention in the appellant's  statement,  the
         refusal letter or the appellant's skeleton argument  of  membership
         of an NGO and so see no merit in ground (vii).

The Renewed Application for Permission to Appeal

27. Ms Jegarajah settled a renewed application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The ICRC was a well-known international NGO.   The
    medical evidence as a matter of law rendered the appellant a vulnerable
    person.  Vulnerable adult had the same meaning as in  the  Safeguarding
    Vulnerable Groups Act 2006.  Section 59 of the Safeguarding  Vulnerable
    Groups Act defined a vulnerable adult as follows:

         A person is a vulnerable adult if he has attained the age of 18 and
         ... some individuals are vulnerable because of what has happened to
         them e.g. they are victims of trafficking or of  sustained  serious
         harm or torture or are suffering from PTSD.

28. Given that the consultant psychiatrist had made a clinical finding that
    the appellant was suffering from a major depressive episode and was  at
    an increased risk of suicide, the appellant was a  vulnerable  witness.
    Even if the submission relating to the vulnerable witness guidance  was
    not made at the hearing, there was a clear expectation that Judge  Eban
    would apply the Presidential Guidance without it being  identified  and
    relied on.

The Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

29. On 8 December 2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  said  she  found  it
    appropriate to grant permission "in light of the argument as to whether
    [the judge] should have considered that the appellant was a  vulnerable
    person for the purpose of these proceedings".

The Rule 24 Response

30. On 24 December 2014 Mr Tufan of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  a
    Rule 24 response on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  opposing  the
    appeal.  He relied on Judge Baird's refusal of permission.   There  was
    no evidence to suggest the appellant was a vulnerable person,  and  the
    medical  evidence  did  not  specifically  suggest  as  such.   In  her
    comprehensive determination Judge Eban considered the evidence and made
    reasoned findings.  The judge had applied  the  ratio  of  the  country
    guidance case of GJ and there were no material errors  of  law  in  her
    determination.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

31. At the hearing before me,  Ms  Jegarajah  abandoned  grounds  (ii)  and
    (iii).  She also abandoned part of ground (x), which was the  criticism
    contained in paragraph 37 of the grounds. She indicated that she wished
    to pursue the remaining grounds.

32. Ms Kenny submitted that the appellant only  had  permission  to  pursue
    ground (i).  But, being mindful of the case of Ferrer,  I  declined  to
    treat the other grounds as being inadmissible.

Discussion

33. I am not persuaded that the judge should have treated the appellant  as
    a vulnerable adult witness, or that she erred in law in  not  including
    in her determination a discussion as to the applicability of the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note of 2010.

34. The definition of a vulnerable adult given in the  renewed  application
    for permission appears to be  an  amalgam  of  definitions  taken  from
    different sources. More pertinent is the definition given in  paragraph
    20 of the guidance itself:

         This guidance applies to children and young persons under  the  age
         of 18, who appear to be under the age of 18 or claim  to  be  under
         the age of 18, individuals who suffer from a mental disorder within
         the meaning  of  the  Mental  Health  Act  1983  or  who  have  any
         significant impairment of intelligence or social function  such  as
         to  inhibit  understanding  and  participation  in  proceedings  or
         learning disability or as defined in  the  Safeguarding  Vulnerable
         Groups Act 2006 or who are vulnerable because of external factors.

35. The premise of Ms Jegarajah's main error of law  challenge  is  that  a
    person who suffers from depression is ipso facto a vulnerable  witness.
    This is wholly fallacious.  Dr  Morrison  diagnosed  the  appellant  as
    suffering from  a  major  depressive  episode  which  was  moderate  in
    severity.  He found that the appellant's depression appeared to  be  in
    response to recent stressful life events, rather than any ill-treatment
    which he had personally suffered in the past.   He  did  not  meet  the
    criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder.  Furthermore, based on his
    interview with the appellant, he was of the opinion that the  appellant
    was able to comprehend court proceedings, give evidence and give proper
    instructions  to  his  legal  representatives.   Dr  Morrison   further
    observed that the intensity of the  appellant's  depression  had  eased
    "with a combination of antidepressant treatment and  counselling".   He
    was not currently suicidal.  But as  he  was  still  suffering  from  a
    depressive disorder,  he  was  at  an  increased  statistical  risk  of
    suicide. Dr Morrison did not opine that  the  appellant  was  suffering
    from a mental disorder within the meaning of the Mental Health Act 1983
    or that he had any significant impairment  in  intelligence  or  social
    function.

36. Paragraph 14 of the guidance  cited  by  Ms  Jegarajah  in  ground  (i)
    provides inter alia as follows: "Where there were  clear  discrepancies
    in  the  oral  evidence,  consider  the  extent  to  which   the   age,
    vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness  was  an  element  of  that
    discrepancy or lack of clarity."

37. A notable feature of this case is that the judge  does  not  appear  to
    have based her adverse credibility findings on any asserted discrepancy
    in the appellant's oral evidence.  Insofar  as  the  judge's  reasoning
    relies on inconsistencies, they  are  not  internal  ones  (such  as  a
    discrepancy between what  the  appellant  said  in  his  oral  evidence
    against what he said in interview) but  upon  external  inconsistencies
    between his narrative and the background material.

38. It is apparent from the judge's self-direction at paragraph 20 that she
    took full account of the fact that the  appellant  was  suffering  from
    depression in her overall assessment of the  credibility  of  the  core
    claim.  As the appellant  was  legally  represented  and  was  not  put
    forward as a vulnerable witness, the judge  did  not  have  a  duty  to
    consider whether the Joint Presidential Guidance applied, still less to
    follow the guidance to the letter, such as formally  recording  whether
    in her view the appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness  or  not.  Under
    paragraph 5 of the guidance the primary  responsibility  lay  with  the
    appellant's legal representatives to put the  appellant  forward  as  a
    vulnerable witness.

39. It is convenient to address ground (v) next, as it also relates to  the
    judge's approach to  the  medical  evidence.   The  judge  observed  in
    subparagraph (6) of paragraph 20  that  there  was  no  contemporaneous
    medical evidence of treatment for the scars, and she  found  that  this
    lack of independent corroborating evidence led her to doubt even to the
    lower standard that the appellant's scars stemmed  from  a  beating  in
    December 2008.  Ms Jegarajah submits that this was not a finding  which
    was open to the judge, as there was independent medical  evidence  from
    Mr Martin as to the likely cause of the appellant's scarring.

40. But Ms Jegarajah's challenge ignores the fact that the judge  addressed
    Mr Martin's report in subparagraph (4) of paragraph 20.  She  noted  Mr
    Martin's view that the scars on the appellant's  back  occurred  a  few
    years ago.  She contrasted this opinion with the following  passage  in
    KV (Scarring - medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC):

         Whilst the medical literature continues to consider  that  scarring
         cannot be dated beyond 6 months from when it was  inflicted,  there
         is some medical basis for considering in relation to certain  types
         of cases that its age can be determined up to 2 years.

41. It is clear from this passage, and from what the judge  says  elsewhere
    in her determination, that she is not disputing that Mr Martin's report
    constitutes independent medical evidence as to the likely cause of  the
    scarring observed by him on the appellant's back, namely  that  it  was
    deliberately inflicted by a third party.  What the judge is driving  at
    in subparagraph (4) of paragraph  20  is  that  little  weight  can  be
    attached to Mr Martin's opinion as to when  the  scarring  took  place,
    beyond the fact that it must have taken place at least two years before
    he undertook his clinical examination.  Since,  according  to  KV,  the
    scarring could have occurred at any time up  to  two  years  previously
    (for example, ten years previously),  the  absence  of  contemporaneous
    medical evidence of the appellant receiving treatment for  fresh  scars
    in or shortly after December 2008 was a highly  relevant  consideration
    to which the judge was entitled to attach considerable weight.

42. Although not canvassed in the grounds of appeal, Ms Jegarajah also took
    issue with the judge's  line  of  reasoning  in  subparagraph  (12)  of
    paragraph 20.  The judge referred to what Dr Morrison had  recorded  in
    his report as to why the appellant had taken an overdose of paracetamol
    which had led to him being  admitted  to  Royal  Free  Hospital  on  25
    November 2013.  According to what the appellant told  Dr  Morrison,  he
    had found out two days before about  his  brother's  B's  capture.   Dr
    Morrison observed  that  this  appeared  to  be  the  trigger  for  the
    overdose.  However, as the judge noted, the  evidence  adduced  by  the
    appellant was that B had been arrested on  21  January  2012.   So  the
    appellant did not take an overdose two days after he  found  out  about
    his brother's capture, as recorded by Dr Morrison.  This  indicated  to
    the judge that the appellant sought to mislead Dr  Morrison,  or  there
    was some misunderstanding.  Either way,  Dr  Morrison's  diagnosis  was
    based on erroneous facts.

43. Ms Jegarajah submits that this finding by the  judge  is  erroneous  in
    law, as Dr Morrison's diagnosis of depression was based on  a  clinical
    observation of the appellant's presentation and demeanour.  But this is
    only partially true.  His diagnosis is also based  on  the  appellant's
    account of the development of his symptoms, and his account of what led
    to him taking an  overdose.   The  central  finding  in  Dr  Morrison's
    psychiatric report is that the appellant's current  depressive  episode
    is likely to have been triggered by news of his  brother's  arrest  and
    ill-treatment in detention.  Since, on the appellant's  own  case,  his
    brother had been arrested and ill-treated 18 months before he  took  an
    overdose, it was an entirely legitimate observation for  the  judge  to
    make that Dr Morrison had made his diagnosis as to  the  cause  of  the
    appellant's depression on a false factual basis.

44. Ground (iv) is the only other ground which I have not  considered  thus
    far which Designated Judge Baird said might have some  merit.   At  the
    beginning of subparagraph (6) of paragraph 20 the judge  observed  that
    the appellant did not report his alleged assault in detention  in  2008
    "to anyone".  Ms Jegarajah submits that this is an irrational  finding,
    as it was the state authorities who had perpetrated the torture, and it
    would be the state authorities to whom he would have to complain.   But
    the judge did not specify that the appellant should have  reported  the
    alleged assault to the authorities.  "Anyone" includes a lawyer,  human
    rights organisation or doctor.   As  the  judge  went  on  to  note  in
    subparagraph (11), the alleged arrest of  B  on  21  January  2012  was
    allegedly reported to Mr Kuganeswaran, attorney  at  law,  immediately.
    Given the level of ill-treatment that the  appellant  claimed  to  have
    suffered in detention, it was open to the judge to attach weight to the
    fact that the appellant had not made a contemporaneous  report  of  his
    alleged ill-treatment in detention to anyone.

45. Grounds (vi), (vii), (viii) and (ix) all have a common theme, which  is
    that the judge erred in law in her assessment of risk on  return.   The
    NGO  apparently  referred  to  in  ground  (vii)  is  the  ICRC.    The
    appellant's case is that he worked with  the  ICRC  in  Jaffna  between
    March and December 2007, not that he was a  member  of  the  ICRC,  and
    certainly not that he continued to be a member of the ICRC.  I consider
    that all the grounds of challenge on the issue of risk on return are no
    more than  an  expression  of  disagreement  with  findings  that  were
    reasonably open to the judge in the light of her  primary  findings  of
    fact and having regard to  the  country  guidance  of  GJ  and  Others.
    Although the appellant stated in his witness  statement  that  his  sur
    place activities in the UK were significant,  during  cross-examination
    he accepted he did not write, blog,  give  speeches  on  platforms,  or
    otherwise lead opposition.  He attended demonstrations and occasionally
    handed out leaflets:  see  paragraph  20(14).   The  evidence  did  not
    establish that the appellant had been a  supporter  or  member  of  the
    British Tamils Forum before 2014:  see  paragraph  20(14).   The  judge
    rightly  proceeded  on  the  premise  that,  given  the   sophisticated
    intelligence available  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  within  and
    without Sri Lanka, they  would  know  what  separatist  activities  the
    appellant had undertaken in Sri Lanka and what his activities had  been
    in  the  United  Kingdom.   Notwithstanding   his   (recent)   declared
    involvement in the banned British Tamils Forum, which  the  authorities
    in Sri Lanka would already presumptively know about, it was open to the
    judge to find that he would not be perceived as  having  a  significant
    role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora,
    and therefore he was not someone for whom there  was  a  real  risk  of
    being stopped and questioned  at  the  airport  or  thereafter  in  the
    community.

46. The surviving part of ground (x) is a complaint that the  judge  failed
    to take into account the corroborative evidence  of  a  member  of  the
    Provincial Council who purported to confirm what the appellant's mother
    had told him about the arrest on  18  April  2014  of  the  appellant's
    brother R.

47. Although not cited to me, I have had regard to Muse &  Others  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 on challenges to the adequacy of a
    judge's reasons.  In South Bucks District Council v Porter  (2)  [2004]
    UKHL 33, cited with approval by the Court of Appeal  at  paragraph  33,
    Lord Brown said:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration.

48. The judge was not bound to make  a  specific  finding  on  R's  alleged
    arrest, which was only a subsidiary aspect of  the  appellant's  claim.
    Furthermore, it is tolerably clear that the judge rejected this  aspect
    of the appellant's claim for the reasons canvassed in paragraph  10  of
    the decision.  Mr Vaghela submitted that the alleged arrest  of  R  was
    incredible.  The claim was that R had been arrested when he  went  back
    to Sri Lanka to visit their sick sister, and had then fled  to  the  UK
    upon his release.  But there was no evidence that R was in the  UK,  or
    that he had made an asylum claim.  R had not attended  the  hearing  to
    support the appeal.  Mr Vaghela said that prior to the hearing  he  had
    undertaken a check, and had found 50 people with the same name  as  the
    appellant's brother R.  He was not able to identify whether any one  of
    them was the appellant's brother, as he did not have R's asserted  date
    of birth.

49. I have reviewed the judge's very detailed typed Record of  Proceedings,
    and it appears that Ms Poynor accepted in her closing submissions  that
    there was no evidence that R was here, or that he  had  claimed  asylum
    or, if he had, his reasons for claiming asylum.  She also  acknowledged
    that R was not here to support the appellant, and there was no  witness
    statement from him.  There is no indication from the typed record  that
    Ms Poynor nonetheless sought to persuade  the  judge  that  she  should
    attribute some probative value to the letter from  the  member  of  the
    Provincial  Council,  in  circumstances  where  there   had   been   an
    inexplicable failure to adduce direct evidence from R.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  The appellant's appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 30 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

