
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01442/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    L D K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order, which follows a similar order made in  the
       First-tier Tribunal, to prevent the possibility of  publicity  about
       this appeal creating  a  risk  for  the  appellant  that  would  not
       otherwise exist.

   1. This is an appeal by a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
      against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal
      against a decision of the respondent on 18 February 2014 refusing  her
      claim  for  asylum.   The  appeal  has  previously   been   determined
      unsatisfactorily.  I am concerned  with  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge A M Black promulgated on 20 June  2016.  Permission  to
      appeal was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  given  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Freeman on 4 October 2016.  The material parts  of  his
      order are in the following terms:
  "2. However, the renewed grounds present no fresh arguments on the asylum
  and human rights case dealt with by the permission judge, and  I  see  no
  reasons to grant the application on that point.
  3. The hearing judge has treated as abandoned the case put forward in the
  skeleton argument for the appellant, to the effect that she would  be  at
  real risk on return as a member of  a  'particular  social  group'  as  a
  ''female failed asylum seeker' [FFAS], on the basis (see  paragraphs  64-
  65) that it had not been pursued by counsel,  either  there  or  in  oral
  argument, and was not supported by any background evidence.
  4. While the judge was arguably wrong to treat that point  as  abandoned,
  without confirming that with counsel, it will be  for  the  appellant  to
  make a positive case before the Upper Tribunal that doing so  involved  a
  material error of law."

   2. Mr Amunwa had settled the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
      and the renewed grounds to the Upper Tribunal.  It is  clear  that  he
      wanted to argue two points. Ground 1 might be summarised fairly as  "a
      failure to have regard to relevant evidence" which is  how  he  framed
      the point in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and  the
      second ground can be described  as  "a  failure  to  resolve  material
      conflicts of fact".

   3. It is plain to me beyond all reasonable argument  that  Judge  Freeman
      did not intend to give permission to argue  anything  other  than  the
      point summarised above which reflects  the  alleged  failure  to  have
      regard to relevant evidence.

   4. It is correct that Judge Freeman did not state in terms  that  he  had
      given permission solely on that ground.   Neither  did  he  state,  as
      judges often do, that although  he  had  given  detailed  reasons  for
      giving permission on a particular ground all grounds might be  argued.
      I find that when paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of Judge Freeman's reasons  are
      read together  the  only  sensible  conclusions  is  that  he  limited
      permission to the point that he had identified and excluded permission
      on other points because, in his judgment, they  had  been  dealt  with
      adequately  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   who   had   refused
      permission.

   5. The key paragraph of Judge Black's decision is at 64 where she said:
  "It is submitted in the appellant's counsel's skeleton argument that  'as
  a female failed asylum seeker ('FFAS'), the objective evidence shows that
  she forms part of a PSG which faces  a  real  risk  of  persecution  upon
  return ..." However counsel does  not  expand  upon  this  in  subsequent
  paragraphs in his skeleton argument;  nor  did  he  do  so  in  his  oral
  submissions. I have not been referred to any such  "background  evidence"
  to demonstrate the appellant could be considered a member of  a  PSG.   I
  therefore find that this aspect of the appeal has been abandoned. In  any
  event, I am unable to find that the appellant,  a  female  failed  asylum
  seeker, is a member of a particular social group."

   6. I must respectfully disagree with Judge Black when she said  that  the
      point had been abandoned.  I do not think it  was  developed  in  oral
      argument but the skeleton argument should be considered unless  it  is
      clear that the relevant party did not wish to rely upon it.  Whilst  I
      recognise the attraction of  an  argument  that  says  that  the  very
      essence of abandoning something is doing nothing with it,  abandonment
      is not a fair description of a point raised in a skeleton argument but
      not developed.

   7. I appreciate that Judge Black did not content herself with saying that
      the point had been abandoned.  She  continued  "In  any  event,  I  am
      unable to find that the appellant, as a  failed  asylum  seeker  is  a
      member of a particular social group."

   8. Mr Whitwell submitted that  the  judge  had  in  fact  considered  the
      possibility of the appellant being at risk as a failed  female  asylum
      seeker and had rejected that argument.

   9. I will consider that proposition against a review of the determination
      as a whole.

  10. The appellant identified herself as a 31-year-old  female  citizen  of
      the DRC.  She claimed to  be  at  risk  because  of  things  that  had
      happened to her and her father who she described as a prominent figure
      in the MLC (Mouvement de Liberation du Congo).  Much of  the  Decision
      and Reasons explains why Judge Black did not believe  the  appellant's
      evidence.

  11. At paragraph 59 the judge refereed to the country guidance case of  BM
      and Others (Returnees - criminal and non  criminal)  DRC  (CG)  [2015]
      00293 (IAC) but decided that a national of the DRC  who  was  returned
      after unsuccessfully seeking asylum in the United Kingdom  would  not,
      without more, risk persecution as a result.

  12. This of course is  a  precise  answer  to  the  point  raised  by  the
      appellant but does not show any consideration of the evidence on which
      she relied. The skeleton argument dated 20 November 2015 prepared  for
      the First-tier Tribunal hearing, refers to a report from Freedom  From
      Torture and also to other documents.  The Freedom From Torture  report
      was particularly relied upon. It is dated June 2014.  I have read  the
      whole report. The high-water mark  from  the  appellant's  perspective
      appears to be under the heading "Research Findings: Survivor Profile".
       It dealt with reports of women who had been tortured in the DRC after
      2006.  The report states:
  "The majority of these women were targeted for detention as a  result  of
  their political profile, or that of a member of their family, as  members
  or  supporters  of  a  legitimate  political  party  or   civil   society
  organisation".

  13. Mr Amunwa argued that if  the  majority  were  in  trouble  for  these
      reasons then some were in trouble for other reasons. As  a  matter  of
      logic this is unimpeachable. However, the subsequent sentence states:
  "A smaller number of women were targeted due to an association with armed
  groups or with the Bundu Dia Kongo (BDK) political- religious movement."

  14. Whilst the report regards travel from abroad to have been a factor  in
      their detention  either  on  arrival  or  soon  afterwards,  the  only
      recorded example, as I read  the  report,  of  a  person  who  had  no
      previous detention or political activity was the wife of a person with
      a political profile. It should not be thought that I  am  in  any  way
      dismissing the importance of the report.   It  gives  apparently  very
      well researched details of women who have been hideously  ill-treated.
      Whilst their being raped is probably the  worst  part  of  their  ill-
      treatment, it is  only  one  element  in  a  catalogue  of  obnoxious,
      degrading, humiliating and painful acts of  abuse.  However  there  is
      nothing I can see in that report that supports a  finding  that  women
      generally or this appellant in particular would be at risk  simply  by
      reason of being returned.  It may well be that  return  combined  with
      other factors does create a risk because the act of  return  tends  to
      draw someone to the attention of the authorities but that is not  what
      this case is about.

  15. As the appellant plainly  recognises,  the  Tribunal  decided  in  the
      country guidance case of BM and Others (Returnees - criminal  and  non
      criminal) DRC (CG) [2015] 00293 (IAC) that there was no  general  risk
      in the event of return.  I accept that that country guidance case  was
      prompted by a view that was probably  attributable  properly  to  some
      loose talk, that all returnees  to  the  DRC  risk  ill-treatment.   I
      accept that the focus of the decision in BM is a little way  from  the
      point that this appellant was making, namely that she is a risk  as  a
      member of a particular social group. However, at  the  risk  of  being
      repetitive, I  can  find  nothing  in  the  background  material  that
      supports the proposition that women without a political profile are at
      risk simply by reason of being returned.

  16. It follows therefore that I can see no way in which the  appeal  could
      have been allowed even bearing in mind the low standard of proof.

  17. I  find  on  reflection  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  did,
      technically,  err  in  law  because  she  thought,  wrongly,  that   a
      particular strand of  argument  had  been  abandoned.   The  error  is
      material in the strict sense that I can only remedy it by  considering
      the evidence which I have done.

  18. I therefore allow the appeal to the very limited  extent  that  I  set
      aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  the  judge
      omitted to consider a particular point.  I have considered  the  point
      and I resolve it against the appellant.

  19. It follows that the appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
      is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

  20. I set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  because  the  Judge
      wrongly thought that a point had been abandoned, I consider the  point
      and I dismiss the appeal against the Respondent's decision.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 November 2016               |








