

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01896/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On Wednesday 30 September 2015        |                On Tuesday 6 October |
|                                      |2015                                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr P Haywood, Counsel

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a  protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department.
   For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were  in  the
   First-Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
   Appellant in this particular appeal.

2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sri Lanka.  He  is  Tamil  and  Hindu.
   He arrived in the UK on 22 September 2009 as a student with  leave  valid
   until 27 November 2012.  He  claimed  asylum  on  27  November  2012.   A
   decision was made on 12 January 2015 to refuse his claim  and  to  remove
   him to Sri Lanka.

3. The Appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Malley
   in a decision promulgated on 11 June 2015 ("the  Decision").   Permission
   to appeal was granted to the Respondent by Fist-tier Tribunal Judge Astle
   on 6 July 2015 on the basis that the Judge's findings were not adequately
   reasoned in the light of present country guidance in GJ and others (post-
   civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  ("GJ")  and
   that the Judge had failed to engage with  the  guidance  in  relation  to
   "post-conflict Tamil separatism" in GJ.

4. The matter comes before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  determine  whether  the
   First-tier Tribunal Decision involved the making of an error of law.

5. The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim is set out  in  detail  in  the
   Decision at [17] as is his oral evidence [18 - 32], the Respondent's case
   [33] and the submissions [55].  No issue is taken by the Respondent  with
   the Judge's credibility findings.  The essence of  the  protection  claim
   insofar as relevant to my decision is that the Appellant is a  Tamil  who
   has been involved in the past with LTTE activities and  was  detained  on
   that account  once  in  2008  (for  approximately  one  week)  and  again
   following abduction from  his  home  in  2009  (for  approximately  three
   months) during which period he  was  ill-treated.   He  was  released  on
   payment of a bribe.  He has  an  uncle  and  a  close  friend  with  LTTE
   connections who it is accepted were killed on this account  in  2007  and
   2008.  The Sri Lankan authorities have visited the  Appellant's  parents'
   house seeking the Appellant since early  2014.  The  Appellant  has  been
   involved in some demonstrations whilst in the UK but the Judge found that
   those would not have been at a significant enough level for him to be  at
   risk on that account alone.

   Submissions

6. I do not need to set out the submissions made in full  as  there  was  no
   disagreement between the representatives  as  to  the  substance  of  the
   guidance given in GJ.  The disagreement arose as to the  impact  of  that
   guidance  on  this  case.   Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the  Judge   had
   misunderstood that a person's past history no longer gave  rise  to  risk
   and had accepted that the Appellant's profile whilst in the UK was not at
   a sufficient  level  to  give  rise  to  that  risk.   He  criticised  in
   particular [57] of the Decision which is in the following terms:-
           "I have considered the objective  information  provided  by  the
           appellant and find that it is consistent with the conclusions of
           GJ.  I find therefore that Tamils are at risk and  most  closely
           scrutinised for their involvement with LTTE and activities which
           the GOSL considers  destabilising  may  be  at  risk  on  return
           (sic)."
   I put it to Mr Jarvis that what the Judge might have meant  by  this  was
   that the objective evidence and guidance in GJ showed that  an  appellant
   who was Tamil with past LTTE involvement might, based on a combination of
   that profile and some activity in the diaspora, (on the  lower  standard)
   be at risk on return.  Mr Jarvis fairly accepted that if this is what was
   meant, he could not complain.  He did not read the paragraph  however  in
   that way.  He accepted that the judgment in MP (Sri Lanka)  and  NT  (Sri
   Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  829
   ("MP") was to the effect  that  a  historic  profile  when  coupled  with
   current activities might be sufficient to give rise to a risk on  return.



7. Mr Jarvis pointed to [77] to [79] and to the finding I have  noted  above
   that the Appellant's activities in the UK were not sufficient to create a
   risk.  He submitted that the Judge's focus was on  the  Appellant's  past
   history.  The decision in GJ showed that the  intelligence  available  to
   the Sri Lankan authorities  is  sophisticated  and  would  lead  them  to
   disregard a historic profile if there is no perception that a person is a
   destabilising influence currently.   The issue is whether  an  individual
   is of adverse interest to the authorities  currently  and  there  was  no
   indication that the Judge considered this.

8. Mr Haywood pointed to the facts of the NT  case  in  MP  which  were  not
   dissimilar to the facts here.  There, the Appellant had  a  past  history
   which the Court of Appeal held might be  enough  when  coupled  with  low
   level current activity in the UK to give rise to a risk  on  return.   In
   that case, the Appellant's historic profile was in fact at a lower  level
   than this Appellant's.  Mr Haywood accepted that [57] of the Decision was
   not well  expressed.   However,  he  drew  my  attention  to  [82]  which
   indicated that what the Judge was considering was a  combination  of  the
   Appellant's historic  profile,  the  continuing  interest  shown  by  the
   authorities seeking the Appellant out at his parents' house and  his  low
   level activity in the UK.  Paragraph [82] is in the following terms:-
           "I find that the appellant would be at real risk of  persecution
           or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.   I  am  not  satisfied,
           even on the lower standard, that he comes within the  definition
           at GJ - 7(a) "individuals who are, or are  perceived  to  be,  a
           threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  because
           they are, or  are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
           relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within  the  diaspora
           and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka".   However,  I
           do find that as a person suspected of  certain  links  with  the
           Liberation Tigers of  Tamil  Eelam  and  as  a  person  who  has
           previously been detained and ill-treated  and  as  someone  with
           close links to those killed as a result of  LTTE  sympathies  he
           does come within  the  risk  profile  identified  by  UNHCR  and
           referred to in GJ and the skeleton argument  of  Mr  Muquit.   I
           find that his previous links to LTTE continue to expose  him  to
           treatment which gives rise to a need for  international  refugee
           protection."
   In circumstances where the Respondent  accepted  in  MP  that  the  UNHCR
   guidelines were relevant and that the guidance in GJ did  not  contradict
   that guidance (albeit it proceeded on a "less generous approach to  risk"
   ([19] MP)), Mr Haywood submitted that this reasoning did not disclose  an
   error of law.


Error of law decision and reasons

9. The Judge's findings are set out at [56] to  [86]  of  the  Decision.   I
   agree with the  submission  that  [57]  (cited  above)  could  be  better
   expressed  when   referring   to   the   objective   evidence   and   the
   interrelationship between that and the guidance in GJ.  I accept also  Mr
   Jarvis' submission that the Judge focussed the majority of  her  findings
   on the Appellant's past.  However, it was necessary for the Judge  to  do
   so in order to consider whether the Appellant's historic profile was such
   as to give rise to an adverse interest currently when assessed  alongside
   the other factors and his current activities in the UK.

10. As part of her consideration  of  the  Appellant's  profile,  the  Judge
   makes the finding at [76] that the Appellant's family continue  to  be  a
   source of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities because of the perceived
   activities of the Appellant.  The evidence which led to that finding  was
   not challenged by the Respondent at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and nor is the finding challenged in this appeal.  At  [79]  the
   Judge accepted that the Appellant's diaspora activities "if they were the
   only evidence before the Tribunal" would not be enough to come within the
   guidance in GJ.   However, the Judge goes on at [80] to note  and  accept
   the conclusions in GJ that the authorities'  interest  is  in  "perceived
   threats to destabilise their position".  Having properly directed herself
   in that regard, the Judge goes on to consider  whether  in  circumstances
   where the Appellant did come to the attention of the authorities  in  the
   past and was detained and ill-treated in 2009 [81], he  would  remain  at
   risk now based on that "perceived threat".  The Judge found at [82]  that
   the Appellant's historic profile when coupled with the low level activity
   in the UK and continued interest shown by the authorities in Sri Lanka by
   the visits to the Appellant's parents' house since he left Sri Lanka  was
   sufficient to show on the lower standard a  sufficient  risk  on  return.
   That was a finding which the Judge was entitled to reach on the  material
   before her and for the reasons given.

11. There is no error of law in the  Judge's  approach  or  her  conclusions
   based on her findings.  I am therefore not satisfied that the  First-tier
   Tribunal Decision involved the making of an error of law.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision



Signed      [pic]Date               5 October 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith






