
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/01297/2014
      AA/01302/2014
      AA/01303/2014
      AA/01304/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|On February 13, 2015                 |On February 19, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              mr rehana nadeem
                           mr muhammad nadeem butt
                          master muhammad umar butt
                          master muhammad ali butt
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of  Pakistan.  The  first  named  appellant
    applied for asylum on July 29, 2011 having entered the  United  Kingdom
    with her family on a visa on July 6, 2011. The remaining appellants are
    dependants  on  her   application.   The   respondent   refused   their
    applications on February 10, 2014 and decisions were  taken  to  remove
    them by way of directions under  section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  February  27,
    2014 and on March 28  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Obhi
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard their appeals  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on April 10, 2014 he refused their claims for
    asylum and humanitarian protection as well  as  finding  there  was  no
    breach of ECHR legislation.

 3. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on April 24, 2014 and on May 1,
    2014 Designated Judge Baird found it was arguable  there  had  been  an
    error in light of  the  apparent  error  relating  to  the  first-named
    appellant's father-in-law. She did not find merit on the other  grounds
    but stated all grounds were arguable.

 4. The matter came before me on the above date and on  that  occasion  all
    appellants were present and represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 5. Miss Ofei-Kwatia adopted the grounds of appeal and argued the FtTJ  had
    materially erred. There was at page 45 of the appellant's bundle a copy
    of the father-in-law's death certificate and by recording in paragraphs
    [17], [32] and [38] that he was still alive the  FtTJ  had  erred.  The
    FtTj had also made general comments about  the  school  letter  and  in
    particular found the principal's name was not mentioned on  the  letter
    when in fact it was. The letter was material  because  it  referred  to
    three of the appellants and the  FtTJ's  findings  were  flawed.  These
    errors undermined  the  humanitarian  protections  assessment  and  the
    decision should be set aside. As regards Article 8 it was submitted the
    FtTJ failed to have regard to the best interest of the  children.  They
    ahd been in the country for almost four years and the  FtTJ  failed  to
    have regard to this period and the delay in assessing the  claims.  The
    FtTJ also failed to consider that the children would have been upset by
    what they saw in 2011 and the fact  they  vomited.  The  children  have
    stability and at ages 13 and 15 it would not be in their best interests
    to remove them. The FtTJ failed to have regard to these factors.

 6. Mr Wilding submitted that there was no error in law and he adopted  the
    Rule 24 letter filed on July 2, 2014. With regard to the possible error
    relating to the father-in-law he  pointed  to  paragraph  [17]  of  the
    determination where the FtTJ  recorded  cross-examination  evidence  in
    which the first-named appellant stated her father-in-law had  sent  the
    documents and was still living in the house. This evidence had not been
    challenged and the FtTJ was therefore entitled to find  the  father-in-
    law was still alive. There was no evidence that the  death  certificate
    was raised with the FtTJ and he invited me  to  find  that  the  FtTJ's
    findings were open to him. He adopted Designated Judge Baird's findings
    on the school letter namely his comments were neither unreasonable  nor
    perverse and submitted  that  the  omission  of  the  principal's  name
    changed nothing. In any event the FtTj had found in paragraphs [38] and
    [39] that they would have sufficiency of protection or  the  option  of
    internal relocation. Neither of these  findings  had  been  challenged.
    With regard to Article 8 he reminded me that grounds of appeal were  on
    a failure to consider the best interests of the children. He  submitted
    the FtTJ had considered their interests and found nothing extraordinary
    about their cases and went onto consider their claim under  Article  8.
    He referred me to paragraphs [42] and [43] and submitted that the  FtTJ
    properly considered the factors necessary and  made  findings  open  to
    him. On the issue of delay he made the point that this had  never  been
    raised prior to this hearing and any delay did not mean the  appellants
    should succeed.

 7. Having heard the submissions I indicated to Miss Ofei-Kwatia that I was
    unconvinced by  her  submissions  but  I  would  give  a  full  written
    determination.

    DISCUSSIONS AND FINDINGS

 8. The grounds raised three areas of appeal but for the reasons I set  out
    herein I find there is no error in law.

 9. The first ground related to the first-named appellant's  father-in-law.
    Contained within the bundle is a document that is said to be his  death
    certificate. There  is  nothing  in  the  determination  that  suggests
    submissions were made on this document but what is clear  is  that  the
    FtTJ recorded in paragraph [17] that the first-named appellant's father-
    in-law sent her the documents although this is  partially  contradicted
    in the next sentence when she made reference to her paternal aunt's son
    sending documents. However, the FtTJ went onto record that in answer to
    questions put to her she confirmed her father-in-law continued to  live
    in the house  so  perhaps  it  comes  as  no  surprise  that  the  FtTJ
    summarised her evidence in paragraph [28] that he was still  alive.  At
    paragraph [32] the FtTJ concluded by finding hew  as  still  alive  and
    living in the property. It  was  not  suggested  in  the  grounds  that
    submissions had been made on the father-in-law being dead and I  accept
    Mr Wilding's point that there had also been no challenge to the finings
    on sufficiency of protection and internal relocation in paragraphs [38]
    and [39] of the determination.

10. Even if the father-in-law was dead  this  did  not  change  the  FtTJ's
    findings on the shooting incident in 2011 because he was alive  in  any
    event at that time. The FtTJ completely rejected  the  claim  and  gave
    reasons in paragraph [32]. Regardless of the findings relating to  what
    happened involving her brother-in-law I find  the  FtTJ's  findings  on
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation are unchallenged  and
    stand. There is therefore no material error of law on this ground.

11. With regard to the letter from the school it seems no one  spotted  the
    typed name under the school stamp.  In any event the  FtTJ  gave  ample
    reasons for rejecting the content of the letter and this omission  does
    not negate those findings.   The  same  principle  for  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal  relocation  apply  in  relation  to  what  was
    alleged in the letter.  There is therefore no material error of law  on
    this ground.

12. I turn to the final  ground  of  appeal  namely  Article  8.  The  FtTJ
    considered  the  evidence  before  him  and  I  am  satisfied  that  in
    paragraphs [43] and [43] he considered the necessary evidence.

13. At paragraph [35] of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  the  Court
    confirmed what a court should be considering when looking at  the  best
    interests of the child-

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education; (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

14. The FtTJ was clearly aware of the children's  ages  because  they  were
    present in court when he heard the case  and  he  had  before  him  the
    family's immigration history so would have been aware how long they had
    been here. He had evidence of their schooling and  the  fact  they  had
    spent the majority of their lives in Pakistan. He  had  rejected  their
    mother's claims about what happened in Pakistan and  found  they  could
    all return to Pakistan as a family and renew their family  connections.
    At paragraph [43] the FtTJ note he had extended family in Pakistan  and
    he shared their culture, religion and language. They were both at  ages
    where they could continue their education in Pakistan.

15. There is nothing wrong with  his  assessment  of  the  children's  best
    interests and although there had been a delay this had  not  prejudiced
    their situation. If anything it had strengthened  their  situation  but
    not  sufficiently  to  override  the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control.

16. I am satisfied the FtTJ did consider the  children's  interest  but  he
    also had regard to the overall  picture  and  in  particular  that  the
    family would be removed together.

17. There is no error of law and I dismiss the appeals.

    DECISION

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law and the original decision shall stand.

19. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order was not made in the First-tier and I see no reason to amend  that
    order.



Signed:     Dated: February 19, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no award on fees.



Signed:     Dated: February 19, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
