
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01596/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st October 2015 and                      |On 29 March 2016              |
|23rd February 2016                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield (Counsel instructed by Vasuki,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant against a
    judgment of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Britton, promulgated on 30th
    June 2015 in which he dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse his asylum claim and return him
    to Sri Lanka.

 2.  This matter first came  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  21st
    September 2015.  On that occasion I heard submissions from  both  sides
    as to whether the First-tier Tribunal had made an  error  of  law.   On
    that occasion the Appellant was represented by Miss Physsas of  Counsel
    and the Secretary of  State  by  Mr  Kotas.   Miss  Physsas'  principle
    submission was that the Judge had not made clear findings on  the  core
    issues in the case such as the Appellant's LTTE involvement.   He  gave
    inadequate reasons  as  to  the  significance  of  the  length  of  the
    Appellant's detention, whether the army had in fact  searched  for  the
    Appellant or whether the Appellant's profile in Sri Lanka or in the  UK
    would mean he was at risk.  I found that the Judge had erred in law  in
    making inadequate findings as to  the  Appellant's  profile  and  those
    inadequate findings were insufficient to justify a conclusion that  the
    Appellant would not be perceived as a threat on return and therefore at
    risk of persecution.

 3. I directed the matter remain in the Upper Tribunal and be listed for  a
    full rehearing.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 23rd February 2016.

 5. I had the Respondent's original bundle, the Appellant's bundle and some
    original colour photographs of the Appellant's activities in the United
    Kingdom which were handed to me at the start of the hearing.

 6. I also had a medical report prepared by Professor  Lingham  dated  13th
    March 2015.

 7. The Appellant attended and gave evidence through  a  Tamil  interpreter
    who, having checked at the beginning of the hearing, I was satisfied he
    understood and that there were no interpretation difficulties.

 8. The Appellant is a Tamil from Sri Lanka  born  on  the  18th  September
    1989.  His claim is set out in the Secretary of State's refusal and  is
    as follows.

 9. The Appellant is unmarried and has no children.  Although not himself a
    member of the LTTE he did support them through his  family  links.   He
    had an uncle who was a member of the LTTE and  in  2005  he  asked  the
    Appellant to help him, which he did by setting up a stage  and  putting
    up banners for a Tamil festival in Jaffna.  Later in 2006 he helped his
    uncle by purchasing medical supplies from pharmacies on his behalf.  He
    also hid weapons in his home, putting pistols, rifles and  grenades  in
    the shed outside the house.

10. In October 2009 a distant relative was released  from  an  LTTE  prison
    camp and the Appellant helped her to obtain a  passport  and  visa  for
    India.  He then assisted three other LTTE members to  obtain  passports
    and visas for India.

11. On 9th December 2009 a letter was left at the Appellant's home  by  the
    Sri Lankan Police requesting him to attend the police  headquarters  in
    Colombo.  This frightened the Appellant and he did not  report;  rather
    he stayed at his aunt's house, in hiding, until June 2010.

12. On 15th June 2010 the Appellant  was  arrested  at  his  home  by  four
    members of  the  Terrorist  Investigation  Department  and  accused  of
    assisting terrorists to leave the country.  The Appellant was taken  to
    the police station in Colombo where he was  detained  for  three  weeks
    during which  time  he  was  interrogated  and  beaten.   He  was  then
    transferred to Velikadai Prison where  the  interrogation  and  beating
    continued.  He was burned with cigarettes and sexually  abused  by  the
    guards.  He was forced to sign a document confessing that he had helped
    the LTTE and helped to plant bombs.  After fifty days in detention,  on
    25th August 2010, the Appellant was released upon payment of a bribe.

13. The agent who had organised his release helped him to  obtain  a  false
    passport in order to  pass  through  checkpoints  on  the  way  to  the
    airport.  He left Sri Lanka on 8th October 2010 using his  genuine  Sri
    Lankan passport which had been issued in September 2009  with  a  valid
    Tier 4 Student Visa.

14. On the 9th October 2012 the Army attended the Appellant's home  in  Sri
    Lanka with an arrest warrant and told his mother that he was wanted for
    escaping from prison.

15. Having arrived in the United Kingdom on 7th October 2010 with a student
    visa he thereafter applied for an extension of that visa  on  21st  May
    2012.  That was refused without a right of appeal on 18th October 2012.
     Then on 16th November 2012 the Appellant claimed asylum.  He  attended
    a screening interview on that date and a substantive interview  on  the
    7th December 2012.  The Secretary of State  rejected  his  claim  in  a
    decision dated 13th January 2015.

16. In the refusal letter the Secretary of State set out  her  reasons  for
    disbelieving that the Appellant is at risk on  return.   In  particular
    the Secretary of State said that the background  information  indicated
    that LTTE supporters suspected  of  assisting  members  to  escape  the
    country had been held in prison for  substantial  extended  periods  of
    time and quoted from the 2012 COIS which indicated that suspects  could
    be detained for up to eighteen months  without  trial  under  emergency
    anti-terrorism regulations in force since 2006.  Those had been used to
    detain  perceived  enemies  of  the  government   including   political
    opponents, critical journalists, members of  civil  society  and  Tamil
    civilians  suspected  of  supporting   the   LTTE.    Those   emergency
    regulations lapsed in August 2011 but the  Government  then  authorised
    the expansion  of  law  enforcement  powers  under  the  Prevention  of
    Terrorism Act meaning  that  several  thousand  remained  in  detention
    without charge at the end of 2012.

17. There is then reference to a report that some people had been in prison
    under emergency regulations for more than twelve years.  On that  basis
    the Secretary of State said it was not consistent with what  was  known
    about the Sri Lankan authorities that the Appellant would  be  released
    after only fifty days if he was genuinely suspected of the  actions  he
    claimed, particularly if he had  signed  a  confession  confirming  his
    involvement in terrorist activities.

18. The Secretary of State noted the Appellant's claim to require  a  false
    passport in order to travel freely which was contradicted by  the  fact
    that he had a valid passport issued in September 2009 and had  obtained
    a UK visa.

19. The Secretary of State considered various documents the  Appellant  had
    submitted in support of his claim, one of which was a letter  from  the
    Sri Lankan police.  This however was a photocopy and the  original  had
    not been provided and the Appellant had not provided a translation.  He
    claimed that it was a request from the  police  to  attend  the  police
    building in Colombo but as the letter was untranslated  and  considered
    to be self-serving the Secretary of State placed no weight upon it.

20. The Appellant had submitted photographs which he said confirmed that he
    had been tortured as they showed cigarette burns.   As  they  were  not
    accompanied by an independent medical report  in  accordance  with  the
    Istanbul Protocol the Secretary of State attached no  weight  to  those
    and rejected his claim to have been tortured.  The Secretary  of  State
    thus did not accept that he had  been  arrested  and  tortured  by  the
    authorities in June 2010 for assisting LTTE members escape the country.
     It was not accepted that he had signed a confession  or  that  he  had
    travelled using fake documents obtained by an agent.

21. The Secretary of State also attached weight, in accordance with Section
    8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act  2004
    to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  only  claimed  asylum,  after  his
    application to remain as a student  was  rejected.   The  Secretary  of
    State then considered the Country Guidance Case of GJ and Others (Post-
    Civil-War: Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) and  the  risk
    factors identified therein and found that the Appellant would not  face
    a real risk of persecution.  The Secretary of State considered  Article
    8 of the ECHR and found his removal proportionate given the  length  of
    time he had been in the UK and the lack of family life.

22. In response to that refusal the Appellant  filed  a  witness  statement
    which he  adopted  as  his  evidence  in  the  hearing.   That  witness
    statement is dated 13th May 2015.

23. The Appellant indicated that although he had not been a member  of  the
    LTTE his uncles were.  One was killed in 1992 while  fighting  for  the
    LTTE.  The uncle that he assisted would often talk about the uncle that
    had died.

24. He talked about getting  a  shopping  list  from  his  uncle  over  the
    telephone for various minor pharmaceutical products which he would  buy
    and also food, batteries and wires, all of which were delivered to  his
    uncle.  Because he made those deliveries  secretly  he  never  had  any
    problems.  His uncle was his only contact within the LTTE although  his
    uncle did live with three other members.  With regard to his assistance
    to the LTTE and also helping to hide weapons the  Appellant  said  that
    his parents knew nothing about this.  His uncle would only come to  the
    house if his parents were not at home.

25. The Appellant then referred to the relative he had helped to leave  the
    country.  Her brother was married to his cousin and  her  parents  were
    well known to him.  Her parents were in India and asked  the  Appellant
    to help their daughter.  Once she was released from prison in  Vavuniya
    on payment of a bribe she was still at risk because  she  had  been  an
    LTTE fighter which was why the Appellant  assisted  her  to  leave  Sri
    Lanka.  He took her to Colombo where they obtained a passport and  visa
    which the Appellant collected  for  her.   He  also  took  her  to  the
    airport.  He later performed a similar service for two others.

26. During his time in detention in 2010 the Appellant was asked about  his
    relative and the other men that he had helped to leave the country.

27. The Appellant described his time in  the  prison  saying  that  he  was
    detained in solitary confinement and was beaten frequently by hand  and
    batons and burned with cigarettes.  He also suffered sexual abuse.

28. His escape was facilitated by payment of a bribe by his  family  to  an
    agent who made the arrangements.  His release took place in August 2010
    and he was blindfolded  and  taken  to  a  vehicle.   His  release  was
    illegal.

29. The Appellant says that it was the agent that used his passport to  get
    the Appellant a visa and he also said that his agent  had  contacts  at
    the airport which is how he was able to leave without difficulties.

30. With regard to the letter from the police, he said  that  the  original
    had been lost but he  had  in  fact  submitted  a  translation  to  the
    Secretary of State but she had not considered it.   He  said  that  his
    agent had advised him not to claim asylum on arrival  as  he  would  be
    sent back.  He did not do so, he continued therefore with his  studies.
    His student friends also told him he should study  and  not  apply  for
    asylum as he would be sent back.

31. The Appellant said the police went to his  house  looking  for  him  in
    December 2010 and in October 2012.   They  did  not  believe  that  his
    mother did not know his whereabouts and threatened to shoot his  father
    if she did not tell them the truth.

32. The Appellant then described how he has attended various events in  the
    United Kingdom and become involved with the Transnational Government of
    Tamil Eelam since May 2014 as an activist.  He has  attended  meetings,
    demonstrations and helped issue leaflets and collected  signatures  and
    generally assisted in raising awareness amongst the general public.  He
    has also attended heroes' day events in November 2012, 2013 and 2014.

33. He says that he has been told by his mother that the CID  went  to  the
    house again in November 2013 looking for information  and  they  showed
    his mother a photograph of him from a website and said that he had been
    working against the government with the LTTE in  the  UK.   His  mother
    told them she could tell  them  nothing  about  him.   They  apparently
    visited his mother again in June 2014 and  November  2014  telling  her
    that they knew that he was in the UK and working against the government
    and that he was a wanted person.

34. The authorities again threatened the family that they would be punished
    if they were hiding anything.

35. In his oral evidence the Appellant confirmed  the  photographs  of  him
    taken at various occasions in the United Kingdom  and  pointed  himself
    out in each of the  photographs.   He  also  adopted  his  most  recent
    statement which was dated the 4th January 2016.  In that  statement  he
    gave more details about his activities in the UK  with  the  TGTE.   He
    spoke about the photographs including one which showed  him  collecting
    signatures in Downing Street in May 2015.  He referred to a web article
    which had been submitted of an event that he attended in November  2013
    and he could be seen on that document holding a  banner.   He  produced
    other news articles about events that he had  attended.   He  confirmed
    that he was still actively involved  in  Tamil  Diaspora  protests  and
    demonstrations and also with the TGTE.

36. In his oral evidence he had nothing to update with regard to the events
    described in the various statements.  He explained that when  he  first
    came to the UK he did not participate in  any  organisations  here  but
    rather would talk to  people  about  what  had  happened  to  him.   He
    eventually decided to join an organisation and chose the  TGTE  because
    it is his belief that Tamils need their own state and that is something
    which the TGTE works towards.

37. In cross-examination he was asked what his role was in the TGTE and  he
    said that the group tried to bring the genocide to light.  He was asked
    what he had to do to join and whether he had to complete any forms  and
    he said that he had to meet them and to explain his situation and asked
    to join.  He does not have an ID card or membership card.  He just  has
    a letter from the MP which he has submitted.   He  confirmed  that  the
    TGTE hold elections and the last one was about  three  years  ago  when
    they elected a Prime Minister and five  Ministers.   He  described  the
    people who had been elected in the UK.  He was asked given that he  was
    a volunteer, whether he was accountable to anyone in  the  organisation
    and he said that he worked mainly for "Nimalan" and  "Meethirajah"  who
    arrange meetings.  He said that he had not asked  anyone  to  come  and
    give evidence on his behalf because they had given him a letter to  say
    that he is with the organisation.  He agreed that he  had  only  become
    active after his student extension had been refused and when asked  why
    he had not joined before his claim was rejected he  said  that  he  had
    participated in  events  and  protests  but  not  with  any  particular
    organisation before then.  It was put to him that he was not  named  in
    any of the articles he had submitted.  He  agreed  but  said  that  his
    photo was clearly visible.  He said that he attended public protests as
    part of the TGTE five or six times and a total of about  ten  since  he
    came to the UK.  He said that if there was an election within the  TGTE
    now he would be able to vote.  When  asked  how  he  was  eligible  and
    whether he was on a register, he said that as a Tamil he would have  to
    complete an application and they would then allow him to vote.  He  had
    not yet done that because there was no election and therefore  no  need
    to make an application.

38. He said that the last occasion when the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  had
    visited his mother was in December 2015.  When asked what they had said
    to her he said it was the same as usual asking  about  his  whereabouts
    and they told her  that  if  he  came  back  she  was  to  inform  them
    immediately otherwise his father would be in trouble.  He was asked  if
    they knew he was in the UK and he said that he did not know although in
    2013 they had said that they did.  They had shown her an article from a
    website containing his picture and said that they knew he was living in
    London and participating in protests.

39. He said he believed there was an  outstanding  arrest  warrant  in  Sri
    Lanka because his mother had told him in October 2012.  He did not know
    whether his mother had employed a lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka  to  get  more
    information about the arrest warrant and had not asked her about it.

40. With regard to the student visa he obtained in Sri Lanka  he  confirmed
    that he took the IELTS exam in Colombo.  He said  he  decided  that  it
    would be a good idea to take the test because he was planning to  study
    at the International School in Sri Lanka.

41. He was asked again why he had not claimed asylum upon arrival and  said
    that it was because that was what the agent had told  him  to  do.   He
    said that if he believed the authorities were no longer looking for him
    in Sri Lanka he would return.

42. At the conclusion of the evidence I heard submissions on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State.  Ms Everett relied on the refusal letter.  She also
    submitted the Appellant was not credible for a number of reasons.   She
    referred to  his  delay  in  his  claiming  asylum  with  no  plausible
    explanation and the coincidental timing of his claim  being  after  his
    claim for an extension of his student visa was refused.

43. She relied upon a Wikipedia article about the TGTE whilst acknowledging
    the various criticisms that had been made of Wikipedia.  However,  from
    the information contained it seemed that the Appellant did not  have  a
    great deal of knowledge of the organisation that he  claimed  to  be  a
    member of.  She submitted that clearly he is not an official member  as
    he has completed no application form, is not on  a  register,  has  not
    voted and has no official role.  She suggested that the authorities  in
    Sri Lanka would not know of his involvement with  TGTE  and  would  not
    perceive him as a threat.

44. She pointed out that despite the articles that had been  submitted  the
    Appellant was not named in any of them and no one from the organisation
    had given evidence  on  his  behalf.   She  argued  that  his  face  at
    demonstrations would not be enough to put him at risk on  return.   She
    also indicated that it was not credible that if the authorities visited
    his mother in 2013 saying they were aware he was in the UK and involved
    with the TGTE that they would then keep  going  back  to  ask  for  his
    whereabouts when they knew where  he  was.   She  noted  there  was  no
    further evidence regarding the arrest warrant and no statement from the
    Appellant's mother and  no  discussion  about  or  proposal  to  obtain
    assistance from a lawyer in Sri Lanka.

45. She stated that it was not credible that given his claim to  have  been
    in hiding that he would then take the IELTS exam and obtain  a  student
    visa.  She submitted that taking it at its  highest  the  Appellant  is
    only a supporter of the TGTE and not a member and is not named  in  any
    public documents.  At no time has the Appellant claimed that  he  would
    campaign in Sri Lanka and he is therefore not in  a  risk  category  as
    identified in the Country Guidance Case, GJ.  She argued that  the  Sri
    Lankan intelligence was sophisticated enough to be aware of  those  who
    are a threat and those who are not and this Appellant is not.  There is
    no reason to believe that he would be stopped at  the  airport  and  no
    reason to believe that he would conduct his life in Sri Lanka in a  way
    to attract the attention of the authorities.

46. Ms Benfield  opened  her  submissions  by  relying  upon  the  skeleton
    argument submitted  by  Ms  Physsas  on  the  previous  occasion.   She
    accepted that the activities claimed by  the  Appellant  in  Sri  Lanka
    between 2006 and 2010 may well not put him amongst the risk  categories
    identified in GJ.  She said however, that his claim was relevant to his
    overall  credibility  and  the  detailed  account  that  he  has  given
    throughout suggests that he has established general credibility.   With
    regard to his relatively early release after fifty  days  in  2010  the
    Secretary of State  failed  to  consider  Paragraph  275  of  GJ  which
    contradicted the Secretary of State's statement.   Although  many  were
    detained for long periods it was still possible to be released  earlier
    on payment of a bribe.

47. With regard to the Secretary of State's argument that he  was  able  to
    leave Sri Lanka safely using his own passport and move  throughout  Sri
    Lanka she pointed out the Appellant's claim was  that  he  had  used  a
    false passport to move around within Sri  Lanka,  only  using  his  own
    passport to leave the country.  She also relied on Paragraphs 170,  275
    and 276 of GJ where the Upper Tribunal found that it  was  possible  to
    leave Sri Lanka even when actively being sought by the authorities.

48. With regard to the claimed torture Miss Benfield relied on the  medical
    report which indicated that the scars were  strongly  corroborative  of
    torture as claimed.  She submitted that while there were features which
    detracted from credibility the  Medico  Legal  report  should  be  give
    significant weight as it demonstrated the clear evidence  that  he  had
    been the victim of torture.   In  his  report  the  doctor,  as  he  is
    required to do, considered the possibility of it  being  self-inflicted
    by proxy and concluded at Paragraph 18  of  the  report  that  was  not
    likely.  She submitted that his account was entirely in line with  what
    is known about Sri Lanka at the relevant time and he should be accepted
    as credible.  With regard to the risk factors described in GJ she  said
    those described at "a", "b" and "d" applied  to  him.   He  had  helped
    others to escape and had signed a confession.   He  had  been  detained
    post conflict which indicates he remains of interest and  therefore  at
    risk.  His claim was that the authorities knew he was involved  in  the
    Diaspora which again put him at risk.  She referred to the letter  from
    the TGTE pointing out that the author of that letter is  named  in  the
    objective evidence as a member of the TGTE and argued  that  if  it  is
    accepted that he is involved with the TGTE and  an  activist  for  that
    organisation it is likely that he will have been identified because  as
    a proscribed organisation it is one that the authorities in  Sri  Lanka
    are interested in.  He has been photographed and  therefore  will  have
    come to the attention of the authorities.

49. She submitted that the question for the Tribunal is bearing in mind the
    extent of his activities, whether he is likely to be recognised by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities and she argued that he would and the  fact  that
    the organisation that he is active for is a banned  organisation  would
    mean he would be of even greater interest.  Not  only  does  he  attend
    public events but he volunteers at their offices and attends  meetings.
    She argued that it  is  highly  likely  that  those  offices  would  be
    monitored.

50. Ms Benfield also argued that his Article 3 claim should  be  considered
    outside the asylum claim on the basis that on return he is likely to be
    detained and questioned and likely to be detained in a facility outside
    of the airport where there would be a high risk of  abuse  which  would
    cross the Article 3 threshold.

Findings

51. The current Country Guidance Case in relation to Sri Lanka  is  GJ  and
    Others referred to above.  In that case the Tribunal held that:

          i) The determination replaced all existing  Country  Guidance  on
             Sri Lanka;

         ii) The focus of the Sri Lankan Government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war;

        iii) The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the Diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the "violation  of  territorial  integrity"  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is preventing both (a) the resurgence of the
             LTTE or any similar Tamil Separatist organisation and (b)  the
             revival of the civil war in Sri Lanka.

         iv) If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection;

          v) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities since  the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and the  Tamils
             are required to  return  to  a  named  address  after  passing
             through the airport;

         vi) There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities are or become interested  in  exists  not  at  the
             airport but after arrival, in  their  home  area  where  there
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days;

        vii) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             of serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to post conflict Tamil separatism in the Diaspora
                  and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sir Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists whether in print  or  other  media  or  human
                  rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the
                  Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
                  record, or who are associated with  publications  critical
                  of the Sri Lankan government;

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the no-fire zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses;

             (d)  A person  who  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (viii)    The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is   based   on
             sophisticated intelligence both as to  activities  within  Sri
             Lanka and in the Diaspora.  The Sri  Lankan  authorities  know
             that many Sri Lankan Tamils have travelled abroad as  economic
             migrants and also that everyone in the Northern  Provence  had
             some level of involvement with the LTTE during the civil  war.
             In post conflict Sri Lanka, an individuals past  history  will
             be relevant only to the extend that it is perceived by the Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.

         (ix) The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence  led
             "watch" list.  A person whose name appears on a  "watch"  list
             is not reasonably likely to be detained  at  the  airport  but
             will be monitored by the security services after  his  or  her
             return.  If that monitoring does not conclude that such person
             is a Tamil activist working to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri
             Lankan state  or  revive  the  internal  armed  conflict,  the
             individual in question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             to be detained by  the  security  forces.   That  would  be  a
             question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any  Diaspora
             activities carried out by such an individual.

52. It was realistically  accepted  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that  his
    activities in Sri Lanka prior to his leaving would not themselves place
    him at risk today.  However, the  credibility  of  his  claims,  it  is
    argued, should impact on the credibility findings in  relation  to  his
    claims overall and in particular with  his  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

53. His credibility is adversely affected by the fact that he claims at the
    age of sixteen to have acted to assist an uncle on  the  LTTE's  behalf
    without the knowledge of his parents.  At the age  of  sixteen  he  was
    living with his parents and his relationship with  them  would  be  far
    closer than that to his uncle.  I do not find it credible that he would
    act behind his parent's back to assist his uncle  in  what  would  have
    been a risky way.  I find this even less  likely  with  regard  to  his
    claim to have stored weapons on behalf of the  LTTE  just  outside  the
    family home, again without his families' knowledge.

54. He claims then in 2010 to have helped a distant relative and two others
    who were not related to have escaped  Sri  Lanka  by  helping  them  to
    obtain passports and visas to  India.   Nothing  is  said  as  to  what
    particularly qualified him as a young man to  do  this.   There  is  no
    suggestion that the passports and visas obtained were not  genuine  and
    if that were the case there is no reason why the persons could not have
    obtained them for themselves.

55. He then claims to have been detained because the  authorities  believed
    that he had assisted  terrorists  and  that  he  was  made  to  sign  a
    confession indicating that he  had  assisted  terrorist  activities  by
    planting bombs.  If that were true then he would have been considered a
    very dangerous individual and even with  the  recorded  possibility  of
    persons being released on payment of bribes, for someone who is a self-
    confessed terrorist, I find this extremely unlikely to have happened.

56. He claims to have been tortured and that  is  supported  by  a  medical
    report.  Again, if he had been  involved  in  terrorist  activities  by
    planting bombs as he suggests  then  given  what  is  known  about  the
    security forces at the time and the torture that is  practised  against
    detainees, this Appellant seems to have got  away  very  lightly.   The
    only evidence today of any torture are various small  scars  which  the
    medical expert says are typical of cigarette burns.   However,  despite
    the doctor claiming that cigarette burns caused by torture are  usually
    in groups, the photographs do not bear this out.  The expert rules  out
    that they were self inflicted or self inflicted by proxy without giving
    any explanation as to why this is the case.  I note that there is  only
    one very small scar which is visible on the Appellant's  back.   Whilst
    the doctor expresses some concern over  the  Appellant's  mental  state
    there  is  no  other  evidence  concerning  that  and  indeed   it   is
    contradicted by the fact that the Appellant has been  studying  in  the
    United Kingdom and there is no evidence that he is receiving  any  form
    of psychiatric treatment.

57. It may be that as a young Tamil from the  north  he  was  detained  and
    mistreated at some time during the war, but  not  in  the  way  he  now
    claims.

58. The Appellant claims that the authorities have repeatedly  visited  his
    family home  and  made  threats  against  the  family.   Again  if  the
    Appellant were in truth a terrorist, it is not  credible  that  despite
    all these threats no action would have been taken against  the  family.
    Furthermore, it is claimed that the authorities know that he is in  the
    UK.  That being the case it is not credible that they would continue to
    visit the family.  If the authorities already know where the  Appellant
    is, nothing is to be gained by visiting the family.

59. The Appellant's credibility is further damaged by  his  claim  to  have
    been in hiding in Colombo and yet at the  same  time  feeling  able  to
    emerge from hiding in order to take the IELTS test.  That was necessary
    for him to obtain a student visa.

60. On the basis that he was granted a student visa I do  not  accept  that
    the passport and visa were obtained on his behalf.

61. The credibility of his claim is further damaged by the  timing  of  his
    asylum application, namely very shortly after his application to extend
    his student visa was rejected.  The Appellant claims not to have  known
    the process for claiming asylum and to have been advised by  the  agent
    and friends that he would be returned if he claimed asylum.   I  reject
    that explanation.  This is clearly an intelligent young man embedded in
    Tamil society in the UK.  It is not credible that  he  would  not  have
    known about the asylum process and if he in truth was in  fear  of  his
    life he would have claimed immediately upon arrival.

62. Furthermore, medical evidence would have been more readily and usefully
    obtained at that time than several years later.

63. I reject as incredible the Appellant's claims to have been involved  at
    any significant level with the LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka  or  to  have  been
    detained and tortured as a result.  Nor do I accept as credible that he
    is of continued interest to the authorities there.

64. The Appellant relied on his activities within  the  United  Kingdom  as
    evidence that he is of continuing  interest  and  he  also  claims  the
    authorities are aware of his activities in the UK.

65. His activities within the UK commenced only in 2014.  Again  I  do  not
    accept the  explanation  for  that.   If  the  Appellant  is  indeed  a
    committed Tamil separatist then I do not believe  that  he  would  have
    waited until 2014 to do something about it.  It seems  clear  that  the
    Appellant, having been refused further leave to remain and launched  an
    asylum claim he would also be aware that  this  would  be  assisted  by
    activities in the United  Kingdom,  in  the  same  way  as  many  other
    economic migrants do  so,  not  only  from  Sri  Lanka  but  also  from
    Zimbabwe.

66. That said, case law has now made clear that the  motives  of  a  person
    carrying out sur place activities are irrelevant  if  those  activities
    would in fact place them at risk upon return.  That therefore is what I
    need to assess.

67. The Appellant has put forward a number  of  documents  and  photographs
    concerning the group with which he has aligned himself,  the  TGTE.   I
    have been provided with evidence that it is a  proscribed  organisation
    in Sri Lanka and I am prepared to accept that being  a  member  of  any
    note or activist in that organisation would put a person at risk in Sri
    Lanka.  However, despite numerous photographs  and  articles  submitted
    the Appellant is not named in  any.   The  organisation  itself  has  a
    number of high profile persons who  have  been  elected  including  the
    author of the letter submitted on the Appellant's behalf.   I  have  no
    doubt those persons would be at risk if they were to be returned.  That
    organisation  is  clearly  an  organised  organisation  with   a   well
    publicised leadership.  The Appellant claims that there is no  register
    of members and that he has no ID or membership card and that  his  name
    is not on any list.  If he were a member of that organisation I do  not
    believe that would be the case.  He was very vague in his  evidence  as
    to his entitlement to vote in the organisation suggesting that  it  was
    only at the time of an election where he would have to complete a form.
     All that would suggest that he is not currently a member.

68. He has put forward a letter from an MP in that  organisation  and  that
    letter confirms that the Appellant is "an activist  working  with  TGTE
    projects in the past year exposing the Tamil genocide by Sri  Lanka  to
    the public.  He does this by distributing leaflets, attending meetings,
    demonstrations, etc".

69. Despite the contents of that letter no person came to give evidence  on
    the Appellant's behalf from that organisation and Mr  Seevaratnam,  the
    author of the letter could have done so.  I bear in mind  the  guidance
    of TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 where the Court of Appeal said  that
    where there were circumstances  in  which  evidence  corroborating  the
    Appellant's evidence was easily obtainable, the lack of  such  evidence
    must affect the assessment of the  Appellant's  credibility.   In  this
    case, if the Appellant is indeed a serious member and activist for  the
    organisation I would have  expected  someone  in  authority  from  that
    organisation to have come to the  Tribunal  to  give  evidence  on  his
    behalf and to volunteer themselves  for  cross-examination  as  to  the
    precise role and involvement of the Appellant.  In that regard I  raise
    a similarity with persons who claim to have converted  to  Christianity
    in the UK are expected to be supported by a pastor or a vicar from  the
    relevant church (Dorodian 01/TH01537).

70. The Appellant claims that the authorities in Sri Lanka are aware of his
    activities in the UK.  However, I have not found it credible  that  the
    authorities continue to visit his family.  There is  no  evidence  from
    his family and given that he is not named in any of the articles I find
    it highly unlikely that the authorities would view him  of  someone  of
    interest for his Diaspora activities even if, which I  do  not  believe
    they could, have identified him.

71. I take particular note of what is said  in  GJ  that  the  intelligence
    services are sophisticated and well aware of economic  migrants  making
    claims to be at risk of persecution when in  reality  they  are  of  no
    interest to the authorities.

72. For all of the above reasons I find that this Appellant would not be at
    risk on return to Sri Lanka.  He does not fall into  any  of  the  risk
    categories identified in GJ and his activities in the UK fall far below
    those which would place him at risk of persecution on return.

73. In light of the nature of what is claimed by the Appellant  I  make  an
    anonymity order in this case.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date 11th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 11th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

