
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01617/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 December 2015                   |On 26 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Madubuike, Counsel
For the SSHD:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Libya.   I  have  made  an  anonymity
         order as this decision refers  to  details  concerning  his  asylum
         claim.

      2.  The  appellant  contends  that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for reasons relating to an imputed  political  opinion.
         He claims that he has been targeted in Libya  because  he  and  his
         family were supporters of  the  Gadhafi  regime.   This  claim  was
         refused by the SSHD and the appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

      3. In a detailed decision dated  28  April  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Lloyd-Smith dismissed the appeal.  Judge Lloyd-Smith rejected
         much of the appellant's account  as  incredible  and  inconsistent.
         The appellant appealed against this in wide-ranging  grounds.   The
         majority of the grounds of appeal are taken up  with  disagreements
         and re-arguing the appellant's case.  It  is  however  possible  to
         discern two alleged  errors  of  law  when  the  grounds  are  read
         together with the decision under appeal.  Mr Harrison  was  content
         to interpret the grounds in a generous  manner  in  the  particular
         circumstances of this protection claim.  First, the decision  fails
         to address a central plank in the appellant's appeal  -  his  claim
         that he was specifically targeted and attacked whilst at university
         in Libya.  Second, the judge has failed to appreciate and / or take
         into account the appellant's clear evidence that he  told  untruths
         in his visa application form in order to get a visa to  flee  Libya
         for reasons relating to a fear of persecution.

Hearing

      4. At the beginning of the hearing I indicated my preliminary view  to
         Mr Harrison that Judge  Lloyd-Smith  erred  in  law  in  these  two
         respects such that her decision should be set aside.   Mr  Harrison
         conceded  that  these  amounted  to  material  errors  of  law.   I
         therefore did not need to hear from Mr Madubuike  save  to  clarify
         that he agreed with Mr Harrison that the appropriate course was  to
         remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  to  make  findings  of
         fact afresh.

Error of law

      5. As Mr Harrison conceded that there are material errors  of  law  in
         the decision I can give my reasons briefly.

      6. Judge Lloyd-Smith summarised the appellant's  claim  at  [10].   At
         [10e] she states the following "the appellant began  university  in
         October 2013 but was attacked on campus in January 2014 and accused
         of being part of the regime and his brother being a  martyr".   The
         SSHD also included this in her refusal letter in her summary of the
         appellant's claim at [Annex A, 3G].  The appellant dealt with  this
         aspect of his account in some  detail  in  his  rebuttal  statement
         dated 25 March 2015 at [6, 7, 17].  The attack on the appellant and
         its  surrounding  circumstances  is  a  central   aspect   of   the
         appellant's account.  It explains why he felt particularly targeted
         over and above his family members and why he felt the  need  to  go
         into hiding and flee Libya.

      7. Whilst the judge has provided detailed reasons for  her  view  that
         the  appellant  has  provided   inconsistent   evidence   and   his
         credibility has been damaged [14-18] she has failed to address this
         central aspect of the appellant's evidence.  I accept that  passing
         reference has been made  to  it  [14(d)]  but  the  judge  has  not
         addressed any of  the  detail  of  this  important  aspect  of  his
         account.  It is also concerning that the judge's passing  reference
         to this  feature  of  the  appellant's  account  is  based  upon  a
         fundamental misunderstanding of the appellant's  case.   The  judge
         regarded the appellant's claim that he was attending university  in
         Libya to be inconsistent with the following statement made  by  the
         appellant in an earlier application: "I would like to study English
         language course to improve my English before starting university in
         my country".  This statement was made in his visa application  form
         and not as the judge states [14(d)]  in  his  screening  interview.
         The reference provided by the judge is "R A10, q76".  That part  of
         the SSHD's bundle clearly refers to the application form for a visa
         to enter the UK as a visitor in order to  study  English,  dated  3
         April 2014.  In his rebuttal statement the appellant made it  clear
         that he did not tell the truth when completing the visa application
         form because his true intention was to escape harm in  Libya.   The
         appellant clearly admitted to inventing  a  number  of  matters  to
         support his application for a  visitor's  visa  in  order  to  flee
         Libya.  This explains the apparent inconsistency, yet the judge has
         failed to address this.

      8. This is linked to the second material error of law, as conceded  by
         Mr Harrison.  The judge has drawn a number  of  adverse  inferences
         from various inaccuracies and  untruths  in  the  appellant's  visa
         application forms [14(a), (b), 16].  The judge concluded  that  the
         appellant used deception in the visa applications and lied  to  the
         entry clearance officer.  This is of course factually accurate  but
         does not of itself mean that his asylum  claim  is  not  reasonably
         likely  to  be  true.   The  judge  has  effectively  made  adverse
         credibility findings on the basis of  the  use  of  lies  that  the
         appellant accepted he told during the process  of  escaping  Libya.
         There has been no recognition by the judge that bona fide  refugees
         often have little option but to travel under false  pretences  when
         fleeing persecution.  Hence it is  only  with  caution  that  there
         should be reliance on deception  regarding  entry  clearance,  when
         evaluating an asylum applicant's general credibility.   In  failing
         to recognise the need for caution and whether it should be  applied
         to the instant case the judge has erred in law.

      9. The judge also drew adverse inferences from the appellant's failure
         to provide detail of what happened in Libya in the initial  account
         provided at the  screening  interview  [17].  In  response  to  the
         question what problems [the appellant faced in Libya] he said  "the
         unstable political circumstances in Libya".  This was  followed  up
         by this question and answer:  "Can  you  briefly  explain  why  you
         cannot return to your home country? If I go back I will  be  killed
         due to the unstable political circumstances."   The  appellant  was
         not invited to expand upon this and  it  appears  that  no  further
         questions followed, even though  there  are  a  number  of  further
         prompt questions open to the interviewer (see 4.2 of the  screening
         interview).  The judge seems to have  made  no  allowance  for  the
         particular way that  information  was  elicited  at  the  screening
         interview (brief explanation  only,  no  follow  up  questions)  in
         contrast to the  asylum  interview  and  witness  statements.   Any
         comparison between the  responses  to  initial  queries  and  later
         responses must bear in mind the limited terms in which the  initial
         questions are asked.  In these circumstances it was unfair for  the
         judge to draw adverse inferences from the lack  of  detail  in  the
         screening interview when contrasted with the detail provided by the
         appellant  in  his  statements  and  during  the  course   of   his
         substantive interview.

     10. I am satisfied that the errors of law identified above are material
         and justify the setting aside of the decision.  I  appreciate  that
         the  judge  has  provided  other  reasons  for  not  accepting  the
         appellant's evidence but it is difficult to  separate  the  adverse
         findings,  which  are  interlinked.   I  therefore  find  that  the
         decision should be set aside and remade afresh.

Remittal

     11. Both representatives agreed that the decision needs  to  be  remade
         completely and that given the nature and extent of those  findings,
         this should be done in the First-tier Tribunal.  I have had  regard
         to para 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's  Practice  Statement
         and the nature and extent  of  the  factual  findings  required  in
         remaking  the  decision,  and  I  have  decided  that  this  is  an
         appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

     12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     13. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

      1) The appeal shall be reheard de  novo  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         sitting in Manchester (TE: 2 hrs)  on  the  first  date  available.
         Arabic interpreter necessary.

      2) 14 days before the hearing date the appellant shall file and  serve
         an indexed and paginated bundle (to replace all  previous  bundles)
         containing all  evidence,  including  updated  background  evidence
         relevant to the rehearing.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
4 December 2015
