
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01999/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25th February 2016                    |On 23rd March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     OFA
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mullins of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Pacey of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 27th April 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Nigerian citizen born in 1961  who  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 20th  February  2013.   The  Appellant  had  been
    granted a medical visa valid between 12th February 2013 and 12th August
    2013.  This visa was subsequently extended until 31st December 2013.

 3. The Appellant made a humanitarian protection claim on 8th  March  2014.
    He underwent a screening interview on  that  date,  and  a  substantive
    interview on 22nd December 2014.

 4. The Respondent refused his  application  on  21st  January  2015.   The
    appeal was heard by the FtT on 22nd April 2015 and dismissed.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable
    that the FtT had failed to have regard to material evidence in relation
    to the shooting of the  Appellant  and  therefore  may  have  erred  in
    concluding that the Appellant was a victim  of  armed  robbery,  rather
    than an attempt to kill him.

Error of Law

 6. On 15th January 2016 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation
    to error of law, and concluded that the FtT decision must be set aside.
      Full  details  of  the  application  for  permission,  the  grant  of
    permission, the submissions made by both parties, and  my  conclusions,
    are contained in my decision dated 18th January 2016.  I set out  below
    paragraphs 15-20 which contain my conclusions and reasons  for  setting
    aside the FtT decision;

         "15. Mr Mullins was entirely correct not  to  pursue  the  argument
             that the Tribunal had applied an 'excessively high standard of
             proof', and in any event Judge Bruce did not grant  permission
             on that point.
         16.  My initial view is that Judge Bruce did not  grant  permission
             on the contention that the FtT had gone behind the  concession
             made by the Presenting Officer.  However, in the  alternative,
             if permission was granted on that point, I find  no  error  of
             law.  This is because I conclude that the concession  made  by
             the Presenting Officer amounted  to  an  acceptance  that  the
             Appellant was a lawyer in Nigeria, and that he had been  shot.
             The FtT did not go behind the concession made.
         17.  The  Record  of  Proceedings  indicates  that  the  Presenting
             Officer opened his submissions by relying upon the reasons for
             refusal letter dated 21st January 2015.  In  paragraph  37  of
             Annex A of that letter, the Respondent considers that delay in
             making a humanitarian protection claim  was  damaging  to  the
             Appellant's credibility.   My  view  is  that  the  Presenting
             Officer was therefore maintaining  that  point,  and  on  that
             basis the FtT was entitled to conclude at paragraph  44,  that
             no satisfactory explanation had been given for  the  Appellant
             not making a claim earlier.
         18.  The main issue, and the point upon which permission to  appeal
             was granted, is whether or not the FtT failed to  have  regard
             to material evidence.  I find  that  the  FtT  erred  on  this
             issue, and that the error is material.  At  paragraph  45  the
             FtT noted that no property was taken in the attack, and  found
             that since armed robbery is commonplace  in  Nigeria,  it  was
             reasonable to consider that the Appellant 'might have been yet
             another victim of  armed  robbery',  and  therefore  concluded
             robbery was the intention of the  attackers,  rather  than  an
             assassination attempt.
         19.  The FtT did not make  findings  on  the  Appellant's  evidence
             contained in his witness statement dated 28th December 2013 at
             paragraph 2 in which he explained that he  thought  the  three
             men who approached him were going to steal  his  car,  and  he
             therefore threw the key on the ground and told them that  they
             could have the car, and he attempted to run away and was  shot
             while trying to escape.  In addition, the FtT failed  to  make
             findings on the evidence of a witness, OO, whose affidavit  is
             contained in the Appellant's bundle which was before the  FtT,
             at pages 47-48.  This witness  explained  that  the  attackers
             arrived on commercial motorcycles  as  passengers,  an  escape
             vehicle was waiting, and the Appellant's  car,  although  open
             with the keys on the ground was not  taken,  neither  was  the
             Appellant's mobile telephone.
         20.  The failure of the FtT to demonstrate that this  evidence  had
             been considered  and  findings  made  thereon,  amounts  to  a
             failure to consider material evidence, which is  an  error  of
             law."

 7. The decision of the FtT was set aside, but  the  unchallenged  findings
    that  the  Appellant  was  a  lawyer  in  Nigeria,  who  was  shot  and
    subsequently required hospital treatment, were preserved.

 8. I granted an application made by Mr Mullins,  which  was  made  without
    objection, to amend the Grounds of Appeal to permit reliance  upon  the
    1951 Refugee Convention, so that it could be argued that the  Appellant
    is entitled to a grant of asylum due to his imputed political  opinion.



 9. I also granted an application made  pursuant  to  rule  15(2A)  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  admitting  a  further
    bundle of evidence comprising 23 pages, which had not been  before  the
    FtT.  Again, this application was made without objection.

Re-Making the Decision

The Law

10. The Appellant is entitled to asylum if he is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality and is recognised as a refugee as defined in  regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on him to prove that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.

11. The Appellant would  be  eligible  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules if he does  not  qualify  as  a
    refugee, and establishes substantial grounds for believing that  if  he
    was removed from the United Kingdom, he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling
    to avail himself of the protection of the country of return.

12. The Appellant claims that to remove him from the United  Kingdom  would
    breach Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights
    (the 1950 Convention).  The Appellant  must  therefore  establish  that
    there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  returning  him  to
    Nigeria would create a real risk that he would be killed, or  subjected
    to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

13. In relation to risk on return, the burden of proof is on the  Appellant
    and can be described as a reasonable degree of likelihood  which  is  a
    lower standard than  the  normal  civil  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The Tribunal must consider the circumstances as at  the
    date of hearing.

The Appellant's Claim

14. The Appellant's claim as initially presented to the Respondent  is  set
    out in his screening and substantive interview records, and his witness
    statement dated 28th December 2013 and may  be  briefly  summarised  as
    follows.

15. The Appellant worked as a lawyer, living and  working  in  an  area  of
    Lagos.  He arrived home at about 7.30pm on Friday 21st September  2012.
    When he got out of his car he was approached by three men.  He  thought
    that he was being robbed and threw his car keys on the ground,  telling
    the men that they could have the car.

16. No attempt was made to take any property but he was shot several  times
    and his attackers then fled.

17. The Appellant was treated at a local clinic and then taken to hospital.
     He had two bullet wounds in his back, a wound to his foot, and  bullet
    wounds in his thighs and groin.  His left elbow was  fractured  as  was
    his left femur.

18. The Appellant remained in hospital in Nigeria until he left Nigeria  on
    20th February 2013, having obtained a medical visa  so  that  he  could
    receive treatment in the United Kingdom.

19. The Appellant has undergone medical treatment in this country, and  had
    a further bullet removed from his thigh, which  was  discovered  to  be
    from an AK47 weapon.

20. The Appellant feared that if returned to Nigeria he  would  be  killed,
    and therefore applied for humanitarian protection.

21. The Appellant believed that the attack upon him was an attempt to  kill
    him rather than rob him.  He obtained an affidavit from an eye witness,
    who  confirmed  that  the  attackers  had  arrived  as  passengers   on
    commercial motorcycles, and that they fled  in  a  car  that  had  been
    waiting.  Another witness confirmed that a plainclothes policeman  came
    into the clinic  where  the  Appellant  was  initially  being  treated,
    stating that he had picked up some spent shells at  the  scene  of  the
    shooting and insisted on seeing the Appellant to see if  he  was  still
    alive.

22. The police officers who were normally on patrol in that area because of
    nearby beer parlours were absent during that evening which was unusual.



23. The police did not investigate the shooting.

24. The Appellant believed that it was his work  as  a  campaigning  lawyer
    that had caused the attempt upon his life.  He  gave  details  of  some
    cases that he had been involved in that may have led to the attack upon
    him.

25. One case involved the pastor of a church who the Appellant described as
    a cult leader.  A member of the church instructed  the  Appellant,  and
    the  pastor  was  subsequently  charged  with  murder,  convicted,  and
    sentenced to death.  The Appellant believed that some of his  followers
    may have been responsible for his attempted murder.

26. Another case involved an attempt upon his life in 2004 by two brothers,
    one of whom is a serving police officer, which  arose  out  of  a  land
    dispute.  There was an ambush but the Appellant had  not  attended  the
    meeting, and an associate of his was attacked in his place.  One of the
    brothers was subsequently charged with attempted  murder  although  the
    police  attempted  to  frustrate  the  prosecution.    There   was   no
    conviction.  The Appellant had consistently submitted petitions in this
    case and was still awaiting the outcome when he was shot.

27. The Appellant had also acted in opposition  to  the  interests  of  the
    local government chairman who had closed down businesses for no  lawful
    reason.  The Appellant was instructed by individuals, and petitioned on
    their behalf.

28. The Appellant  had  also  made  complaints  against  the  local  police
    commander, and he feared that the police were  behind  the  attempt  to
    murder him.

The Refusal

29. The Respondent issued a reasons for refusal letter dated  21st  January
    2015 which may be briefly summarised as follows.

30. The Appellant's nationality and identity were accepted and it was  also
    accepted that he was a lawyer in Nigeria and that he had been shot.

31. It was not accepted that there was an attempt to kill him in 2004,  and
    it was not accepted that the shooting on 21st September 2012, had  been
    an attempt to kill him, but it was believed that this had been an armed
    robbery.

32. The Respondent noted that the Appellant had not  claimed  international
    protection immediately upon arrival in the United Kingdom, and that  he
    had been able to leave Nigeria  using  his  own  passport  without  any
    difficulty.

33. The Respondent noted that the Appellant  had  not  claimed  asylum  and
    therefore there was no Convention reason for his claim.

34.  The  Respondent  considered  that  in  any  event  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency  of  protection  in  Nigeria,  and  the  Appellant  had   a
    reasonable option of internal relocation.

The Appellant's Response to Refusal

35. The Appellant prepared  a  witness  statement  dated  13th  April  2015
    commenting upon the reasons for  refusal,  and  the  statement  may  be
    briefly summarised as follows.

36. In relation to the attempt to kill the Appellant in 2004, he  contended
    that the  police  had  frustrated  the  prosecution  and  he  had  been
    complaining about it ever since.

37. The Appellant also maintained that he  had  orchestrated  a  number  of
    cases against the  local  government  chairman,  who  could  have  been
    responsible for the attempt to kill him, and that the  pastor  who  had
    been sentenced to death for murder, operated a  cult,  and  that  could
    also have been the cause of the attack.

38. The Appellant had applied for humanitarian protection  because  he  did
    not consider himself to be a refugee, he only wanted protection.

39. The Appellant contended that the evidence did not support the assertion
    that he was the victim of an armed robbery, as his attackers showed  no
    interest in stealing anything from him, and there  was  an  absence  of
    police officers who were usually  at  the  scene,  and  no  attempt  to
    properly investigate the shooting.

40. The shooting had been reported to the police so that a permit could  be
    issued to enable the Appellant to be treated at hospital.

41. The  Appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  primarily  for  medical
    treatment that was not available in Nigeria, as well as to escape  from
    danger.  When he arrived he was more concerned with  receiving  medical
    treatment than in making an application to remain in the United Kingdom
    long term.

The Hearing

Preliminary Issues

42. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely and that each party had served the other  with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to  be  placed.   I  had  the
    Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-S which had  been  before  the  FtT,
    together with  the  Grounds  of  Appeal,  and  the  Appellant's  bundle
    comprising 527 pages.

43. I also had an Index of Fresh Evidence comprising 23 pages, and  a  case
    law index comprising 48 pages.  Mr Mullins submitted  a  photograph  of
    the scene of the shooting, and a skeleton argument dated 25th  February
    2016.

44. Mr Mullins confirmed that the Appellant claimed asylum on the basis  of
    his imputed political opinion, as he would be considered to be  opposed
    to the state  by  reason  of  his  activities  and  his  opposition  to
    corruption.  In the alternative humanitarian  protection  was  claimed,
    and the Appellant relied upon Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950  Convention.



45. Mr Duffy acknowledged that there did not  seem  to  be  any  basis  for
    arguing that the attack upon the Appellant was an  armed  robbery.   In
    relation to the Appellant's delay in claiming humanitarian  protection,
    Mr Duffy acknowledged that given his medical condition, some delay  was
    to be expected.

46. Mr Duffy also acknowledged that the Appellant's activities as a  lawyer
    in  Nigeria  were  not  contested.   Mr  Duffy   indicated   that   the
    Respondent's position was that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection
    available to the Appellant, he had  a  reasonable  internal  relocation
    option, and he would still be able to practise as a lawyer.

Oral Evidence

47. Both the Appellant and his wife gave oral evidence and were  questioned
    by both representatives.  I have recorded all questions and answers  in
    my Record of Proceedings and it is not necessary to reiterate  them  in
    full here.

48. The Appellant adopted as his  evidence  his  three  witness  statements
    dated 28th December 2013, 13th April 2015, and 4th January  2015.   The
    contents of the first two statements have already been summarised.   In
    brief, the contents  of  the  statement  dated  4th  January  2016  are
    summarised below.

49. The Appellant repeated that he had given details  of  four  cases  that
    could have caused the attempt on his life  in  September  2012.   These
    related to the pastor of the church, the case of the two  brothers  who
    attempted to kill the Appellant in 2004, and cases that had been raised
    by the Appellant against the chairman  of  the  local  government,  and
    commander of the local police.  The Appellant  confirmed  that  he  had
    confronted  the  police  commander  about  corrupt  practices  and   in
    particular in a case involving a kidnap and murder.

50. The Appellant repeated his belief that the police had been involved  in
    the shooting.  He pointed out that the area police commander who he had
    opposed was very influential, having at one time being an assistant  of
    the Inspector General of police.  The Appellant had a petition made  on
    his behalf by lawyers, to the Inspector General  of  police  at  Abuja,
    which resulted in two police officers coming from Oyo State to Lagos to
    arrest him and take him back to Oyo.  The arrest did not happen because
    the police went to the Appellant's previous office, not realising  that
    he had moved offices.  The Appellant feels sure that he would have been
    killed had he been arrested at that time.

51. The Appellant gave details of several petitions that he had made to the
    police making complaints.  The Appellant pointed out that AK47  weapons
    are used by the police and there is objective evidence to prove this.

52. The Appellant pointed out that  he  had  submitted  newspaper  articles
    proving that he is a prominent lawyer  in  Nigeria,  and  it  would  be
    extremely difficult for him to relocate to another  area  without  this
    becoming known.  He contended that there would  be  no  sufficiency  of
    protection or reasonable option of relocation open to him in Nigeria.

53.  The  Appellant's  wife  when  giving  evidence,  adopted  her  witness
    statement dated 13th April 2015, which supports the Appellant's case.

The Respondent's Submissions

54. Mr Duffy did not doubt the Appellant's subjective belief that he was in
    danger, but submitted that the Appellant did not know who had tried  to
    kill him and did not know the motivation behind the attack.   It  could
    not be said that it was due to the Appellant's political opinion.

55. If the Tribunal found there was a risk to the  Appellant  in  his  home
    area, Mr Duffy submitted that there was  a  sufficiency  of  protection
    available for the reasons given in paragraphs 40-54 of the reasons  for
    refusal letter dated 21st January 2015,  and  there  was  a  reasonable
    option of internal relocation for the reasons given in paragraphs 55  -
    69 of that letter.

56. Although crimes may have been committed, Mr Duffy submitted that  there
    was no conspiracy, and the Appellant could move  away  from  Lagos  and
    internally relocate.  The Appellant could continue his profession as  a
    lawyer.

The Appellant's Submissions

57. Mr Mullins relied upon his skeleton argument dated 25th  February  2016
    which I will not reiterate here.

58. Mr Mullins argued that taking into account the lower standard of proof,
    there was a real risk of the Appellant being shot again if returned  to
    Nigeria.  It was clear that he had been the victim of an  assassination
    attempt and not an armed robbery.

59. The Appellant is entitled  to  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  imputed
    political opinion because he had made a stand  against  corruption  and
    injustice.

60. The background evidence in  the  Respondent's  own  Nigeria  OGN  dated
    December 2013 supported  the  Appellant's  case  that  the  police  are
    complicit in corruption and do not offer a sufficiency  of  protection.
    There would be no internal relocation option  as  the  Appellant  is  a
    prominent lawyer and if  he  resumed  practice,  his  activities  would
    become known, and the police are present throughout Nigeria.

61. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.





My Conclusions and Reasons

62. I have taken into account all the oral and documentary evidence  placed
    before  me,  together  with  the  oral   submissions   made   by   both
    representatives.  I take into account the lower standard of proof  that
    applies, which can be described as a reasonable degree  of  likelihood,
    and I accept that it is important that I view the  Appellant's  account
    in the context of conditions in Nigeria.

63. I have considered the evidence in the round, and with anxious scrutiny,
    and have considered this appeal in  the  light  of  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules which for ease of  reference  I
    set out below;

         339L It is the duty of the person to substantiate the asylum  claim
                or establish that he is a person eligible  for  humanitarian
                protection or substantiate his human  rights  claim.   Where
                aspects of the person's  statements  are  not  supported  by
                documentary or other evidence, those aspects will  not  need
                confirmation when all of the following conditions are met:
                (i)    the person has made a genuine effort to  substantiate
                    his asylum claim  or  establish  that  he  is  a  person
                    eligible for humanitarian protection or substantiate his
                    human rights claim;
                (ii)   all material factors at the  person's  disposal  have
                    been submitted, and a satisfactory explanation regarding
                    any lack of other relevant material has been given;
                (iii)  the person's statements are found to be coherent  and
                    plausible and do not run counter to  available  specific
                    and general information relevant to the person's case;
                (iv)   the person has made an  asylum  claim  or  sought  to
                    establish that he is a person eligible for  humanitarian
                    protection or made a human rights claim at the  earliest
                    possible time, unless the person  can  demonstrate  good
                    reason for not having done so; and
                (v)    the  general  credibility  of  the  person  has  been
                    established.

64. I will now set out facts that are agreed by the parties.  The Appellant
    was shot several times on 21st September 2012.  It was conceded  by  Mr
    Duffy that there was no basis  for  arguing  that  this  was  an  armed
    robbery and I so find.  It is  therefore  accepted  that  this  was  an
    attempt to kill the Appellant.

65. The Appellant required hospital treatment in Nigeria until he  departed
    for the United Kingdom on 20th February 2013.  He was granted a medical
    visa entitling him to have  treatment  in  this  country.   During  the
    course of the treatment here, a bullet was removed from his thigh.

66. The Appellant claimed humanitarian protection on 8th  March  2014.   Mr
    Duffy accepted that some delay was to be expected given the Appellant's
    serious medical condition when he arrived in this country.

67. It was accepted that the Appellant was a lawyer in Nigeria and that  he
    was an active human rights lawyer.  Mr Duffy acknowledged that no issue
    was taken with the Appellant's activities as a lawyer.

68. I now make findings on issues upon which the parties do not agree.

69. Initially, in the reasons for refusal letter, it was not accepted  that
    there had been an attempt upon the Appellant's life in  2004,  although
    Mr Duffy  appeared  in  his  submissions  to  indicate  that  this  was
    accepted.  For the avoidance of doubt, I find that there was an attempt
    upon the Appellant's life in 2004.  I  am  satisfied  that  this  arose
    because of a land dispute involving the Appellant and two brothers, one
    of whom was a serving police  officer.   I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
    reasonably likely, that there was an ambush set for the Appellant,  but
    that he was not involved in the attack, as one of  his  associates  had
    attended in his place.  As a result of this, one of  the  brothers  was
    charged with attempted murder, although there was no conviction.

70. I am also satisfied that the Appellant was involved in a  high  profile
    case, in which the pastor of a church was subsequently found guilty  of
    murder and sentenced to death.

71. I also accept that the Appellant made complaints and  issued  petitions
    against the local police commander, and the local government  chairman.
    In relation  to  the  local  government  chairman,  the  Appellant  was
    involved in opposing the closing of  businesses,  which  the  Appellant
    contended was unlawful.  In  relation  to  the  police  commander,  the
    Appellant had criticised practices said to be corrupt.

72. My reasons for making these findings are that I accept as credible,  to
    the lower standard of proof, the evidence that the Appellant has given.
     He has given consistent evidence, when the contents of  his  interview
    records, witness statements, and his oral testimony are considered.  In
    addition, I am  satisfied  that  there  is  documentary  evidence  that
    supports the Appellant's account.  Much of  this  documentary  evidence
    has been  obtained  from  Nigeria.   There  are  numerous  letters  and
    petitions contained within the Appellant's initial bundle of documents,
    at pages 68-509.  These are addressed to the police, the chief judge at
    the Lagos High Court, the director of public prosecutions, the attorney
    general, and the chairman of the local government council.   There  are
    also newspaper articles.

73. I am therefore satisfied that the Appellant has made  every  effort  to
    obtain evidence to support his case, and  I  find  that  the  evidence,
    considered in the round, does support the findings  that  I  have  made
    above.

74. I must consider whether the Appellant would be at risk if  returned  to
    Nigeria.  I have to consider this taking into account my findings  that
    there was an attempt upon his life in 2004, and a very serious  attempt
    to kill him on  21st  September  2012.   It  is  relevant  to  consider
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules which I set out below;

         339K The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution
                or serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution or
                such harm, will be regarded as a serious indication  of  the
                person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
                suffering serious harm, unless there  are  good  reasons  to
                consider that such persecution or serious harm will  not  be
                repeated.

75. I do not ascertain that  any  good  reason  has  been  given  why  such
    persecution or serious harm will  not  be  repeated.   If  returned  to
    Nigeria  the  Appellant  can  realistically  only  support  himself  by
    practising  as  a  lawyer.   The  evidence  indicates  that  he  is   a
    campaigning lawyer which has  brought  him  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities.  He has also attracted some attention in the press.

76. The Appellant could not be expected to refrain from  carrying  on  with
    his activities because of a fear of the consequences, and  in  reaching
    this conclusion I have applied the principles in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC
    3.

77. I find, to the lower standard of proof, that some police officers  were
    involved in the attack upon  the  Appellant.   I  find  persuasive  the
    reasons set out in the Appellant's skeleton argument, those  being  the
    absence of police officers at the scene, which was unusual  given  that
    it was a Friday evening and the  adjacent  beer  parlours.   A  witness
    identified a plainclothes policeman as  coming  into  the  clinic  with
    spent  shells,  wanting  to  see  the  Appellant,   and   no   official
    investigation was opened by the police.  A colleague of  the  Appellant
    has given a statement that a police officer demanded that money be paid
    before an investigation was commenced.

78. My view of the medical evidence is that the Appellant is  fortunate  to
    be alive following the several gunshot wounds that he received on  21st
    September 2012.  In the absence of robbery as a motive, I am  satisfied
    that it is the Appellant's activities  as  a  lawyer  that  caused  the
    attack upon him to be made.  I find no good  reason  to  consider  that
    such an attack would not be repeated if the Appellant returned  to  his
    home.

79. I therefore do  not  accept  that  there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for the Appellant.  I accept that the leading  authority  on
    the issue of state protection is Horvath [2000] UKHL 37  in  which  the
    Supreme Court upheld what was stated by Stuart-Smith LJ in the Court of
    Appeal;

         "In my judgment there must be in force in the country in question a
         criminal law which makes the violent  attacks  by  the  persecutors
         punishable by  sentences  commensurate  with  the  gravity  of  the
         crimes.  The victims as  a  class  must  not  be  exempt  from  the
         protection of the law.  There must be a reasonable  willingness  by
         the law enforcement agencies, that is to say the police and  courts
         to detect, prosecute and punish offenders."

80. Mr Mullins on behalf of the Appellant has referred to the  Respondent's
    own Operational Guidance Note on Nigeria dated  December  2013  on  the
    existence of corruption within the police force, and the  inability  of
    government to control this, and I set out below paragraph 2.2.5;

         2.2.5    The NPF, SSS, and military report to civilian authorities;
                however, these security services periodically act outside of
                civilian control.  The government lack effective  mechanisms
                to investigate and punish abuse  and  corruption.   The  NPF
                remain  susceptible  to  corruption,  commit  human   rights
                abuses,  and  generally  operate  with   impunity   in   the
                apprehension, illegal detention, and sometimes execution  of
                criminal suspects.  The SSS also commit human rights abuses,
                particularly in restricting freedom of speech and press.  In
                some  cases  private  citizens  or  the  government  brought
                charges against perpetrators of human rights abuses in these
                units.   However  most  cases  lingered  in  court  or  went
                unresolved after initial investigation.

81. In the same report, at 2.2.9 there is reference to the police force  in
    Nigeria being implicated in frequent human rights violations, including
    extrajudicial  killings,  torture,  arbitrary  arrests  and   extortion
    related abuses.  Corruption remains a serious problem despite promising
    public statements by the new Inspector General of police.   The  police
    routinely solicit bribes from victims to investigate crimes,  and  from
    suspects to drop investigations.  Senior police officials  embezzle  or
    mismanage police funds.  Police corruption is  described  as  remaining
    rampant.

82. Again, in the same report, at 2.2.12 it is stated that  the  office  of
    the Inspector General of police  attempted  to  strengthen  the  police
    monitoring unit, which was charged with  visiting  police  stations  to
    search officers  for  signs  of  accepting  bribes,  but  the  unit  is
    described as remaining ineffective.  Citizens could report incidents of
    police corruption to the National  Human  Rights  Commission,  but  the
    report indicates that the NHRC did not act on such  complaints  and  no
    other mechanism existed to investigate security force abuse.

83. I do not find that there would  be  a  reasonable  option  of  internal
    relocation within  Nigeria.   The  Respondent  in  the  refusal  letter
    suggested relocating from Lagos to Abuja.   However  if  the  Appellant
    returned, he would have to earn a living as a  lawyer,  which  applying
    the lower standard of proof, I find would mean that  he  would  attract
    the attention of the authorities.  The police are present in Abuja just
    as they are in Lagos.  Indeed, the police have  a  presence  throughout
    Nigeria.  For that reason, I do not find that  there  is  a  reasonable
    internal relocation option open to the Appellant.

84. I am satisfied that the attack upon the Appellant was as a result of an
    imputed political opinion, in that he is perceived to be an  individual
    who has taken  a  stand  against  corruption  and  abuse  within  local
    government in Lagos, and the police force.  I  therefore  conclude  the
    Appellant has demonstrated a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason, and he is entitled to asylum.

85. If I was wrong in concluding that the Appellant had a well-founded fear
    of persecution by reason of imputed political  opinion,  I  would  find
    that the Appellant  would  be  entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to  paragraph  339C(iii)  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant has shown substantial grounds for believing that if  returned
    he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable,  or,
    owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself  of  the  protection  of
    Nigeria.  Serious harm includes  unlawful  killing,  according  to  the
    definition in paragraph 339C.

86. My primary finding therefore is that the Appellant  is  entitled  to  a
    grant of asylum.  I do not find that  the  evidence  reaches  the  high
    threshold of Article 2, in that it must be proved a near  certainty  of
    death in order for Article 2 to  apply  but  I  do  find  the  evidence
    demonstrates a real risk of treatment prohibited  by  Article  3.   For
    these reasons the Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is therefore not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds in relation to Article 3  of  the
1950 Convention.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction.   I  continue  that
direction pursuant to rule 14 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 4th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there is no fee award.





Signed                              Date 4th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
