
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01744/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     KV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I make this order because the  First-tier
    Tribunal made a similar order and in unresolved asylum appeals  such  as
    this there is a risk that publicity might itself create a  risk  to  the
    appellant in the event of his return.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse him asylum.

 3. There are extensive grounds.  With respect to Mr Muquit,  whose  grounds
    are entirely satisfactory, it may be that his best point  is  buried  in
    the middle of the list because that is where he says that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's adverse credibility findings are unsustainable.

 4. They are unsustainable because they are based on  a  misreading  of  the
    evidence.  At paragraph 41 of its decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    says in terms:

         "It is to be noted that the appellant made  no  mention  of  ankles
         being tied together and suspended upside down during his  screening
         or asylum interview".

 5. The judge then went on to find that he found that a significant omission
    that tended to undermine the credibility of the claim as  a  whole.  The
    problem with that finding is that it  is  wrong.   At  his  full  asylum
    interview at question 173 the appellant was asked:

         "How were you tortured?"

         He replied:

         "I was beaten.  ...  They hung me upside down.  Forced my head into
         water and burnt me".

 6. It follows therefore  that  a  major  reason  given  by  the  judge  for
    disbelieving the appellant is unsustainable.  Mr Muquit said  that  this
    contaminated the other findings, and with respect, I think  that  was  a
    very good word.  It is precisely what it did.

 7. Mr Walker, who, as I would expect, was scrupulously  fair,  pointed  out
    that the suggestion that the appellant had been  hung  upside  down  was
    made also in the psychiatric report where the psychiatrist had picked up
    that it had been claimed on an earlier occasion.

 8. This leads on conveniently to criticisms that have to  be  made  on  the
    judge's evaluation of the  expert  evidence.   There  is  a  psychiatric
    report from a Dr Dhumad.  I do not mean to minimise  or  trivialise  the
    report in any way when I say it is in the form not uncommon in cases  of
    this kind.  It explains that the decision that  the  appellant  suffered
    from post-traumatic stress disorder and concluded  with  an  observation
    that because of depression and poor concentration the  appellant  needed
    particularly sensitive treatment.  This is something  to  bear  in  mind
    when deciding if poor sequencing or  omission  of  apparently  important
    events is indeed significant and is  a  further  reason  why  the  judge
    should have thought a bit more before making the adverse finding that he
    did about the appellant  not  giving  a  complete  account  of  how  the
    injuries were inflicted.

 9. What ought to have happened is that that expert report, and  the  expert
    report from Dr Martin, a Fellow of the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of
    Edinburgh and a Fellow of the College of  Emergency  Medicine,  who  had
    considered the appellant's injuries and found  that  the  appellant  had
    injuries which were inflicted at the time he said they were inflicted as
    a result of torture,  should  have  been  considered  separately.   They
    should have been considered to see if they were credible and reasonable.
     If they were not proper reasons should have been given.  If  they  were
    then the facts of the reports should have  been  used  as  part  of  the
    overall credibility evaluation. There is at least a suspicion here  that
    instead of looking at the evidence  in  the  round,  as  the  judge  was
    supposed to have done, the judge decided  points  sequentially  and  had
    decided before considering the medical evidence that the  appellant  had
    not in fact told the truth.  I am not absolutely certain that  that  was
    what had happened but again it was another mistake. It should  be  clear
    that this is not what the judge did.

10. Scarring in Sri Lankan cases has been troublesome to Immigration  Judges
    in various incarnations for many years now.  There  are  photographs  in
    the bundle  prepared  by  Dr  Martin.   They  show  the  appellant  with
    something like twenty, I have not counted exactly,  vivid  scars  across
    his back.  Clearly it would be helpful if anybody deciding if such scars
    were inflicted, not as a result of torture but mischievously to  enhance
    an otherwise unmeritorious claim did  ask  just  what  was  involved  in
    submitting to such injuries.

11. Dr Martin has done that.  It was his judgment that it was unlikely  that
    anyone would submit to such injuries being done by a friend.  He said in
    terms that it was a possibility that the  injuries  had  been  inflicted
    voluntarily but he said "in my opinion I found  the  former  possibility
    extremely unlikely due to the numerous numbers of scars and the severity
    of the injuries".  This led him to go on to say that there was  "a  high
    likelihood that the injuries were caused by being tortured as  described
    by the claimant". Dr Martin's opinion is not necessarily  right  but  it
    needed to be respected and explained and sweeping it away because  of  a
    wholly mistaken reading of the evidence was not the proper way  to  deal
    with this case.

12. I think it is also right to say that the evidence is not  entirely  one-
    sided.  It is a matter of surprise to me that  the  appellant  left  Sri
    Lanka with a  return  ticket  in  his  pocket  if  were  really  fleeing
    persecution.

13.  Nevertheless,  for  all  the  reasons  indicated  above   and   without
    opposition from the Secretary of State after Mr  Walker  had  heard  the
    submissions  I  conclude   that   this   determination   is   completely
    unsatisfactory.

Notice of Decision

The appeal has not  been  determined  properly.   I  allow  the  appellant's
appeal to the extent that I rule that the appeal has to be determined  again
in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  file  will  be  sent  for  listing   in
Birmingham. The appellant now lives in Walthamstow. He should apply  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if he wants the appeal heard in London.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 December 2015               |

