
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01780/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 21 January 2015                           |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi, instructed by Migrant Legal Project

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Archer) dismissing DA's appeal on asylum and
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR  but
    allowing the appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 31 December 1978.
     She came to the UK in 2003 when she was  24  years  old.   It  is  now
    accepted that she was trafficked for sexual exploitation.   In  October
    2011, the appellant's daughter, E entered the UK on a visit  visa.   On
    20 October 2011, the appellant claimed  asylum  with  her  children  as
    dependants.  The children were born on 1 May 2007, 16 February 2009,  1
    February 2011 and 26 January 2012 and  are  all  citizens  of  Nigeria.
    Their father, also a citizen of Nigeria separated  from  the  appellant
    before Christmas 2013.  In addition, the appellant's daughter, E  (whom
    I have already referred to as entering  on  a  visit  visa  in  October
    2011), was born on 26 December 1998.  She has a  different  father  but
    she is also a Nigerian citizen.

 5. The appellant's claim is that she entered the UK in November 2003 as  a
    victim of trafficking.  After six months of  sexual  exploitation,  she
    ran away from her trafficker and started a family with her then partner
    and gave birth  in  the  UK  to  their  four  children.   Although  the
    appellant's original claim was based upon a fear as a result of being a
    Christian woman in a relationship with a  Muslim  man  that  claim  was
    abandoned since the relationship broke up in 2013.  Her  current  claim
    was based upon her history of being  trafficked  and  that  she  had  a
    history of mental health problems, was uneducated and illiterate and as
    a single mother of five children returning to Nigeria with no family or
    other social support she would face severe discrimination  and  serious
    harm.

 6. On 24 February 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds.
    On that date, the Secretary of State also made a decision to remove the
    appellant to Nigeria by way of directions under s.10 of the Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal

 8.  Judge  Archer  rejected  the  appellant's  claim   for   international
    protection under the Refugee  Convention,  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  That is not challenged.

 9. However, the judge allowed the appellant's appeal under Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.  The judge accepted that the appellant had been trafficked to the
    UK for the purposes of sexual exploitation and had been in  prison  and
    compelled to have sex against her wishes for six months.   Further,  he
    accepted that the appellant was a vulnerable person with mental  health
    issues, in particular that she suffered from depression.

10. However, central  to  the  judge's  conclusions  that  the  appellant's
    removal would not be proportionate  was  the  "best  interests  of  the
    children."  Before Judge Archer, it  was  conceded  by  the  Presenting
    Officer that the oldest child born in the UK on  1  May  2007  met  the
    requirements  of  para  276ADE(iv)  because  he  was  under   18,   had
    continuously lived in the UK for at least  seven  years  and,  as  para
    276ADE(iv) required, it would not be reasonable for him to leave the UK
    and live in Nigeria.  Further, the judge considered  an  expert  report
    from an Independent Social Worker, Mr  Johal  dated  16  June  2014  in
    particular (at para 32 of the determination) that:

         "the family will eventually face severe hardship  upon  return  and
         the appellant and [E] may be forced into prostitution as a means of
         survival."

11. The judge also relied upon the  expert  report's  conclusion  which  he
    summarised at para 33 of the determination that:

         "there is no doubt that the children's  best  interests  (including
         meeting their physical, emotional, health  and  educational  needs)
         are met by them continuing to live in the UK."

12. At para 34,  the  judge,  having  considered  the  objective  evidence,
    concluded that:

         "The appellant and the children face a broadly bleak future if they
         are removed to Nigeria.  I find that it  is  clearly  in  the  best
         interests of the children to  remain  in  the  UK.   I  reject  the
         respondent's conclusion that it is in the  best  interests  of  the
         children to be removed to Nigeria.  I recognise that the respondent
         did not have access  to  the  expert  report  as  at  the  date  of
         decision.  I find that it is highly unlikely that any expert  would
         find that it is in the best interests of the children to be removed
         to Nigeria, given my findings of fact above.   The  factual  matrix
         cannot support that conclusion."

13. Having set out the proper approach to determine whether  the  appellant
    should succeed under Art 8 outside the Rules  and  the  requirement  to
    show  that  there  were  "sufficiently  compelling"  circumstances   to
    outweigh the public interest,  and  noting  that  the  children's  best
    interests were, "a primary consideration"  but  were  "not  necessarily
    determinative," the judge stated at paras 40-41 his conclusion  that  a
    breach of Art 8 was established as follows:

         "40. I am satisfied that the factual matrix in this  case  (history
             as a victim of trafficking,  return  without  family  support,
             return as a single mother with five  children,  mental  health
             issues and the fact that SD has a potential  right  under  the
             Rules to remain in the UK) amounts  to  arguably  sufficiently
             compelling circumstances such as to justify  consideration  of
             Article 8 outside the Rules.

         41.  I have carefully considered all of the authorities cited by Mr
             Hoshi at paragraphs 11-21 of his skeleton argument and do  not
             find it necessary to repeat them here.  In the end, this is  a
             clear cut  case.  Removal  is  not  proportionate.   The  best
             interests of the children are not outweighed by the legitimate
             objective."

14. As a consequence, the judge allowed the appeal under Art 8.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Omotosho) on 24 July 2014.   However,  on  7  October  2014  UTJ
    Kekic, dealing with the renewed  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

16. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Grounds of Appeal

17. The grounds of appeal may be summarised as follows:

      1) The judge failed to give adequate reasons for his finding that  the
         appellant had been trafficked to the UK;

      2) The judge failed properly to direct himself  as  to  whether  there
         were "good arguable grounds" for granting leave outside  the  Rules
         relying on Gulshan (Article 8  -  New  Rules  -  Correct  Approach)
         [2013] UKUT  640  (IAC)  and  erred  in  finding  that  there  were
         sufficiently "compelling circumstances" to grant leave outside  the
         Rules; in particular there was no evidence to support  the  judge's
         finding that the appellant suffered from  depression  and  required
         support;

      3) The judge erred in law in assessing the  "best  interests"  of  the
         appellant's children and in applying the decision  of  the  Supreme
         Court in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]  UKSC  74  because  the  appellant's
         children were not British citizens  and  had  no  right  to  future
         education or healthcare in the UK.

      4) In addition,  reliance  was  placed  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in  EV  (Philippines)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  in
         particular that, where none of the family  is  a  British  citizen,
         none has the right  to  remain  in  the  UK  it  will  be  entirely
         reasonable to expect the  children  to  return  with  the  parents.



Discussion

18. Mr Richards, in his oral submissions  accepted  that  he  was  in  some
    difficulty in pursuing the grounds of appeal.  First, he accepted  that
    the appellant had been a victim of trafficking.  Indeed I was  shown  a
    "conclusive grounds" decision dated  5  September  2014  in  which  the
    Secretary of State, as  the  Competent  Authority,  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been trafficked.  Consequently,  Mr  Richards  no  longer
    pursued a challenge to the judge's finding that the appellant had  been
    trafficked.

19. Secondly, Mr Richards accepted that the judge had found that there were
    "compelling circumstances" to justify the grant of  leave  outside  the
    Rules and, although the judge did not refer to Gulshan or R  (Nagre)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Mr Richards did not pursue ground 2  that
    the judge erred in law by failing to consider whether there were  "good
    arguable grounds" for granting leave outside the Rules.

20. Mr Richards was undoubtedly correct to do so in the light of the  Court
    of Appeal's view expressed in MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  985
    at [128] that there was no "threshold" criterion  of  "arguability"  in
    determining whether a decision was proportionate under Art  8(2)  where
    an individual did not meet the requirements of the Rules  (see  also  R
    (Aliyu and Aliyu) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin) at [59]).

21. Mr Richards also accepted that he could not  properly  argue  that  the
    judge's findings were irrational.  He made no further submissions other
    than to state that, subject to the difficulties he had  identified,  he
    relied upon the grounds.

22. In response, Mr Hoshi sought to deal with the grounds which Mr Richards
    continued to rely upon in (3) and (4) above  even  though  Mr  Richards
    made no specific submissions in relation to them.

23. First, in relation  to  (2)  Mr  Hoshi  submitted  that  there  was  an
    evidential basis for the judge to find that the appellant was suffering
    from depression.  He referred me to the evidence set out at para 16  of
    the appellant's Rule 24 response as follows:

         "(a) At p.9 of her  report,  Balwinder  Johal  (Independent  Social
             Worker), who had seen the appellant's medical records,  listed
             the medication that the  appellant  had  been  prescribed  "in
             relation to her anxiety and depression;"

         (b)  at p.20 of her report,  Ms  Johal  wrote  in  respect  of  the
             appellant that "[A] referral to a mental health support worker
             may be required;"

         (c)  the appellant's medical records appeared  at  A20-A34  of  the
             appellant's bundle - she had been prescribed with  Hydroxizine
             (Atarax,  anti-anxiety  medication)  and   Olanzapine   (anti-
             psychotic medication) (see A23); and

         (d)  the appellant supplied a photocopy  of  her  prescription  for
             Citalopram  (anti-depressant  medication)  at   A94   of   the
             appellant's bundle (this prescription did not  appear  in  her
             medical records because it post-dated the date  on  which  her
             medical records were supplied to her representatives). "

24. In addition, Mr Hoshi reminded me that  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been trafficked and sexually exploited for six months and
    been subject to abuse which  was  relevant  to  his  finding  that  she
    suffered from depression and might require referral or support  from  a
    mental health worker.

25. Secondly, Mr Hoshi submitted that the respondent's grounds, in  effect,
    sought to  elevate  the  decisions  in  Zoumbas  and  EV  to  establish
    principles that if it is in the best interests of children to remain in
    the UK, as they are not British citizens their best interests  will  in
    all cases be outweighed by the public interest.  He submitted that that
    was not the ratio of  either  case.   The  assessment  of  whether  the
    children's best interests were  outweighed  required  a  fact-sensitive
    assessment which the judge had carried out at para 31  onwards  of  his
    determination taking into account the severe hardship that  they  would
    face on return.  Mr Hoshi submitted that the judge's approach  was  not
    erroneous.

26. Mr Hoshi submitted that Zoumbas  was  correctly  distinguished  by  the
    judge at para 34 not least on the basis  that  it  did  not  involve  a
    "single parent" and there was a  distinction  between  the  appellant's
    history in the UK and that of the  appellant  in  Zoumbas  who  had  an
    "unedifying" or "appalling" immigration history.  Here,  the  judge  in
    contrast, found at para 27 that  given  that  the  appellant  had  been
    trafficked he would draw no adverse inferences as  to  her  immigration
    history.  There was also the issue of benefit fraud in Zoumbas.

27. Mr Hoshi submitted that there were five children in this appeal, one of
    whom, it was conceded, if an application were made, would succeed under
    para 276ADE(iv), not least on the basis that it would not be reasonable
    to expect him to return to Nigeria.   Mr  Hoshi  reminded  me  that  in
    Zoumbas there had been a finding that there was "no  serious  detriment
    to the well-being" of the children on return.

28. As regards EV, Mr Hoshi submitted that again  that  case  was  properly
    distinguishable as the  judge  had  found  that  the  two  parents,  on
    returning to the Philippines, would have accommodation  and  employment
    and, despite a finding that it would be in the best  interests  of  the
    children to remain in the UK, the Court of Appeal simply concluded that
    in those circumstances that  was  properly  outweighed  by  the  public
    interest.   Mr Hoshi submitted that the passages  in  the  judgment  of
    Lewson LJ, in particular at [60], relied upon in the grounds, were only
    emphasising that the expense to the public purse of educating children,
    just as the expense of providing NHS medical treatment, was  likely  to
    outweigh the best interests of the children to remain in the UK and the
    benefit of them remaining with their parents who were  to  be  removed.
    However, this was not a pure education or pure NHS case as  there  were
    "wider" issues because of the impact on the  children  if  returned  to
    Nigeria.

Discussion

29. First, I accept Mr Hoshi's submission that the judge  was  entitled  to
    find at para 31 of his determination that the appellant  suffered  from
    depression and might require referral and support from a mental  health
    worker.  The documents and evidence referred to by Mr Hoshi at para  16
    of his Rule 24 reply (which I have set out above) were, in my judgment,
    sufficient and adequate to support his finding even in the absence of a
    specific medical report setting out the appellant's diagnosis.

30. Secondly, I accept Mr Hoshi's submissions on the application of Zoumbas
    and EV.

31. In her grounds, the Secretary of State relies upon [24] of Lord Hodge's
    judgment in Zoumbas which is as follows:

         "There is no irrationality in the conclusion that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo.  No doubt it would have  been  possible  to  have  stated
         that, other things being equal, it was in the best interests of the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher
         standard than would be available in the Congo.   But  other  things
         were not equal.  They were not British citizens.  They had no right
         to future education and health care in  this  country.   They  were
         part of a close-knit family with highly educated parents  and  were
         of an age when their emotional needs could only be fully met within
         the immediate family unit.  Such integration as had  occurred  into
         United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the context
         of  that  family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision-maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care of their parents without serious detriment to their  well-
         being.  We agree  with  Lady  Dorrian's  succinct  summary  of  the
         position in para 18 of the Inner House's opinion."

32. I do not understand Lord Hodge to be suggesting that the best interests
    of a child or  children  to  remain  in  the  UK  will  necessarily  be
    outweighed where they are not British citizens.  In  Zoumbas,  as  Lord
    Hodge makes clear  in  the  first  sentence  of  [24],  the  judge  had
    concluded that it was in the children's best interests to go with their
    parents, in that case, to the Republic of Congo and  that  was  not  an
    irrational conclusion.  In this appeal, by contrast,  the  judge  found
    that it was in the best interests of the children to remain in the  UK.
    That was, in large measure, based upon the effect  that  removal  would
    have on the appellant and, in particular, E.  The judge found,  relying
    on the expert report:

         "the family will eventually face severe hardship  upon  return  and
         the appellant and E may be forced into prostitution as a  means  of
         survival."

33. That finding is not challenged in this appeal and it was, in any event,
    rationally open to the judge in the light of  the  expert  report.   By
    contrast, in  Zoumbas,  the  decision  maker  had  concluded  that  the
    children could return to the Republic of Congo in  the  care  of  their
    parents "without serious detriment to their well-being."  I agree  with
    Mr Hoshi that that is a significant difference  between  the  facts  of
    Zoumbas and the present appeal.

34. Lord Hodge does place weight  upon  the  fact  neither  the  children's
    parents nor the children in  Zoumbas  were  British  citizens  and  the
    latter had no  right  to  "future  education  and  healthcare  in  this
    country."  However, I do not understand Lord Hodge to be  stating  that
    being a "British citizen" is a necessary condition to succeeding in  an
    Art 8 claim.  That is patently not the case.  The point being made  is,
    however, that "all things being equal" none of the  individual  in  the
    family in Zoumbas had any basis for  remaining  in  the  UK,  including
    enjoying free education and healthcare.

35. This appeal is  different.   It  was  conceded  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and Mr Richards accepted that concession before me, that  the
    appellant's eldest child born in the UK on 1 May 2007 would be entitled
    to leave under para 276ADE(iv) because he had been in the UK for  seven
    years and it was not reasonable to expect him to leave the UK and  live
    in Nigeria.  As Mr Hoshi helpfully pointed  out  to  me,  although  the
    child would not be entitled initially to ILR but  only  to  30  months'
    leave, further leave and ILR would "all things being equal" follow.

36. That fact was a matter which the judge clearly  took  into  account  at
    para 30  of  his  determination.   One  of  the  appellant's  children,
    therefore, has a basis for remaining lawfully in the UK and, of course,
    enjoying such benefits as education and healthcare that went along with
    that leave.  There is no suggestion in this appeal that the appellant's
    family should  be  split.   It  was  therefore,  a  very  powerful  and
    significant factor in determining whether the public interest justified
    the removal of the appellant and her children.

37. That, also, in my judgment, touches  upon  the  issues  raised  in  the
    grounds in reliance upon the  judgment  of  Lewison  LJ  at  [58]-[60].
    There, Lewison LJ said this:

                  "58. In my judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the
             best interests of the children must be made on the basis  that
             the facts are as they are in the real world.   If  one  parent
             has no right to remain, but the other parent does, that is the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus
             the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?

     59. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children  to
             follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the  family
             would be separated and the children would be deprived  of  the
             right to grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

     60. That is a long way from the facts of our case.  In  our  case  none
             of the family is a British citizen.  None  has  the  right  to
             remain in this country.  If the mother is removed, the  father
             has no independent  right  to  remain.   If  the  parents  are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go with  them.   As  the  immigration  judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents.  Although it is, of course a question of fact for the
             tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents.  Just as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world."

38. The "real world" situation in this appeal is, of course,  that  one  of
    the appellant's children is entitled to leave to remain for a period of
    30 months under para 276ADE.  This is not a  case  where  none  of  the
    family has any lawful basis for being in the UK.  That  concession  has
    built within it an acceptance by the Secretary of State that it is  not
    "reasonable to expect" that child to follow  the  appellant  (its  only
    effective parent) to Nigeria.

39. Further, I see nothing in EV to dictate that one of the  family  should
    be a "British citizen" in order that a breach of Art 8  may  follow  if
    that individual is required to leave the UK.  It may  be  that  without
    any right of abode or "right to remain" (as Lewison LJ states at [60]),
    the best interests of a child simply determined on the basis that their
    educational or health wellbeing will be better  served  in  the  UK  is
    unlikely to outweigh the public interest in the economic well-being  of
    the country.  Here, however, one of the children does have a  right  to
    remain and an assessment of their best interests does not  rest  simply
    on the basis that their educational and  health  well-being  is  better
    served in the UK.  The judge found, as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
    history  of  being  trafficked  for  sexual   exploitation,   and   the
    circumstances in which she would return to Nigeria  that  there  was  a
    very real prospect of a "severe hardship" being  suffered  by  them  on
    return.  That finding  is  not  challenged  and  it  is  a  significant
    difference from the factual matrix in EV as well as Zoumbas.

40. Mr Richards did not actively pursue in  his  submissions  the  grounds'
    reliance on Zoumbas and EV.  Out of deference  to  Mr  Hoshi's  careful
    submissions why the grounds do not establish an error  of  law  by  the
    judge, I have dealt at some length with the position  set  out  in  the
    grounds.  For the reasons I have given, I am  wholly  unpersuaded  that
    those grounds identify any error of law in the judge's approach to, and
    findings in relation to, Art 8 and  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's children are not outweighed  by  the  public  interest  and
    their removal to Nigeria would not be proportionate.


Decision

41. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law.  That decision stands.

42. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

