
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA016132015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th May 2017                      |On 23rd June 2017                    |

                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                     AAA
                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, Counsel instructed by Ison Harrison
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  the  decision  of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson who, in a decision promulgated  on  the
   30th November 2016, allowed the appeal against refusal of the appellant's
   international protection claim.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya who was born on the  [  ]  1979.  The
   basis of his claim was (and no doubt still is) that  he  is  at  risk  of
   being murdered by his former employers in Libya in order to  prevent  him
   from  making  further   complaints   concerning   their   structure   and
   organisation.

3. Judge Hindson believed that the appellant had made  such  complaints.  He
   also believed "the bare facts" of the appellant's description of a  road-
   traffic incident, which had subsequently occurred on the 19th June  2014.
   He did not however share the appellant's view that this was an attempt to
   kill him. He considered instead that it  was  an  entirely  innocent  and
   unconnected  event  [paragraph  40].  He  therefore  concluded  that  the
   appellant would not be at risk  of  harm  at  the  hands  of  his  former
   employers upon returning to Libya [paragraph 41].

4. However, Judge Hindson also concluded  that  there  was  a  risk  to  the
   appellant of suffering serious harm throughout Libya due to the situation
   of internal armed conflict in that country [paragraphs  37  and  38].  He
   based this conclusion upon travel advice issued to British and other non-
   Libyan travellers by the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  (FCO)  and  an
   article in the 'Libyan Observer' that was published on the 20th September
   2016. Permission to appeal against this finding  was   granted  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Grubb, who considered that (a) "it is  arguable  that  the
   Judge failed to give adequate reasons for  his  finding  based  upon  the
   background evidence and the appellant's  individual  circumstances",  and
   (b) "it was arguably inadequate  simply  to  rely  upon  the  FCO  travel
   advice".

5. Following the decision in FA (Libya: art  15(c)  Libya)  CG  2016  [UKUT]
   00413, the question of whether a person is at article 15(c) risk in Libya
   should, until further Country Guidance, be determined on the basis of the
   individual evidence in the case. The  reasons  for  this  conclusion  are
   particularly illuminating given the complaint that the  judge  ought  not
   "simply to rely on the FCO travel advice":

    In fact, as it seems to us, there have been numerous changes  in  Libya
    since November 2013, and that they are sufficient to render  unreliable
    the guidance on art 15(c) given in AT.  Amongst those changes  are  the
    cessation of direct flights from the United Kingdom, the ebb  and  flow
    of fighting in Libya, the rise of Daesh,  and  the  issue  of  numerous
    reports and advice, not least by the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office.
    [Emphasis added].

   Given the above, the proposition that the judge would have been in  error
   to rely solely upon the FCO travel advice (that is to  say,  assuming  he
   had not also relied upon an article in the 'Libya  Observer')  is  in  my
   judgement untenable. This is particularly so given that  Mr  Diwnycz  did
   not seek to argue that other  background  country  information  suggested
   that any other conclusion was appropriate.

6. The complaint that the judge failed to have  regard  to  the  appellant's
   individual circumstances derives no doubt from the requirement in Article
   15(c) that the threat  to  life  or  person  must  arise  not  only  from
   "indiscriminate violence" due to internal armed conflict, but  also  that
   it must be "individual". The meaning of this requirement  was  considered
   by the European Court of Justice in Elgafaji [2009] Case C - 465/07.  Its
   conclusions are set out at paragraph 43 of the judgement -
    Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the
    questions  referred  is  that  Article  15(c)  of  the  Directive,   in
    conjunction with Article 2(e) thereof, must be interpreted  as  meaning
    that:
    -        the existence of a serious and individual threat to the  life
    or person of an applicant for subsidiary protection is not  subject  to
    the  condition  that  that  applicant  adduce  evidence  that   he   is
    specifically targeted by reason of factors particular to  his  personal
    circumstances;
    -        the existence of such a threat can exceptionally be considered
    to  be  established  where  the  degree  of   indiscriminate   violence
    characterising the armed  conflict  taking  place  -  assessed  by  the
    competent  national  authorities  before  which  an   application   for
    subsidiary protection is made, or by the courts of a  Member  State  to
    which a decision refusing such an application  is  referred  -  reaches
    such a high level that substantial grounds are shown for believing that
    a civilian, returned to the relevant country or, as the case may be, to
    the relevant region, would, solely on account of his  presence  on  the
    territory of that country or region, face a real risk of being  subject
    to that threat. [Emphasis added]

7. It is  thus  clear  that,  exceptionally,  the  level  of  indiscriminate
   violence may be such that there is a  risk  of  serious  harm  solely  on
   account  of  an  individual's  presence  in  the  territory  in  question
   irrespective of personal circumstances. Given the nature and  content  of
   the evidence that was before Judge Hindson in this appeal, I am satisfied
   that it was reasonably  open  to  him  to  conclude  that  the  level  of
   indiscriminate violence arising from the internal armed conflict in Libya
   had crossed this particular threshold. It follows from  this  that  Judge
   Hindson did not make an error  of  law  and  that  this  appeal  must  be
   dismissed.

Notice of Decision

8. The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 22nd June 2017


Judge Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
