
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01982/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Date Sent                   |
|On 17 October 2013                        |On 22 October 2013          |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                   MR S G
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Ms E Daykin of counsel
           instructed by Blavo & Co solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr N Bramble a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea and to have been  born
      on  12  May  1995.  He  has  been  given  permission  to  appeal   the
      determination of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walker  (the  FTTJ)  who
      dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision of 18  February
      2013 to give directions  for  his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
      following the refusal of asylum.


   2. The appellant claimed to have left Eritrea on 16 September 2011 and to
      have entered the UK illegally on or about 27  June  2012.  He  claimed
      asylum on 29 June 2012.


   3. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Eritrea, born in that country
      and to have been a Pentecostal Christian all his  life.  He  moved  to
      Ethiopia in 1995 when he was about three months old. His  mother  left
      in 1998 and he has only seen her once since then. His father worked as
      a ground technician with Ethiopian Airlines. The appellant  said  that
      he did not go to school in Ethiopia.


   4. The appellant claimed that after war broke out  between  Ethiopia  and
      Eritrea in March 2000 he, his father and a  cousin  were  deported  to
      Eritrea after his father had been sacked from his job.  They  went  to
      live with an aunt in Eritrea and stayed  with  her  between  2000  and
      2002. The appellant was injured when his aunt's house caught  fire  in
      November 2000.


   5. In 2002 the appellant said that his father got a job  in  Egypt  as  a
      ground technician with Gulf Airways.  The  appellant  was  allowed  to
      leave Eritrea with his father and go to Egypt. He attended  school  in
      Egypt and a Pentecostal church every Sunday.  The  appellant's  father
      had difficulties with his employers and was dismissed in  March  2010.
      His work permit expired and the appellant returned to Eritrea with his
      father in June 2010.


   6. The appellant said that the Pentecostal religion had  been  banned  in
      Eritrea in 2002 and that anyone  practising  Pentecostal  Christianity
      had to do so in secret. He claimed that in September  2011  whilst  he
      and his father and two others were  practising  their  faith  soldiers
      broke into their house ransacked it and confiscated their Bibles. They
      were accused of practising a  banned  religion  and  taken  away.  The
      appellant said that he was detained, beaten and suffered broken teeth.
      He  was  interrogated  and  told  to  name  other  followers  of   the
      Pentecostal faith. He spotted a police driver he recognised who helped
      him escape. Later he discovered that a bribe had been paid  to  secure
      his release. His aunt said that he had to leave the  country  and  she
      made the arrangements. He left Eritrea on 16 September 2011, travel to
      Djibouti and then, with the assistance of agents, was brought  to  the
      UK.


   7. The appellant claimed to have a well founded fear  of  persecution  in
      Eritrea because of his religious faith as a Pentecostal Christian.  He
      feared that if he returned he  would,  as  had  already  happened,  be
      arrested and seriously ill treated. He also feared being punished as a
      draft evader or somebody who had left the country illegally. He  could
      face an indefinite term of imprisonment.


   8. The appellant said that his main language was Amharic because  he  was
      raised in Ethiopia. When he was in Egypt teaching was in  English  and
      he socialised with non-Arabic speaking people.


   9. The respondent accepted the appellant's claimed date of birth.  On  16
      August 2012 he underwent a language  analysis  test  by  Sprakab.  The
      conclusions were that he spoke Amharic but could not speak Tigrinya or
      Arabic. He could speak Amharic to "native" level  and  his  linguistic
      background was assessed to be Ethiopian with a  very  high  degree  of
      certainty. It was also assessed to be very likely that his  linguistic
      background was Addis Ababa in Ethiopia. Based  on  this  analysis  the
      respondent did not accept that the appellant was a national of Eritrea
      or that he had been  removed  to  that  country  as  he  claimed.  The
      respondent concluded that the appellant was Ethiopian, could return to
      that country without difficulty and would be entitled to apply for  an
      Ethiopian passport or travel documents. He would be able  to  practice
      his Pentecostal faith in Ethiopia. The respondent considered that  the
      appellant was not a credible witness.


  10. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard his appeal on 22 July  2013.
      Both parties were represented, the appellant by Ms  Daykin.  The  FTTJ
      heard oral evidence from the appellant and a friend who claimed to  be
      a citizen of Eritrea who could confirm his nationality (Mr T). In  his
      determination the FTTJ found that the Sprakab linguistic analysis  was
      correct. He concluded that the appellant was a citizen of Ethiopia not
      Eritrea. He was not a credible witness. His account of events was  not
      believed. The  FTTJ  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds.


  11. The appellant applied for and was granted permission  to  appeal.  The
      grounds submits that the FTTJ erred in law by his erroneous  treatment
      of the expert report from Professor Patrick, failing to  take  account
      of the objective evidence that  Amharic  was  spoken  in  Eritrea  and
      failing to place any weight on the evidence of the appellant's friend.


  12. I have a bundle submitted by the appellant's  solicitors  which  I  am
      told contains documentation which was  before  the  FTTJ  and  no  new
      material. There are no skeleton arguments and Ms Daykin relied on  her
      grounds.


  13. Ms Daykin submitted the judgement of the Extra Division, Inner  House,
      Court of Session in Scotland in MABN and anr v  The  Advocate  General
      for Scotland [2013] CSIH 68 (12 July 2013). I can find  no  indication
      that this judgement was put before the FTTJ although there is  mention
      of it in Professor Patrick's report.  The  papers  already  before  me
      include RB (Linguistic evidence Sprakab) Somalia [2010] UKUT 329 (IAC)
      (15 September 2010) which was before  the  FTTJ.  I  cannot  find  any
      indication that RB  (Somalia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2012] EWCA Civ 277 (13 March 2012) was before the FTTJ.


  14. In her submissions Ms Daykin submitted  that  the  judge  should  have
      placed no weight on the Sprakab report. Only a report from  an  expert
      with the qualifications which Professor Patrick  considered  necessary
      could have been given  weight  and  there  was  no  such  report.  Her
      instructions were that the appellant's solicitors had tried to find an
      expert with the required qualifications, but without success.


  15. In reply to my question, Ms Daykin accepted that what was relied on in
      paragraph 7 of the grounds of appeal did not reflect all that the FTTJ
      said in his determination about Amharic being spoken  in  Eritrea.  In
      relation to paragraph 8 of the grounds, referring to paragraph  48  of
      the determination, Ms Daykin accepted that Mr T did  not  produce  any
      documentation to show that he had been recognised as a refugee in  the
      UK.


  16. I was asked to find  that  the  FTTJ  erred  in  law,  set  aside  his
      determination and adjourn for it to be remade, preferably in the Upper
      Tribunal.


  17. Mr Bramble submitted that in relation to the  Sprakab  report  it  was
      clear that the  FTTJ  had  given  proper  consideration  to  Professor
      Patrick's report. The judgement  of  the  Court  of  Session  was  not
      binding on the Upper Tribunal  although  it  could  be  of  persuasive
      effect. Professor Patrick conceded that he did not have  any  personal
      knowledge of the languages in question. He submitted that it was  open
      to the FTTJ to reject Professor Patrick's view and rely on the Sprakab
      report. In his report Professor Patrick  incorrectly  stated  the  age
      span  during  which  the  appellant  was  in   an   Amharic   speaking
      environment. He said between the ages of three months and seven  years
      whereas  the  appellant's  evidence  was  inconsistent  and  the  FTTJ
      concluded that it was between three months and just under  five  years
      of age. The FTTJ made a proper assessment of the appellant's claims as
      to where he had lived and the languages he might have acquired.  There
      was evidence to support the conclusions reached in the Sprakab report.


  18. As to the second ground of appeal, Mr Bramble said  that  whilst  this
      was correct in so far as it went it took no account of the totality of
      what the FTTJ said.


  19. As to the third ground, Mr Bramble argued  that  the  FTTJ  gave  more
      reasons for finding the witness not  credible  which  were  more  than
      sufficient to support his conclusion.  Furthermore,  it  was  for  the
      appellant to prove his case, not for the respondent to disprove it. He
      argued that there was no error of law  and  asked  me  to  uphold  the
      determination.


  20. In her reply Ms Daykin reiterated that the FTTJ did  not  sufficiently
      assessed Professor Patrick's report when accepting and  giving  weight
      to the Sprakab report.


  21. I reserved my determination.


  22. Professor Patrick's qualifications indicate that he has the  expertise
      to express his opinions and it has not been  suggested  that  he  does
      not. The fact that he does not speak any of the languages in  question
      means that whilst he can express opinions on Sprakab's  qualifications
      and methodology he is, as he accepts, in no position to make  his  own
      analysis of the appellant's speech. Ms Daykin submitted that the  FTTJ
      should have given no weight to the Sprakab report.  Professor  Patrick
      does not go quite so far. In paragraph 7d of his  General  Conclusions
      he states "The  Sprakab  report  on  (the  appellant)  should  not  be
      accepted in scientific evidence, or if it is, its  conclusions  should
      at least be  viewed  with  deep  scepticism."  Whilst  in  his  report
      Professor Patrick makes reference to MABN in the Court  of  Session  I
      can find no indication in the determination, the skeleton argument  or
      elsewhere, that the FTTJ's attention was drawn to this or that he  was
      provided with a copy. In the circumstances I find that  the  FTTJ  did
      not err by failing to have regard to an authority  which  was  in  any
      event not binding on him, although had it been provided it should have
      been considered and might have been persuasive.


  23. On the other hand RB in the Upper Tribunal was an authority which  the
      FTTJ was required to follow unless he was  persuaded  that  there  was
      evidence clearly indicating that he should take a different  view.  It
      is not clear whether the FTTJ was aware that RB had been upheld by the
      Court of Appeal or if so the basis on which this had  been  done.  The
      principles laid down by the Upper Tribunal in RB are summarised in the
      paragraph; "Linguistic analysis reports from Sprakab are  entitled  to
      considerable weight. That conclusion derives from the  data  available
      to Sprakab and the process it uses. They  should  not  be  treated  as
      infallible but evidence opposing them  will  need  to  deal  with  the
      particular factors identified in the report."


  24. I find that the FTTJ did follow RB, the effect of which he  summarised
      in paragraph 35. However, he did  not  treat  the  Sprakab  report  as
      infallible. Between paragraphs 36  and  39  and  in  paragraph  42  he
      addressed Professor Patrick's report.  He also took into  account  the
      COI objective evidence referred to in paragraph 41. In paragraph 42 he
      accepted Professor Patrick's opinion but explained why his  assessment
      of  the  appellant's  evidence  entitled  him  to  reach  a  different
      conclusion. He did not question Professor Patrick's expertise. I  find
      that the FTTJ made a proper summary and analysis of the report  before
      reaching the conclusion, open to him on all  the  evidence,  that  the
      Sprakab linguistic analysis was correct.


  25. I find that the FTTJ did not reject the appellant's evidence and  find
      him not credible purely on the basis of the Sprakab report. There  are
      other strong reasons for this conclusion which appear in paragraphs 44
      to 48 of the determination. These are either  not  challenged  in  the
      grounds of appeal or, if they are, any challenge is not made  out  for
      reasons which follow.


  26. The second ground of appeal argues that the  judge  erred  in  law  by
      finding, in paragraph 42, that there was no reference to Amharic being
      spoken in Eritrea when there was a clear indication to the contrary in
      paragraph 19.04 of the COI report before him.  This  may  be  strictly
      correct but it is nothing to the point because it does not  accurately
      represent the FTTJ's findings. Rather than rejecting  the  claim  that
      Amharic was spoken in Eritrea in paragraph 42 the  FTTJ  accepted  the
      evidence of Professor Patrick that Amharic was the  official  language
      of Eritrea until  independence  and  that  it  was  spoken  by  ethnic
      Eritreans who had lived in Ethiopian before  being  forced  out.  This
      ground does not identify any error of law.


  27. The third ground of appeal submits that the  judge  erred  in  law  by
      failing to place any weight on the evidence of the witness Mr T. It is
      argued that the FTTJ did so because the witness produced  no  evidence
      linking him to Eritrea or proving that  he  was  an  Eritrean  citizen
      apart from his UK provisional driving licence. This ground also  fails
      fully to reflect what the judge said, in this case  in  paragraph  48.
      The FTTJ found that Mr T was not a credible witness for more than this
      reason alone. He had given evidence in Amharic rather than one of  the
      main Eritrean languages. There was no evidence to support  his  claims
      that he also spoke Arabic  and  Tigrinya.  He  had  not  produced  any
      evidence linking him with Eritrea or proving that he was  an  Eritrean
      citizen. I note that in his witness statement the witness says nothing
      about his status in this country. It should not  have  been  difficult
      for him to provide documentation to show  his  status  whether  as  an
      asylum claimant, recognised refugee or in some  other  capacity.  This
      ground does not identify any error of law.


  28. I find that the FTTJ did not err in law. I uphold his determination.


  29. The FTTJ made an anonymity direction which I repeat.


  30. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.  This  direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.














      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 19
      October 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

