
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01226/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th September 2015               |On 5th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    N R C
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Madanhi of Genesis Law Associates Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State has appealed against the decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Nixon (the judge)  promulgated  on  26th  March
    2015.  For the purposes of this decision we shall  hereafter  refer  to
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent and N R C  as  the  Appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zimbabwe born 24  September  1997.
    She initially entered the  United  Kingdom  in  2002  and  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain as a dependant in the asylum  claim  of  her
    aunt S who was granted  refugee  status.   The  Appellant  returned  to
    Zimbabwe in 2003 where she lived until April 2014 when she travelled to
    South Africa.  The Appellant travelled from South Africa on 30th  April
    2014, arriving in the United Kingdom on 1st  May  2014  where  she  was
    refused leave to enter, as her indefinite leave to remain was deemed to
    have lapsed.

 3. The Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  7th  May  2014.   She  underwent  a
    screening  interview  on  16th  June  2014  and  a  substantive  asylum
    interview on 30th June 2014.  Her asylum and  associated  human  rights
    claim was refused on 9th January 2015.

 4. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that she is at risk  in  Zimbabwe
    as a result of her uncle's support for the MDC, and  as  a  lone  minor
    with no family support network.  She claims  to  have  lived  with  her
    paternal grandmother in Zimbabwe  from  2003  until  her  grandmother's
    death in 2007.  Thereafter she attended boarding school, and in  school
    holidays lived with her aunt G  in  Harare  or  with  her  uncle  G  in
    Murehwa.

 5. The Appellant had no direct contact with her father  and  according  to
    her witness statements spoke to her mother occasionally.

 6. In April 2014 she was spending the holidays at her uncle's  house  when
    ZANU-PF supporters attacked the house, beat her  uncle,  and  took  him
    away.  She was told that her family was a target because of her uncle's
    support for the MDC.

 7. Her uncle was taken away on 18th April 2014  and  his  whereabouts  are
    still unknown.  The next day the  Appellant's  aunt  G  travelled  from
    Harare to pick her up and they returned together to her aunt's home  in
    Harare.  On 22nd April 2014 the Appellant's aunt received a threatening
    letter from the men who had  kidnapped  her  uncle,  stating  that  her
    family were going to be targeted.  That night stones were thrown at the
    house and it was believed that this was linked to  the  kidnap  of  the
    Appellant's uncle and the threatening letter.  The  Appellant  and  her
    aunt G left Harare and travelled to South Africa  where  the  Appellant
    was collected by her aunt S who had travelled from the United  Kingdom,
    and was taken back to the United Kingdom.

 8. The Respondent's reasons for refusing the application are set out in  a
    letter dated 9th January 2015.   In  summary  the  Respondent  did  not
    accept that the Appellant had had no contact with her  mother,  because
    enquiries had revealed that her mother's Facebook profile  showed  that
    the Appellant was listed  there  and  there  were  photographs  of  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent did not accept that  the  Appellant's  uncle
    was involved with the MDC, nor was it accepted that he was kidnapped by
    ZANU-PF, nor was it accepted that a threatening  letter  was  received.
    The Respondent considered that the Appellant could return  to  Zimbabwe
    and reside with her mother, and it was not accepted that she  would  be
    at risk on return or that her removal would breach her human rights.

 9. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the judge on 20th March 2015.   The
    judge found there to be no evidence that either the  Appellant  or  her
    uncle had any significant profile within the MDC and found that she was
    not at risk from ZANU-PF.  The judge however accepted  the  Appellant's
    evidence about the lack of contact between herself and her mother,  and
    found that her position was analogous to that of an orphan, and that in
    accordance with the principles in LQ  (Age:  Immutable  Characteristic)
    Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005 she  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe as an orphaned minor and the appeal was allowed on that basis.



10. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on the grounds that the judge had failed to consider the family support
    available to the  Appellant  in  Zimbabwe  and  had  misunderstood  the
    Facebook evidence.

Error of Law

11. On 20th July 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  heard  submissions  from
    both parties in relation to  error  of  law,  and  concluded  that  the
    judge's decision must be set aside.  We set out below paragraphs 9 - 12
    of Judge  Kebede's  decision  giving  reasons  for  setting  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal;

         "9.  In concluding that the Appellant had no family support network
             remaining in Zimbabwe,  Judge  Nixon  found  there  to  be  no
             evidence to counter the Appellant's claim  as  to  a  lack  of
             contact with family members.  However,  in  so  doing,  it  is
             plain that she disregarded many aspects of the evidence.   She
             referred, in paragraph 12, to a photograph  of  the  Appellant
             with her siblings taken in 2013, yet failed  to  consider  how
             that was consistent with a claim to having no contact with her
             siblings.  Her  findings  on  the  Facebook  extracts  show  a
             misunderstanding of the way in  which  Facebook  operates  and
             failed to engage with the fact  that  the  Appellant  and  her
             mother  had  evidently  accepted  each  other  as  friends  on
             Facebook.  Indeed her finding, at paragraph 22, that there was
             no  attempt  at  contact  by   the   Appellant's   mother   is
             inconsistent with the Appellant's own evidence in  her  appeal
             statement that there was communication between herself and her
             mother.  The judge also failed to give  any  consideration  to
             the fact that the Appellant had resided in Zimbabwe for eleven
             years until the age of  17  prior  to  coming  to  the  United
             Kingdom and to consider the family and other  connections  she
             had established during that time.

         10.  The judge's findings on the  Appellant's  account  as  to  her
             uncle's kidnapping are unclear  and  it  is  not  possible  to
             ascertain, from her findings at paragraphs 18 and 19,  whether
             she accepted that account.  It is apparent from  her  findings
             at paragraph 19 that she did not, in any  event,  accept  that
             the family had received threats or that  they  were  targeted.
             In the circumstances, and given that the  Appellant's  account
             of her aunt and uncle's absence was a direct  result  of  that
             claimed threat, it is  unclear  how  the  judge  was  able  to
             conclude  that  the  Appellant's  aunt  and  uncle  no  longer
             remained in Zimbabwe and were thus unable  to  offer  her  any
             support.

         11.  In the light of such concerns,  and  in  the  absence  of  any
             reasoned  analysis,  based  upon  subjective   and   objective
             evidence, of the conditions to which the  Appellant  would  be
             returning, it seems to me that the  judge's  conclusion,  that
             the Appellant's circumstances were analogous to those  of  the
             Appellant in LQ, is plainly unsustainable.

         12.  Accordingly, and for the reasons  given  above,  I  find  that
             errors of law have been established in the Tribunal's decision
             and that it must be set aside and re-made.   The  appeal  will
             accordingly be listed for a resumed hearing.  There  has  been
             no challenge to the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant
             would not be at risk as a result of  any  perceived  political
             profile in line with the country guidance in CM  (Zimbabwe)  v
             the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
             1303 and therefore her findings in that regard are  preserved.
             However the decision will be re-made in regard to the risk  to
             the Appellant as a lone female minor (although bearing in mind
             that the Appellant may no longer be a minor) and in regard  to
             Article 8 of the ECHR."

Re-Making the Decision

The Law

12. The Appellant is entitled to asylum if she is outside  her  country  of
    nationality and is recognised as a refugee, as defined in regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on her to prove that she
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail herself of the protection of the country of her nationality.

13. The Appellant is eligible for humanitarian protection  under  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules if she does not qualify as a refugee, but
    establishes substantial grounds for believing that if she  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom, she  would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk unwilling  to  avail
    herself of the protection of the country of return.

14. In relation to Articles 2 and 3 of  the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the ECHR) it is for the Appellant to  establish  that  if
    removed from the United Kingdom there is  a  real  risk  of  her  being
    killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman or  degrading  treatment  or
    punishment.

15. In relation to Article 8 of the ECHR the  Appellant  must  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to family  life  under  Appendix  FM,  or
    private life with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1).  If  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed under the rules, the Appellant must show a  good  reason
    why Article 8 should be considered outside the rules.

16. The burden of proof is on the Appellant  and  can  be  described  as  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, which is a  lower  standard  than  the
    normal civil standard of the balance of probabilities.  We must look at
    the circumstances as at the date of hearing.



Evidence

17. At the resumed hearing we heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant  who
    adopted her witness statement dated 11th June  2014,  and  her  undated
    appeal statement contained at pages 13 - 16 of the Appellant's  bundle.
    The Appellant also adopted the contents of her  most  recent  statement
    which is undated, and which is attached to a fax  from  her  solicitors
    dated 11th September 2015.

18. In the most recent statement, the Appellant stated,  in  summary,  that
    her mother left her because she could not look after her,  and  it  was
    the Appellant who sent the friend request on Facebook, and although her
    mother accepted it, there was no further contact.  In relation  to  the
    photograph showing the Appellant and her siblings, it was the Appellant
    who had uploaded this.  The photograph was taken when  the  Appellant's
    siblings had visited her aunt G and  the  Appellant  was  also  at  her
    aunt's house during the school holidays.

19. The Appellant confirmed that her parents have played no role whatsoever
    in her upbringing and not shown any interest in her.   The  whereabouts
    of her uncle G are unknown, and her aunt G is  now  resident  in  South
    Africa and therefore there would be nobody in Zimbabwe  to  look  after
    her if she returned.   The  only  person  willing  to  look  after  the
    Appellant is her aunt S, with whom the Appellant lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

20. We also heard evidence from the Appellant's  aunt  S  who  adopted  her
    undated witness statement contained at pages 17 - 19 of the Appellant's
    bundle.  In summary, she confirmed that the Appellant's father  is  her
    brother, who did not accept that the Appellant is his child and did not
    want anything to do with her.  The Appellant's mother decided  to  give
    the Appellant up for adoption.  Other family members  decided  to  look
    after her.

21. This witness confirmed that the Appellant had been given leave  as  her
    dependant in the United Kingdom, but that it was decided  to  send  the
    Appellant back to Zimbabwe in 2003 where she lived  with  her  paternal
    grandmother until she passed away in 2007.  It was not appreciated that
    the indefinite leave to remain that had been granted to  the  Appellant
    would lapse by reason of passage of time.

22. When the Appellant's grandmother passed away, the Appellant was  looked
    after by her aunt G and financially supported by aunt S from the United
    Kingdom.  It was aunt S who paid boarding school fees of  approximately
    US$9,000 per year.

23. Aunt S confirmed that there were no  family  members  in  Zimbabwe  who
    could look after the Appellant.

24.  Both  the  Appellant  and  her  witness  were   questioned   by   both
    representatives and we asked some questions by  way  of  clarification.
    We have recorded all questions and answers in our Record of Proceedings
    and it is not necessary to reiterate them in full here.   If  relevant,
    we will refer to aspects of the oral  evidence  when  we  set  out  our
    conclusions and reasons.

The Respondent's Submissions

25. In submitting that the appeal should be dismissed Mrs Petterson  relied
    upon the reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  9th  January  2015.   In
    addition she submitted in summary, that  both  the  Appellant  and  her
    witness had been evasive in answering questions.  It was suggested that
    the initial intention was for the Appellant to  travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom and apply for leave to enter on the basis that  she  previously
    had indefinite leave to remain.  When it was realised that  this  leave
    had lapsed, an asylum claim was made in order to secure the Appellant's
    entry and stay in the United Kingdom.

26. We were asked to find that the Facebook  evidence  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant did have contact with her mother, and the Appellant had given
    conflicting evidence, by contending in her oral evidence that  she  had
    no  contact  whatsoever  with  her  mother,  whereas  in  her   witness
    statements she had accepted that she had had  some  conversations  with
    her.

27. We were asked to note that there was a dearth of evidence  as  to  what
    had happened to the land owned by the Appellant's uncle G following his
    disappearance.  We were also asked  to  note  that  the  Appellant  had
    brought with her to the United Kingdom, copies of her  school  reports,
    the inference being that this would not have been the case had she fled
    from Harare to South Africa in fear of her life.

28. Mrs Petterson submitted that the Appellant has in Zimbabwe wider family
    support than she has admitted.

29. We were asked to find that the Appellant would not be at risk on return
    to Zimbabwe and therefore the claim  for  asylum  and  the  alternative
    humanitarian protection claim must fail, so  must  her  claim  that  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom would breach Articles 2 and 3 of the
    ECHR.

30. In relation to Article 8 it was submitted that we had been  given  very
    little information about the Appellant's private and family life in the
    United Kingdom.  In oral evidence she did not  know  the  ages  of  her
    cousins with whom she lived.  The provisions  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules were not met in relation to family life, nor were the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1) in relation to private life.  We were
    asked to conclude that this appeal could not succeed with reference  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Appellant's Submissions

31. Mr Madanhi relied upon the skeleton argument contained at pages 2 -  12
    of the Appellant's bundle.  We were asked to accept the  Appellant  and
    her aunt as credible witnesses, and to note  that  detailed  statements
    had been produced, and that the Appellant's  latest  witness  statement
    explained the Facebook entries.

32. It was disputed that the Appellant and her aunt had been  evasive,  and
    we were asked to accept that they had endeavoured  to  recollect  dates
    and provide accurate evidence.

33. We were asked to accept the Appellant's account that her uncle had been
    kidnapped and was still missing, and that her aunt fled  from  Zimbabwe
    to South Africa, and therefore there would be no family support for the
    Appellant if she returned to Zimbabwe.

34. Mr Madanhi submitted that the Appellant had established both a  private
    and family life since arriving in this country, which engaged Article 8
    of the ECHR, and that to remove her to South Africa would be  a  breach
    of Article 8.

35. At the conclusion of oral submissions we reserved our decision.

Our Conclusions and Reasons

36. In re-making the decision we have taken into  account  the  documentary
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  This amounts to  the
    Respondent's bundle with Annexes A -  E,  and  the  Appellant's  bundle
    comprising 67 pages.  In  addition  we  have  taken  into  account  the
    Appellant's most recent undated  witness  statement,  received  by  the
    Tribunal on 11th September 2015.

37. We have considered all of the evidence in the  round,  and  taken  into
    account  the  submissions  made  by  both  representatives.   We   have
    considered the circumstances as at the date of hearing  and  considered
    this appeal in the light of the provisions of  paragraph  339L  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  We are conscious of the need  to  take  great  care
    before making adverse findings of credibility in asylum cases,  and  we
    are aware of the importance of considering this appeal in the light  of
    the conditions in Zimbabwe, and  this  we  have  done  by  taking  into
    account the background evidence.

38. The Appellant's age and nationality are not in dispute.  We have  taken
    into account that the Appellant is a minor at the date of  the  hearing
    before us, although she may have achieved her majority by the time this
    decision is promulgated.  The Appellant will be 18 years of age on 24th
    September 2015.  We have taken into account that the Appellant is still
    a minor, when considering her answers in interview,  and  the  evidence
    given to the Tribunal.  We accept that the Appellant first came to  the
    United Kingdom when she was approximately 5 years of age, in 2002,  and
    she is recorded as a dependant of her aunt S in the grant of asylum  to
    aunt S dated 27th October 2003.

39. We accept that the Appellant was sent back to Zimbabwe  by  aunt  S  in
    2003.

40. The findings made by the First-tier Tribunal that are preserved are set
    out in paragraphs 19 and 20 of the decision and may  be  summarised  as
    follows.  The Appellant is not an MDC member or supporter, and there is
    no evidence  that  either  the  Appellant  or  her  uncle  G  have  any
    significant profile within the MDC.   There  is  no  real  evidence  to
    support the Appellant's claim that she is at risk from ZANU-PF.

41. Having considered the country guidance in CM  Zimbabwe,  the  Appellant
    has not shown that she would be  at  risk  of  attracting  the  adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF if returned to Zimbabwe.  A failed  asylum  seeker
    with no significant MDC profile is  not  at  real  risk  of  having  to
    demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF.  The Appellant would  not  be  at  risk
    because of her political opinion if returned to Harare  where  she  was
    previously living.

42. We had to consider whether the Appellant would be at  risk  as  a  lone
    minor female if returned to Zimbabwe.  Having  carefully  examined  the
    Appellant's account we do not accept that her uncle was kidnapped.   We
    note  the  preserved  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant's uncle did not have  any  significant  profile  within  MDC.
    There was therefore no reason for him to be attacked and  kidnapped  by
    ZANU-PF.

43. If the uncle had been kidnapped, we do not find it  credible  that  the
    family have apparently made no  attempt  to  locate  him  or  make  any
    enquiries as to his whereabouts.  Both the Appellant and her aunt  were
    asked about this in oral evidence, and both indicated that they had  no
    information, and gave no indication that the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe
    had been informed  that  the  uncle  was  still  missing  or  that  any
    enquiries had been made.

44. We also do not find it credible, if the uncle had been kidnapped,  that
    neither the Appellant nor her aunt had any idea as to what had happened
    to his property.  The Appellant described her  uncle's  property  as  a
    farm, although her aunt described it more as rural land rather  than  a
    farm.  It is however apparent from the Appellant's  evidence  that  the
    uncle had some assets, as she described him having two employees.   For
    these reasons,  we  do  not  accept  that  the  Appellant's  uncle  was
    kidnapped.

45. We do not accept the Appellant's aunt G took  the  Appellant  from  her
    uncle's property to her home in Harare and shortly thereafter  received
    a threatening letter from the people  who  had  been  involved  in  the
    kidnap.  Again  we  note  the  preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that neither the Appellant nor her uncle had  any  significant
    MDC profile.  We find that no adequate reason has been given as to  why
    a threatening letter would be sent.  We note that the  letter  has  not
    been produced in evidence, and the Appellant accepted that she had  not
    read  the  letter.   We  also  note  the  lack  of  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's aunt G who is said to have received and  read  the  letter,
    and that it was this letter that caused her to flee  to  South  Africa.
    We fully accept that it would not be possible for aunt G to  give  oral
    evidence before the  Tribunal,  but  if  the  events  had  occurred  as
    claimed, we find that it would have been possible for aunt  G  to  have
    submitted either a written statement or letter.

46. We do not accept that at the same time that the threatening letter  was
    received, stones were thrown at aunt G's property in Harare.   If  some
    individuals did throw stones, which we do not accept, we  do  not  find
    that this  was  linked  to  kidnapping  of  the  Appellant's  uncle  or
    threatening letter, as we do not accept that those events occurred.

47. We accept that the Appellant travelled from Zimbabwe to  South  Africa,
    and that she then travelled from South Africa to the United Kingdom, in
    company with her aunt S who had travelled from the  United  Kingdom  to
    meet her in South Africa.  We  find  that  aunt  S  believed  that  the
    Appellant still had the right to enter the United Kingdom,  because  of
    the leave that she had previously been given in 2003.  Aunt S confirmed
    that she did not realise the Appellant's indefinite leave to remain had
    expired, in answering a question put to her by the Tribunal.

48. We do not accept that the Appellant's aunt G remains  in  South  Africa
    nor do we accept that she has made an asylum claim in that country.  We
    note the absence of any evidence from aunt G to confirm her whereabouts
    and the absence of any documentary evidence to confirm that  an  asylum
    claim has been made in South Africa.  We appreciate that  on  occasions
    it may be difficult to produce documentary evidence, but if  an  asylum
    claim had been made in South Africa, we see no satisfactory reason  why
    documentary evidence of that should not have been sent  in  support  of
    the Appellant's claim to the Tribunal.

49. We do not accept that the Appellant has no family members in  Zimbabwe.
    We note that the Appellant has resided in  Zimbabwe  between  2003  and
    April 2014.  We do not accept that the Appellant does not have  contact
    with her mother.  We find that the  Appellant  has  given  inconsistent
    evidence on this issue.  In response  to  question  21  of  her  asylum
    interview on 30th June 2014, the Appellant when asked when she last had
    contact with her mother, stated that  she  had  "never  talked  to  her
    directly as well."  In her oral evidence,  when  cross-examined  as  to
    paragraph 7 of her witness statement at  page  15  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle, the Appellant stated that she had never had a conversation with
    her mother.  She stated that her witness statement was  incorrect.   In
    her witness statement at paragraph 7 she had recorded; "I confirmed  in
    my witness statement that I speak to my mother here and there.   We  do
    not discuss anything special."  In paragraph  3  of  the  same  witness
    statement the Appellant stated,

         "I refer  you  to  my  WS  paragraph  6  where  I  confirm  that  I
         communicate with my mother here and there.  My mother has  episodes
         of what I assume to be guilt, she tries to communicate but she  has
         always maintained that she is not in a position  to  take  care  or
         live with me because she has since remarried  and  lives  with  her
         husband's family.  I have no idea where she lives and neither do  I
         have other contact details for her apart from  Facebook  which  she
         rarely uses."

    It is therefore evident  that  the  Appellant  has  on  three  separate
    occasions in two of her witness  statements  confirmed  that  she  does
    communicate with her mother, but  denied  this  when  interviewed,  and
    denied it in her oral evidence.  We find  no  satisfactory  explanation
    has been given for  this  contradiction  in  evidence.   We  find  this
    adversely affects the credibility of the Appellant.

50.  We  find  that  the  Facebook  evidence  also  adversely  affects  the
    Appellant's credibility.  It  is  now  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    mother accepted her request to be a friend.  There are  photographs  of
    the Appellant in her mother's  Facebook  profile.   The  Appellant  has
    produced a photograph of herself and her younger  brother  and  sister.
    We did not find her oral evidence when asked about this  to  be  either
    credible or plausible.  The Appellant accepted that  she  had  uploaded
    this photograph onto Facebook  and  explained  that  she  had  met  her
    siblings by coincidence.  She  believed  that  they  lived  with  their
    father, but in oral evidence stated that she had not asked  them  where
    they lived.  We did not find this to be credible.  In our  view  it  is
    reasonably likely, that if the Appellant met her siblings by chance she
    would ask them where they were living and with whom.

51. Having considered the evidence given both  by  the  Appellant  and  her
    aunt, we are not satisfied that the condition  in  paragraph  339L(iii)
    and (v) are met and we set out below those conditions;

         "339L(iii)    the person's statements are found to be coherent  and
                  plausible and do not run counter to available specific and
                  general information relevant to the person's case;

             (v)   the  general  credibility  of  the   person   has   been
                  established."

52. The burden of proof in this appeal is on the Appellant to a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood.  We find that the burden has not been discharged,
    and we do not accept that the Appellant is  not  in  contact  with  her
    mother, nor do we accept that  the  Appellant  has  no  family  support
    available in Zimbabwe.  We conclude that we have not received from  the
    Appellant and her witness, a comprehensive or accurate account  of  the
    Appellant's  circumstances  in  Zimbabwe,  and  we  conclude  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk if returned.  We do not  find  that  she
    would be returned as an orphan female minor,  because  she  is  not  an
    orphan, and we do not accept that she would have no family support.

53. We accept the evidence of aunt S that she has been providing  financial
    support for the Appellant in Zimbabwe, and we find  that  there  is  no
    reason why such financial support could not continue if it was  needed.



54. We therefore conclude that because the Appellant would not be  at  risk
    if returned to Zimbabwe, she is not entitled to a grant of  asylum,  or
    humanitarian protection, and there would be no breach of Articles 2 and
    3 of the ECHR.

55. In considering Article 8 we firstly  consider  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Appellant does not rely upon Appendix  FM  in  relation  to  family
    life,  and  we  conclude  that  the  Appellant   cannot   satisfy   the
    requirements of Appendix FM.

56. We also conclude that the Appellant cannot satisfy the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1).  She cannot satisfy sub-section (iii) because  she
    has not lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least 20 years.
     She cannot satisfy sub-section (iv) because although she is under  the
    age of 18 years, she has not lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom
    for at least 7 years.

57. The Appellant cannot satisfy sub-section (v) because she is not age  18
    years or above and under 25 years.  She cannot satisfy sub-section (vi)
    because she is not age 18 years or above.

58. We have decided that it is appropriate to consider  Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  We have done so taking into account the step by
    step approach  advocated  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  which  involves
    answering the following questions;

         "(1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

59. The burden of proving a family or private life that engages  Article  8
    rests upon the Appellant.  If that is proved, the  Tribunal  must  then
    consider whether the proposed  interference  with  that  family  and/or
    private  life  is  in  accordance   with   the   law,   necessary   and
    proportionate.

60. The Appellant has resided in the United Kingdom since 1st May 2014.  We
    accept she briefly resided in this country as an  infant  in  2002  and
    2003.  She has however lived by far the greater part  of  her  life  in
    Zimbabwe.  We do not find that the Appellant has established  a  family
    life with aunt S, and the children of  aunt  S  with  whom  she  lives.
    There has been very little detail given in relation to the children  of
    aunt S, and the Appellant when asked in oral evidence  could  not  give
    their ages.  The Appellant's biological mother  lives  in  Zimbabwe  as
    does her father.  We are not satisfied that the Appellant  provided  an
    accurate  account  of  her  circumstances  in  Zimbabwe,  and  are  not
    satisfied that she does not have contact with her  mother.   We  accept
    that some financial  support  has  been  provided  by  aunt  S  to  the
    Appellant while the Appellant was in Zimbabwe, and that  the  Appellant
    has lived with her aunt in the United Kingdom for approximately sixteen
    months.  We do not however accept this  amounts  to  family  life  that
    engages Article 8.  However,  we  do  accept  that  the  Appellant  has
    established a private life in this country since  she  arrived  in  May
    2014, and we will go  on  to  consider  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth
    questions posed in Razgar, in relation to the Appellant's private life,
    and also, in relation to her family life, if we are  wrong  in  holding
    that family life does not exist.

61. We find that the proposed interference which would  be  caused  by  the
    Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom is in accordance  with  the
    law.  We find this because the Appellant is not at  risk  in  Zimbabwe,
    and therefore she is not entitled to asylum or humanitarian protection,
    and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR would not be breached.  We  also  find
    that the Appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration  Rules  necessary  in
    order to be granted leave to remain.

62. We find that the removal decision is  necessary  in  the  interests  of
    maintaining effective immigration control, which in turn  is  necessary
    in order to maintain the economic well-being of the country.

63. We then turn to consider the issue of proportionality.   The  Appellant
    is still a minor, and  therefore  her  best  interests  are  a  primary
    consideration.  We take into account the wishes  of  the  Appellant  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  We also take into account that  she  has
    only resided here  for  approximately  sixteen  months,  and  that  her
    biological parents reside in Zimbabwe, and we are  not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant has given an accurate account  of  her  circumstances  in
    that country.

64. We also take into account that the Appellant has lived the greater part
    of her life in Zimbabwe, and she is a citizen of that country, and  she
    would not be at risk if returned.  The Appellant has been  educated  in
    Zimbabwe, and we  find  no  reason  why  she  could  not  continue  her
    education  there.   There  are  no  relevant  medical  issues   to   be
    considered.

65. We conclude that the Appellant's best  interests  would  be  served  by
    returning to the country of which she is a citizen, and  where  we  are
    satisfied that she has developed relationships and friendships  between
    2003 and 2014.

66. We take into account and attach weight to the considerations listed  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   We
    note that sub-section (1) confirms that the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the  public  interest.   We  note  that  the
    Appellant can speak English and  therefore  satisfies  sub-section  (2)
    although as  confirmed  in  AM  (Malawi)  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)  an
    Appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to  remain
    whatever the degree of her fluency in English.

67. Sub-section (3) confirms  that  it  is  the  public  interest  that  an
    individual  seeking  to  remain  in   this   country   is   financially
    independent.   We  do  not  find  that  the  Appellant  is  financially
    independent, although we accept that she has been financially supported
    by her aunt.

68. We have to attach weight to sub-section (4) which  states  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a
    time when  the  person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   The
    Appellant has had no leave to remain in this country since her  arrival
    on 1st May 2014.  Even if she had had limited  leave  to  remain,  sub-
    section (5) states that little weight should be given to a private life
    established by a person when their immigration  status  is  precarious,
    and limited leave is a precarious immigration status.

69. Therefore we find it appropriate to attach little weight to the private
    life  developed  by  the  Appellant.   We  in  fact  have   not   heard
    comprehensive evidence about her private life,  other  than  she  lives
    with her aunt and her aunt's children, and is currently studying.

70. Having conducted a balancing exercise in relation  to  proportionality,
    taking the above factors into account, we conclude that the  weight  to
    be attached to the failure of the Appellant to satisfy the  Immigration
    Rules is substantial, and the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration   control   is   also
    substantial.  We find that this outweighs the weight to be attached  to
    the wishes of the Appellant and her aunt that she be allowed to  remain
    in the United Kingdom  notwithstanding  that  she  cannot  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules.  Our conclusion is that the Appellant's removal from
    the United Kingdom is proportionate, and would not breach Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  is  set  aside.   We  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows, referring to NRC as the Appellant;

    We dismiss the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

    We dismiss the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    We dismiss the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction.   This  is  continued
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant or any  member  of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to a contempt of court.


Signed        Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall        17th September 2015


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed        Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hall        17th September 2015
