
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01535/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 October 2016                        |On 14 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    a s z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Dieu instructed by Virgo Consultancy


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent ("ASZ") who claims
    asylum.  This direction applies  to  both  the  appellant  and  to  the
    respondent and a failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
    Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 23 May  1977.
    He arrived in the UK on or about 6 May 2001 and claimed  asylum.   That
    claim was refused on 9 October 2001  but  he  was  granted  exceptional
    leave to remain until 9 October 2005.  On 7 August 2007  the  appellant
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 4. On 12 February 2010, the appellant was convicted at the  Cardiff  Crown
    Court of conspiracy to supply a controlled drug and was sentenced to  a
    term of twelve years' imprisonment which  was  reduced  to  ten  years'
    imprisonment on appeal.

 5. As a result, on 29 May  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  notified  the
    appellant  of  his  liability  to  be  deported  under  the   automatic
    deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.  On 1 June 2013, the
    appellant submitted representations setting out why he  should  not  be
    deported.  However, on 9 January 2015  a  deportation  order  was  made
    against the appellant.  On 21 January 2015, the appellant was  notified
    of the Secretary of State's decision that s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act
    2007 applied and to refuse his asylum and  human  rights  claims.   The
    Secretary of State also certified the appellant's claim under  s.72  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA  Act  2002")
    on the basis that the appellant had  been  convicted  of  a  particular
    serious crime and constituted a danger to the community.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First,  the
    appellant challenged the certification under s.72 of the NIA Act  2002.
    Judge Lloyd concluded that the appellant did not constitute a danger to
    the community and so  he  did  not  uphold  the  Secretary  of  State's
    certification under s.72.

 7. Secondly, the appellant argued that he would be targeted on  return  by
    the Taliban and his family because of his European  demeanour  and  his
    failure to adhere to the Muslim faith.  Judge Lloyd accepted  that  the
    appellant was at risk on return, and consequently entitled  to  asylum,
    on the  basis  that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  he  would  suffer
    persecution on  political  and  religious  ground  if  he  returned  to
    Afghanistan.

 8. Thirdly, the appellant  argued  that  as  a  result  of  the  level  of
    indiscriminate violence in Kabul, to which he would be returned,  there
    was a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  contrary  to  Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive (Council Directive  2004/83/EC).   Judge  Lloyd
    found the level of indiscriminate violence  in  Kabul  did  reach  that
    required for Art  15(c)  and  so  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds also.

 9. Finally, Judge Lloyd dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art 8.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on two  grounds.   First,  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the certification under s.72 of the NIA  Act  2002  was
    wrong.  Secondly, in finding that there was an Art 15(c) risk in  Kabul
    the judge had failed to consider and apply the country guidance case of
    AK (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  which
    concluded that such a risk  did  not  exist  and  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for departing from that guidance.  Further, the  judge
    had erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds
    and under Arts 2 and 3 essentially on  the  basis  that  the  appellant
    succeeded under Art 15(c).

11. On 29 February 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal limited to the  second  ground.
    Permission was  refused  on  the  first  ground  which  challenged  the
    certification under s.72 of the NIA Act 2002.

12. The appellant filed a Rule 24 response seeking to uphold the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

13. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

14. At the hearing, Mr Richards, who represented the  Secretary  of  State,
    accepted that he could not pursue the challenge  to  the  certification
    under s.72 and that the Secretary of State's appeal was  restricted  to
    the issues raised by ground 2.

15. I will deal first with the judge's decision in respect of Art 15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive.

16. Article 15(c) sets out the requirements  for  "subsidiary  protection",
    reflected in our domestic law in para 339C of the Immigration Rules (HC
    395 as amended), and it defines "serious harm" as consisting of:

         "serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person  by
         reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
         internal armed conflict."

17. Judge Lloyd dealt with Art 15(c) at paras 47-48 as follows:

         "47.     Article 15(c) refers to a "serious and  individual  threat
             to a civilian's life or person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate
             violence in situations of  international  and  internal  armed
             conflict."  I reminded myself that this does not equate to the
             individualised specific threat to the  individual  covered  by
             the Refugee Convention.  Article 15(c) covers situations where
             civilians are at serious risk  by  being  present  in  a  very
             dangerous situation of  armed  conflict  where  indiscriminate
             violence is widespread.  In circumstances where this  criteria
             is met humanitarian protection may be granted.  The  Institute
             for the Study of  War  reported  (see  paragraph  4.4  Country
             Information and Guidance/August 2015:

                  'Analysts and media sources alike have noted a significant
                  escalation in violence in Kabul during the  latter  months
                  of 2014.  Insurgent violence in Kabul  increased  in  July
                  2014  and  maintained  a  consistent  level  of  intensity
                  through March 2015.  In these attacks militants focused on
                  targeting  Afghan  government   and   Western   interests,
                  including foreign military and diplomatic personnel ...

                  A surge of terrorist attacks in Kabul in mid-May 2015  saw
                  at least 26 deaths and over 80 injuries on  13th  May,  an
                  assault on the Kabul Park  Palace  Hotel  killed  fourteen
                  people.  An explosion on the Kabul University campus  left
                  two professors wounded over the weekend of 16th  May.   On
                  17th May an explosion in the Kart-e-Naw neighbourhood  was
                  followed by an explosion on Hawashenasi Road which  killed
                  three people ... a suicide bomb attack near Kabul  Airport
                  killed three people on 17th May, while at  least  eighteen
                  people were injured on 19th May a car bomb  exploded  next
                  to the Ministry of  Justice  building,  killing  five  and
                  wounding at least 43 others ...'

         48.  I concluded that  there  is  an  Article  15(c)  risk  in  the
             Appellant's home area.   Thereafter  the  question  arises  of
             whether there is a part of Afghanistan that is not affected by
             the conflict and to which  the  Appellant  can  reasonably  be
             expected to relocate."

18. Mr Richards submitted that the judge's finding was not supported by the
    country guidance case of AK and Others to which the Judge had  made  no
    reference.  That decision, Mr Richards submitted, makes clear  that  at
    the date of the Upper Tribunal's decision the level  of  indiscriminate
    violence in Afghanistan as a whole was not such as to  reach  the  high
    level required to fall within Art 15(c) such that a civilian, solely by
    being in the country, faced a real risk which  threatens  his  life  or
    person.  Mr Richards submitted that Judge  Lloyd  failed  to  give  any
    adequate reasons for departing from AK and Others and the reference  to
    the report set out in the Home Office Country Information and Guidance,
    to which the judge referred in para 47, was not  sufficient  to  depart
    from AK and Others.

19. On behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Dieu  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    referred to AK and Others in the schedule of cases he set out  at  para
    39 of his determination.  Further, at para 40 he listed four pieces  of
    background evidence, including the CIG report to which he referred.  Mr
    Dieu submitted that it was clear that Judge Lloyd had applied his  mind
    to the CG case law and had followed the proper process to  depart  from
    it based upon the evidence to which he was referred.  Mr Dieu, however,
    accepted that the judge's determination  was  not  explicit  about  the
    reason for departing from AK and Others.

20. It is clear law that the First-tier  Tribunal  (and  indeed  the  Upper
    Tribunal)  is  required  to  treat  a  country  guidance  decision   as
    authoritative and, any decision to depart from it, must be  based  upon
    "cogent reasons" and new evidence (see SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ
    940).

21. Judge Lloyd was, as a consequence, bound to apply the finding in AK and
    Others that the appellant could not establish  an  Art  15(c)  risk  in
    Afghanistan unless there were "cogent reasons" based upon new  evidence
    to depart from it.

22. Judge Lloyd's reasoning in paras 47-48 is very brief indeed.   He  does
    not refer to AK and Others at all.  It was not enough, in my  judgment,
    for him simply to include it in a list of cases to which  he  had  been
    referred.  It was also not enough for him to  state  that  these  cases
    "figured in my deliberations" unless it can be  clearly  seen  to  have
    been the case.  In para 47, which is in effect the whole of the judge's
    reasoning in respect of Art 15(c), it  is  wholly  unclear  whether  he
    approached the appellant's case on the basis that there was a need  for
    "cogent reasons" founded in new evidence to justify a departure from AK
    and Others which was against the appellant's case.  That might not,  in
    itself, be a material error if, in fact, Judge Lloyd had given  "cogent
    reasons" based upon the background  evidence.   Whilst  the  background
    report  to  which  he  referred,  disclosed  a  disturbing   level   of
    indiscriminate violence in Kabul, the judge offered no reasons why this
    level of violence was greater than that considered by the UT in AK  and
    Others not to engage Art 15(c) and why, in itself, it reached the  high
    threshold required for Art 15(c) (see Elgafaji (Case C-465(07) [2009] 1
    WLR 2100 at [43]).  All that Judge Lloyd refers to is, correctly,  that
    the risk under Art 15(c) does not equate to an individualised  targeted
    risk to an individual (see Elgafaji at [43]) and that the situation  is
    "very dangerous" and indiscriminate violence  is  "widespread".   Those
    reasons are, in my judgment, inadequate to justify a departure from  AK
    and Others based solely upon the report extracted from the CIG to which
    the  judge  referred.   It  is  wholly  unclear  what,  if  any,  other
    background evidence the judge actually took into  account  in  reaching
    his ultimate finding.

23. For these reasons, Judge Lloyd erred in law in allowing the appellant's
    appeal under Art 15(c).

24. I now turn to consider his decision  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    asylum grounds.  This claim was based upon his European  demeanour  and
    that he had failed to  adhere  to  his  faith.   It  was  part  of  the
    appellant's case that he would be at risk from  the  Taliban  and  also
    could face mistreatment by members of his family  who  were  associated
    with the Taliban.  The appellant also contended that he was believed to
    have worked as a spy for the Americans and the British in  Afghanistan.



25. The Secretary of State's case before the judge was that  the  appellant
    could safely live in the cosmopolitan environment of Kabul and that his
    involvement with the Americans and the British was of such a low  level
    that the Taliban would be unlikely to have  any  interest  in  locating
    him.  There was no cogent evidence that his family had made threats  to
    him as he claimed.

26. Judge Lloyd's reasons for allowing the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds are set out at para 67 of his determination as follows:

         "For the reasons I have set out in my analysis  of  the  respective
         cases of the Appellant and the Respondent and now applying the  law
         to the facts as I have found them, I conclude  that  the  Appellant
         engages Article 1(A)(2) of the Geneva Convention so as  to  entitle
         him to asylum in the  UK.   I  am  satisfied  according  the  lower
         standard of proof that there  is  a  real  risk  of  the  Appellant
         suffering persecution and ill-treatment on political and  religious
         grounds if he returns to Afghanistan; whether to his home  city  of
         Kabul or if he were to attempt to relocate to another part  of  the
         country.  In reality, however, I believe that it would  be  fraught
         with significant difficulties for him to relocate safely to another
         part of the country, having regard to  contemporary  objective  and
         expert evidence which has been placed before me at this appeal."

27. It is not entirely clear what Judge Lloyd is referring to when he talks
    about his reasons given in his "analysis of the respective cases of the
    appellant and the respondent".  The appellant's case is set out at para
    25 and the respondent's case is set  out  at  paras  26-33.   In  those
    paragraphs the judge does not give any reasons  or  make  any  findings
    which would support allowing  the  appellant's  appeal.   If,  however,
    Judge Lloyd meant that he accepted, it must be assumed, the appellant's
    case, he gave no real reasons in para 67 for doing  so.   Paragraph  67
    simply states that there is a real risk to the appellant of persecution
    or ill-treatment on political and religious grounds if  he  returns  to
    Afghanistan.  In that paragraph, the judge does not  give  any  reasons
    for accepting the appellant's claim to be at risk and does not  grapple
    with the Secretary of State's arguments that the appellant's  claim  is
    not well-founded because the level of his involvement with British  and
    American forces not would make him of any interest to  the  Taliban  on
    return to Kabul or put him at risk from his family in  the  absence  of
    any threats made to him.  Likewise, to the extent Judge Lloyd concluded
    that the appellant was at risk as a result of his "western  demeanour",
    he gave no reasons for that finding and, again, failed to grapple  with
    the respondent's case that no such risk existed in Kabul.   Judge Lloyd
    does not rely upon or  cite  any  relevant  authority  that  would,  in
    itself, justify his findings.

28. Whilst I do not accept  the  respondent's  argument  that  Judge  Lloyd
    simply read across his finding in respect of Art 15(c) to conclude that
    the appellant had established his asylum claim, he  nevertheless  erred
    in law in finding in favour of the  appellant  on  his  asylum  grounds
    because he failed to give adequate reasons for his findings.

29. As a consequence, Judge  Lloyd's  decision  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and on humanitarian protection grounds cannot stand.

Decision and Disposal

30. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds
    involved the making of an error of law.  To that extent, Judge  Lloyd's
    decision is set aside and must be remade. The decision  not  to  uphold
    the s.72 certification shall stand.

31. Both representatives indicated that if  this  was  my  conclusion,  the
    appropriate disposal of the appeal was to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

32. Applying para 7.2 of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  and
    having regard to the nature and extent of fact finding, this appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing in order  that  the
    decision in respect of the appellant's asylum claim,  for  humanitarian
    protection and under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR can be remade.

33. Judge Lloyd's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal  under  Art  8
    was not challenged by the appellant.  That decision stands  in  respect
    of the factual position at the date of his decision.  If the  situation
    relevant to Art 8 has changed since Judge Lloyd's decision, it will  be
    for the First-tier Tribunal to consider it.

34. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the  decision  to
    be remade to the extent I have indicated by a judge  other  than  Judge
    Lloyd.


                                 Signed

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date 14 October 2016



