
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/01247/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 May 2013                                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                   miss L

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant  is  a  national  of  China  with  an  unusual  immigration
history.  She had gone to New Zealand  on  a  student  visa  in  2001  which
expired in January 2002 but she remained  illegally  in  New  Zealand  until
September 2004  when  she  returned  to  China.   She  then  obtained  entry
clearance to come to the UK as a student valid  from  December  2005-October
2006.  She did not undertake any studies, instead working in a takeaway  and
becoming an overstayer.  On 20 June 2010 she was arrested  on  suspicion  of
shoplifting and received a police caution for this offence.  The  respondent
issued directions for her removal on 10 December 2010 but  two  days  before
that she claimed asylum. The Upper Tribunal  considered  it  appropriate  to
make an anonymity direction in respect of the appellant at  the  28  January
2013 hearing dealing with the error of law issue and I maintain it now.

2. The basis of her asylum claim was that on  return  from  New  Zealand  to
China  in  2004  she  met,  in  Beijing,  Mr  YW,  with  whom  she  began  a
relationship.  However, after being together for  six  to  seven  months  he
disappeared.  Some unknown men came to her flat and  started  searching  it;
she realised they were government officials; when they saw a photo  of  this
man and her together they arrested her.  She was detained for three  months,
during which time  she  was  ill-treated  and  gang-raped/raped  on  several
occasions.  On one occasion she tried to kill herself.  Her parents  somehow
found out where she was  and  were  able  to  bribe  those  responsible  for
detaining her so that she was released.  She spent six to  seven  months  in
hospital before flying to the  UK.   She  claimed  that  her  detention  was
prompted by government suspicions of her being associated with  a  Taiwanese
spy, intent on discrediting the Chinese nation.

3. The respondent did not believe her story and on 20 January  2012  made  a
decision to remove, having refused to grant her  asylum.   Her  appeal  came
before First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Lingard who in a  determination  sent
on 26 April 2012 dismissed her appeal.  At the  hearing  the  appellant  was
not tendered to give evidence.

4. This brings me to the medical  dimension  to  the  appellant's  case.  In
addition to the appellant's written evidence, the FtT judge had  before  her
a medico-legal report by Dr Naomi Hartree from the Helen  Bamber  Foundation
(HBF) dated 27 February 2012 together with an addendum dated 26 March  2012,
inpatient records from Air Force General  Hospital,  Beijing,  NHS  hospital
records and a GP letter relating to smear test and result. In  her  addendum
Dr Hartree said she did not consider the appellant was  psychologically  fit
to give evidence. At the hearing the judge also heard oral evidence from  Dr
Hartree who has worked for the HBF since 2009.  Dr  Hartree  said  that  the
appellant had described herself as a "normal"  happy  person  prior  to  her
imprisonment  in  China  but  from  that  time  onwards  her  mental  health
deteriorated severely and, since arriving  in  the  UK,  her  mental  health
continued to be poor since she tried to "keep everything inside".   She  had
not reacted well to a period of immigration detention in  the  UK,  becoming
intensely distressed.  The appellant had told Dr Hartree she had  found  her
asylum interview very difficult because  she  had  to  talk  about  her  ill
treatment in prison.

5. I will deal with Dr  Hartree's  evidence  more  fully  below  but  it  is
important to mention at this stage that the  appellant's  evidence  both  to
the UKBA and Dr Hartree was that since arrival in the UK  she  had  begun  a
relationship around 2007 with a man  called  Danny  who  was  of  Vietnamese
origin.  Their relationship lasted some four  years  during  which  time  he
became physically violent towards her.


First report
6. Dr Hartree's first report, dated 27 February 2012, set  out  the  account
the appellant gave to her of her life in China, dealing in  particular  with
her account of detention and mistreatment by  the  Chinese  authorities  who
suspected her of  being  involved  in  spying  for  Taiwan,  her  subsequent
attempts at self-harm, her difficulties in the UK, her relationship  with  a
man called Danny which in  its  second  or  third  years  became  physically
violent (at [24] the doctor noted that "Ms L was reticent  about  disclosing
to me the extent of frequency of the violence from  Danny"),  her  pregnancy
and miscarriage and her two detentions in  Yarlswood.  Dr  Hartree's  report
recorded scars and lesions noted on the appellant's body during  a  clinical
examination. SI, a scar on the head above the left ear,  was  considered  by
the doctor to be "typical of its stated attribution to being pushed  onto  a
sharp corner of a heater when assaulted in  prison".  At  [122]  the  doctor
stated that in her view "the overall patterns of Ms L's scars and  marks  is
typical of her history...[Of her 29 scars]  sixteen  are  typical;  two  are
highly consistent; six are  consistent;  and  none  are  inconsistent".  She
considered the Air Force General Hospital Inpatient  Medical  record  (which
recorded a date of admission  of  11  June  2005)  ,  which  noted  "serious
injuries on many parts of the head" to corroborate the  appellant's  account
of ill treatment in prison. There was, the doctor said,  "...no  history  to
suggest  alternative  causes.  There  is  no  history  to  suggest   assault
occurring other than during Ms L's imprisonment. She seemed  frank  with  me
about the violence from her ex-partner Danny, and did not  describe  assault
by him other than on her neck and restraint  to  her  wrists".   Her  report
also described the appellant  as  being  highly  vulnerable,  as  exhibiting
significant psychological sequelae of mistreatment and having a  cluster  of
symptoms indicating a diagnosis of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD)
with psychotic features; profound disturbance in her ability  to  trust  and
relate to others; social isolation,  a  tendency  to  have  a  childlike  or
unrealistic approach to problems; and traumatisation due to  ill  treatment.
There was nothing  to  suggest  a  false  allegation  of  mistreatment.  She
described the appellant as afraid of making  contact  with  her  parents  in
Beijing for fear she may cause them  trouble.  Dr  Hartree  considered  that
although there was no evidence of any  current,  active  suicidal  ideation,
removal of the appellant to China would destabilise  her  mental  state  and
her mental health would most likely deteriorate drastically  and  she  would
be unable to cope: "[t]he prospect of return  would  re-awaken  memories  of
her trauma..."

7. Dr Hartree's report also commented on the  respondent's  refusal  letter,
considering that her traumatised state  may  have  explained  her  delay  in
claiming asylum despite her educated background and that it also  meant  she
had considerable difficulty in recalling details of her life  in  China  and
being accurate about dates.

Second report
 8. Dr Hartree's second report, dated 26 March 2012  sought  to  update  the
appellant's mental health  circumstances,  noting  that  the  appellant  had
found the last three months highly stressful, particularly  due  to  ongoing
immigration proceedings, and  continued  to  resist  advice  that  she  take
antidepressants medication  and  undertake  counselling,  not  unusual,  the
doctor observed, among highly traumatised patients. In  addition  there  may
be cultural  reasons  for  her  declining  treatment.   She  reiterated  her
concerns that Ms L would be unable to access suitable mental health care  in
China. She expressed her opinion that the appellant would be unlikely to  be
able to give full or accurate answers if she  were  questioned  in  evidence
and in her view would  be  unfit  to  give  evidence  in  court.  She  noted
difficulties Ms L had with recall.

First-tier Tribunal decision and subsequent proceedings

9. The FtT judge was not persuaded to  accept  the  appellant's  account  as
credible and gave several reasons why she  attached  limited  weight  to  Dr
Hartree's evidence.

10. Following permission to appeal being granted in August  2012,  an  Upper
Tribunal panel (UTJs Storey and Pitt) found that the FtT had  erred  in  law
and set aside her decision. The panel found that  the  judge's  reasons  for
rejecting the appellant's credibility  lacked  transparency;  that  she  had
failed to apply the guidance given in the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note
No 2 2010, Child, Vulnerable adult and sensitive  appellant  guidance;  that
her expressed view that medical evaluation of credibility can be no part  of
the function of a medical expert was erroneous; and that the judge had  been
wrong to regard Dr Hartree as lacking relevant medical expertise.

11. The panel then turned to consider  whether  it  was  in  a  position  to
remake the decision without a further hearing. It  decided  that  a  further
hearing was necessary so that any concerns the respondent or tribunal  might
have about any aspects of her evidence should be put directly to her: see  Y
(Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362); so that the Tribunal had  the  benefit  of
the parties' oral submissions on the issue of credibility; and in  order  to
obtain a brief  medical  report  updating  the  appellant's  current  mental
health circumstances.

The present hearing

12. At the hearing I explained it had not proved practicable for  the  panel
who dealt with the error of law to sit on the further  hearing.  I  inquired
whether both parties were content for the case to  proceed  with  myself  as
the only Upper  Tribunal  judge.  Both  representatives  said  they  had  no
objections to that course.

13. By the time of the hearing before me  there  were  two  further  reports
from Dr Hartree which I shall briefly summarise.

Third report
14. Dr Hartree's third report dated 31 January 2013  said  its  aim  was  to
reaffirm her earlier reports and to  ensure  that  the  Tribunal  was  fully
aware of the current and up to date clinical position.  It  notes  that  the
appellant had begun counselling sessions with Ms Carrie Tuke at the HBF  and
the appellant had shown commitment to the sessions so  far.  Addressing  the
appellant's relationship with Danny, Dr Hartree noted that in  her  February
report she had suspected that some aspects of his control or violence  might
not have emerged at that stage and she had thus explored them  further  with
the appellant. What emerged was a relationship in which  there  was  a  high
degree of control, with some physical violence, but with  emotional  control
being the most prominent aspect ([10]).  Danny controlled her  by  financial
and emotional means. Given the history of domestic violence and  history  of
A& E attendances Dr  Hartree  had  obtained  Ms  L's  GP  and  hospital  A&E
records. These showed that the appellant was seen by A&E on 6 July 2009  for
self-harm wounds and then  in  May  2010  for  an  alleged  assault  by  her
partner, with a finding made of a  "tender  soft  lump  left  side  parietal
area".  Such a wound would not leave a scar, noted Dr Hartree  and  did  not
account for scar S1 which  was  relatively  broad  and  concorded  with  the
history of a head wound  lacking  formal  medical  attention  [27].  Her  GP
records noted low mood  and  self-harm  and  other  medical  problems;  they
referred to her completing 7  sessions  of  counselling  in  December  2009.
Analysing the appellant's psychological symptoms, Dr Hartree noted that  the
appellant described being dependent on her studies and the  HBF  as  sources
of support. She noted that the appellant was unable to tolerate  being  left
alone in the consulting room with the door closed, that when  feeling  tense
or threatened the appellant often reacted by holding herself  upright  in  a
rigid posture; she avoided speaking about China  and  expressed  fear  about
the fact of her parents. Dr Hartree did not  find  it  surprising  that  the
appellant had not confided in her GP about  ill  treatment  in  China  or  a
history of violence former partner.  The appellant continued to  present  as
highly  traumatised.  Separation  from  family  and  country,   particularly
separation  from  her  parents,  was  likely  to  be  contributing  to   the
appellant's anxiety ([41]).

15. Dr Hartree's report (which  was  prepared  after  having  sight  of  the
decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  which  had  made  findings  on
domestic violence) sought to address whether the  appellant's  psychological
presentation could be explained by her account of domestic  violence  rather
than by ill treatment in China.  In her opinion there were  several  aspects
of the clinical picture which fitted more closely with the  latter,  namely:
the appellant's non-verbal behaviour when describing  her  imprisonment  and
rape; her unusual psychological  symptoms,  in  particular  her  urge,  when
distressed to wrap her legs in a blanket; the severity of her  psychological
presentation, especially her "walling off" of a large part of her past.  She
also considered the appellant's  experience  of  domestic  violence  at  the
hands of Danny was best explained by her having had  prior  humiliating  and
degrading ill treatment in China.  Dr Hartree found  nothing  to  suggest  a
false allegation of torture.  The appellant remained in her  view  unfit  to
give evidence as  she  would  be  unable  to  recall  her  experiences  with
precision and the experience could retraumatise her.

Fourth report
16. Dr Hartree's fourth report dated 23 April 2013 essentially  covered  the
same ground as her third report.

Dr Hartree's oral evidence
17. Before me, Dr Hartree confirmed that prior to her  first  report  of  27
February 2012 she had seen the appellant about four times  and  also  spoken
to her on the telephone; prior to her addendum report of 26 March  2012  she
had seen her twice; prior to her report of 31 January 2013 she had seen  her
approximately eight times and prior to her latest report of  23  April  2013
she had seen her two or three times.  On average she had seen the  appellant
roughly once a month. Although  there  were  some  differences  between  the
appellant's evidence as given in her asylum interview and as given  to  her,
from a clinical point of view, the accounts were broadly similar and in  any
event  discrepancies  were  extremely  common  in  trauma  survivors   whose
memories tend to be more jumbled up.  Not every part of a trauma will be re-
told on each occasion.  Late disclosure is very common.   Avoidance  of  bad
memories is common, especially if the shame is related to rape.

18. For the appellant, the effect of her traumatisation was that  she  tried
to block out difficult memories and "wall off" or distance herself from  her
family.  Dr Hartree did not find it odd  that  the  appellant  was  able  to
attend  college;  for  trauma  victims  undertaking  studies  can  be   very
therapeutic and give them something  away  from  the  trauma  experience  to
focus on.

19. In Dr Hartree's opinion the appellant had complex PTSD, making  it  very
difficult for  her  to  have  normal  relationships  of  trust.   From  what
information she had gathered about the appellant's relationship with  Danny,
it was clearly one of control by him over her, more by mental than  physical
means, and more than the appellant perceived.  The fact that she  stayed  in
the relationship so long shows how vulnerable  she  was.   The  therapy  the
appellant was now undergoing was not about reclaiming the past but  starting
from where she was presently and a lot of therapy was about  establishing  a
relationship of trust  and  creating  affirmation  through  listening.   The
appellant had not wanted to be put on any medication and  she  (Dr  Hartree)
had respected that.

20. If the appellant were returned to China, she would not be able  to  cope
and would probably try to harm herself.  The work the HBF had done with  her
has not got anywhere near solving her  problems.   All  clinical  indicators
pointed against her  "faking"  her  symptoms,  in  particular,  the  sensory
descriptions she gave.  She described things she would not know if  she  had
not experienced them; a liar would have been more verbal.

21. Dealing with her latest report of April 2013, one change  it  noted  was
that the appellant now had regular access to therapy.  Dr  Hartree  did  not
have a real concern  that  the  appellant  would  self-harm  presently;  the
appellant conveyed to her that she did not want to do anything  silly.   But
if, as might happen on return to  China,  she  gets  into  a  situation  she
cannot cope with psychologically, she might then  respond  by  self-harm  in
the form of cutting or worse.  Dr Hartree had serious  concerns  about  this
as the appellant, in her opinion, was an intelligent and  determined  woman.


22. Dr Hartree considered that as  at  her  latest  report  the  appellant's
psychological condition was similar overall to that in previous reports.

23. Asked in cross-examination about her experience in writing  reports,  Dr
Hartree said she had prepared about 40 reports dealing with about 25  to  30
patients.  None of her patients in her opinion had been  lying  about  their
traumatic experiences; if she thought they were she would not do  a  report.
The patients she dealt with at the HBF were  a  highly  selective  group  as
they had been subject to an initial filter by  a  lawyer  and  a  doctor  or
doctors: "I only get to see  those  who  my  colleagues  believe  have  been
traumatised".  She understood her role was to assess patients in  accordance
with  Istanbul  Protocol  guidelines  covering  both  physical   scars   and
psychological disorders.  She was not assessing  truthfulness  as  such  but
compatibility of a story with the patient's history as shown by symptoms.

24. Asked by Mr Jarvis if she agreed that crying a  lot  (which  the  doctor
had described the appellant as doing as a patient) did not necessarily  mean
a patient was being truthful, Dr Hartree  said  the  continuous  crying  was
only one variable she looked at, e.g. if she had a  reserved  patient,  lack
of crying would not be determinative.  Asked if she took  patients  at  face
value, Dr Hartree said she would not believe everything she  was  told;  she
gave the example of  someone  who  was  an  attention  seeker.   She  agreed
complex PTSD could be caused by domestic violence.  She agreed it  could  be
caused by a miscarriage, but that would be unusual.

25. In her first  and  second  reports  she  did  not  have  access  to  the
appellant's NHS documents, but she had to work with what she had.   The  NHS
documents she got by the time of the third report did not include  notes  of
counselling sessions; the GP had told her there were only  the  GP  records.
She did not feel it was her role to chase the GP further;  that  was  up  to
the legal representatives.  Apart from the Chinese hospital records she  had
relied on what the appellant told her.  The appellant's GP had not seen  her
head scar as requiring her to be examined  neurologically.   Although  there
was some amnesia about the  past,  her  current  cognitive  functioning  was
"OK".   Persons  suffering  from  depression  could  have  memory  problems,
depending on the severity of the depression.  In her latest report  she  had
considered whether stretch marks could have caused some of  the  appellant's
scarring.  In a young woman one  would  always  consider  anorexia  but  the
appellant had not described any health problems prior to  her  detention  in
China and there was nothing to suggest there had been a  history  of  family
abuse.

26. Dr Hartree was asked about her reliance in several passages  of  one  of
her  reports  on  observations  about  Chinese  cultural  practices  by   an
interpreter, Ms Huang.  She considered this woman to be an  experienced  and
respected interpreter which made her different  perspective  of  some  help;
she had not had a Chinese client before, but she  did  not  put  forward  Ms
Huang's views as definitive.  Asked  about  some  of  her  own  observations
regarding the appellant's performance at her asylum interview, she said  she
considered the appellant could well have felt obliged to give  answers  even
if not all truthful.

27. Asked about the view expressed in her most recent report  that  domestic
violence in China could not have caused her scarring, Dr Hartree agreed  she
had not been very precise, but she was sure  that  the  appellant  had  been
frank with her and would have mentioned  if  she  had  been  the  victim  of
domestic violence in China.  She agreed that some people would  not  mention
domestic violence to anyone.  Later on in cross-examination  she  said  that
the appellant had found it difficult to recollect  the  exact  occasions  on
which Danny had used physical violence against her.

28. Asked about the Chinese hospital records Dr Hartree agreed they did  not
include a diagram of the appellant's scarring.

29. Asked about the scar she had labelled "S1", Dr Hartree said she did  not
consider it could have been caused by domestic  violence.   It  was  a  wide
scar that must have been caused by a cut causing quite heavy  bleeding,  but
she could not categorically say.   It  was  not  consistent  with  self-harm
taking the form of banging of the head against a wall.  She agreed that  her
main report had not systematically addressed possible alternative causes  of
S1 (apart from ill-treatment in detention) and had not asked  the  appellant
if she had ever self-harmed by banging her head.  It was a  problem  to  get
out of the appellant how many incidents of self-harm  there  had  been.   It
can be quite distressing to a patient for a doctor  to  keep  probing  self-
harm.

30. Asked about whether the appellant had shown suicidal intent in  the  UK.
She said the appellant's descriptions of what she had done to  herself  fell
short of that, Dr Hartree could not remember if she had asked the  appellant
about any suicidal intent.   Since  she  had  recorded  in  her  report  the
appellant  saying  she  does  not  recall  having  any  scars  from  Danny's
violence, she must have explored this topic with the appellant.

31. Regarding the reference in her report to the appellant fearing  that  in
China she would suffer destitution, Dr Hartree said she thought this was  an
actual fear the appellant had and that she was being quite  realistic  about
this being her likely situation on return.

32. Mr Jarvis asked Dr Hartree to clarify the importance  she  had  attached
in her reports  to  the  appellant's  mannerisms  and  body  language.   She
accepted that not telling the truth could cause a person's body language  to
change.  Whilst she agreed  it  was  possible  that  rigid,  defensive  body
posture such as the appellant displayed could  be  caused  by  a  number  of
things, she believed it was closely linked to torture-related  trauma.   The
appellant was the only patient she had had who when on her own  insisted  on
the door to the interviewing room  not  being  shut  even  in  winter.   She
agreed that the appellant's anxiety could be because of her  experiences  of
living with Danny, not detention in China, but her  view  was  it  was  more
likely attributable to the latter.  Similarly, whilst  one  of  the  reasons
for the appellant wrapping her legs up in a blanket could have been  anxiety
about domestic violence, she considered looking  at  the  whole  cluster  of
circumstances  that  the  reason  related  to  her  experience  of  rape  in
detention.

33. In re-examination, Dr Hartree was  asked  why  she  had  concluded  that
domestic violence did not explain the appellant's complex  PTSD.   She  said
there were a number of factors.  One in particular was that she was  clearly
very controlled by Danny and did not herself see that the situation she  was
in was an abusive one.  The story of violence at  his  hands  had  gradually
come out over time;  there  must  have  been  special  reasons  for  her  to
tolerate that situation for so long.  She could not explain the  appellant's
vulnerability in terms of any  troubled  family  background  in  China;  the
appellant spoke about her family life as a loving one.

34. Asked by me to clarify what papers she had read before her first  report
Dr Hartree said she had read the respondent's Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.
She agreed that she had not addressed all of the inconsistencies  identified
by the respondent, in particular between the appellant saying in  one  place
she had been in prison a few days and elsewhere saying it was three  months;
but it was her opinion that the appellant had no concept of  the  period  of
time she was in detention.  Clinically she did not have a problem with  that
degree of discrepancy.   She  often  observed  huge  differences  between  a
patient's account at interview and a patient's account to her.  She  thought
interview accounts were often affected by such factors as the way  questions
were asked, the degree of stress a person was under, whether  a  person  had
valid reasons to avoid certain subjects because of trauma, etc.

35. Dr Hartree asked about the use of terms from the Istanbul  Protocol  and
the latter's well-known hierarchy of degree of likely causes.  She  accepted
that in her January 2013 report she had  used  these  carelessly.   She  had
corrected this in her latest report.

Submissions

36. Mr Jarvis submitted that I  should  find  the  appellant  not  credible.
There were important discrepancies in her account including about  the  time
she had spent in China after being deported from New Zealand.   Her  account
of how her parents had found where she was being detained and how  they  had
obtained her release was implausible and at odds with the country of  origin
information.  Even on her own account she had had  no  problems  in  between
her release and the date, more than six months  later,  when  she  left  the
country.  Country of origin information did not  suggest  persons  suspected
of involvement with spying for the Taiwanese would be  able  to  exit  using
their own passports.  The fact  that she had said that her friend  in  China
who obtained the hospital records may have had help from  her  parents  cast
doubt on her claims about why she had  not  tried  contacting  her  parents.
The  country  of  origin  information  made  clear  that   obtaining   false
documentation, including hospital documentation in  China,  was  easy.   The
explanation she had given for claiming asylum late did  not  hold  up.   The
appellant had been able to talk  to  UK  authorities  about  abuse  she  had
suffered in January 2011 and in her 2012 witness statement.  She could  have
mentioned this in 2010 when she was told about political asylum.  Even  then
she still did not claim.  She had been organised enough to  track  down  the
names and phone numbers of solicitors when detained in the UK,  her  history
of mental problems had not stopped her being able to act then.  It was  also
significant that the appellant's initial account of her  problems  in  China
(being followed and harassed by a group) was not consistent with  her  later
claim.

37. As regards the medical evidence, Mr Jarvis  submitted  that  Dr  Hartree
had conceded in her oral evidence that there  were  other  potential  causes
for the appellant's complex PTSD.   From  the  doctor's  account  there  was
already in her mind at the outset  a  presumption  that  the  appellant  was
truthful because her case had already been "filtered" by colleagues.   There
was also a therapeutic  component  to  Dr  Hartree's  interaction  with  the
appellant.  The fact that the appellant had cried lengthily when  describing
her detention could be explained by the pressure she felt  to  persuade  the
doctor.  Whilst he did not seek to impugn Dr Hartree's  expertise,  her  own
experience was limited because she said she  had  believed  that  all  those
patients she had dealt with at HBF had been victims of trauma and we do  not
know what the outcomes of their claims were.  The  fact  that  an  appellant
gave nonverbal or sensory responses when describing her experiences did  not
mean they were credible; the doctor had agreed some  people's  psychological
condition could be characterised by a lack of emotion.  There was  a  danger
that as Dr Hartree's reports have progressed there  is  almost  a  quest  to
maintain the narrative of the original report.  Dr  Hartree  had  relied  in
part on the input from Ms Huang about Chinese culture, but  the  latter  was
just an interpreter.

38. Mr Jarvis asked me to find that Dr  Hartree's  reports  had  underplayed
the impact on the appellant of domestic violence at the hands of Danny.   Dr
Hartree herself noted at one point that victims  of  domestic  violence  can
minimise that violence.  It was inherently plausible  that  the  appellant's
head injuries were caused by  violence  at  Danny's  hands.   Self-harm  and
weight loss could also have played a part in some of  her  scars.   All  her
symptoms could be given a different gloss or explanation.

39. It was important not to magnify the appellant's symptoms.  She was  able
to socialise through going to college; she had had a number of  sessions  of
counselling.

40. Mr Jarvis said that if the appellant was thought to  be  credible,  then
he would accept her appeal should be allowed, although that was to  do  with
risk on return, not her mental health.  In  this  regard  he  asked  that  I
should find that it was speculative to talk about  the  appellant  being  at
risk of suicide; she did not have a history of self-harming in  the  UK  and
there were adequate health facilities in China.

41. Ms Clarke began her submissions by saying that  the  chronology  of  the
appellant's stay in China after returning from New Zealand allowed time  for
the appellant to have formed a relationship with Mr YW and the  respondent's
suggested chronology was not consistent in any event.

42.  Ms  Clarke  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  given   a   plausible
explanation for how her parents  had  tracked  her  down  when  she  was  in
detention: they had found her house in a mess; it was  consistent  with  the
country of origin information that  they  would  have  been  able  to  bribe
officials.  The hospital records contained a  detailed  description  of  the
injuries the appellant had sustained.  No adverse inference should be  drawn
from the nature of her exit.  She did not arrange it herself.

43. Dr Hartree had been adamant the appellant's scarring on her  head  would
not have been caused  by  head-butting  or  by  the  type  of  violence  she
described Danny as inflicting on her.  Dr Hartree did not treat Ms Huang  as
an expert on China, only as a source of  authentic  information.   The  Home
Office accepts the HBF as an eminent organisation and the  HBF  clearly  had
confidence in Ms Huang.

44. Ms Clarke submitted that for Dr Hartree the fact patients  she  saw  had
been filtered by colleagues did not mean she had prejudged  the  appellant's
case.  Her approach was in line with Istanbul Protocol  guidelines  and  was
forensic.  In her latest report and in her oral evidence she  had  corrected
certain references to scars being "typical of" and given an explanation  for
her conclusions.  She brought to bear  her  considerable  expertise  on  the
traumatic impact of rape on female patients and so  her  observations  about
certain aspects  of  the  appellant's  physical  presentation  (rigidity  of
posture; wanting to wrap herself in a  blanket)  should  carry  considerable
weight.  The therapist, Corrie Tuke, had observed  the  same  rigidity.   Dr
Hartree was  justified  in  considering  that  the  appellant's  deep-seated
psychological problems were best explained by her having been  detained  and
ill-treated.  Dr Hartree's diagnosis also made explicable  such  matters  as
that the appellant did not make an asylum claim until late in the day;  that
she should only claim when detained in the UK;  and  that  she  should  have
said some things that were inaccurate.  It  would  be  wrong  to  treat  the
appellant's discrepancies over dates as determinative.   That  it  was  only
when faced with the threat of removal from the UK that she felt she  had  to
speak about her traumatic experiences was credible.  Her panic about  return
to China would likewise explain her inaccuracies.   It  was  only  when  she
felt safe in the context of interviews with Dr Hartree that she could  fully
explain her own distress and trauma.  Through a relationship  of  trust  she
has moved on and felt able to engage in therapy.  It  was  very  significant
that Dr Hartree had said that despite discrepancies about  dates  there  was
in her view a real consistency in the appellant's  essential  account.   She
had not tried to enhance her claim and had  identified  some  scars  as  not
having been caused by torture.  It was incorrect to say that Dr Hartree  had
played down the appellant's experience of  domestic  violence.   The  trauma
and level of confinement she feels has  continued  even  though  she  is  no
longer in a violent relationship and even though she has a  college  friend.
She has not  been  able  to  forge  proper  friendships.   Her  reaction  to
rejection is still there and must come from something serious  in  her  past
before arrival in the UK.  The clinical position  has  not  broadly  changed
between the first and latest reports.

45. Dr Hartree's experienced judgment, which should be respected,  was  that
the appellant's complex PTSD combined with her scarring strongly pointed  to
her account of detention and ill-treatment in China  being  true.   She  has
been emphatic that the appellant is not making up her story.   Dr  Hartree's
report should be accorded very considerable weight.

46. In terms of the appellant having claimed asylum late and  destroyed  her
passport, she had not tried to hide what she has  done.   The  core  of  her
claim was credible.

My assessment

47. I have to consider whether the appellant has given  a  credible  account
in light of the evidence as a whole, taking into account that the  appellant
is a vulnerable witness and that she  is  an  accepted  victim  of  domestic
violence; see further below.

48. Obviously a central part of the evidence relied on by Ms Clarke in  this
case is the medical evidence of Dr Hartree. In the  error  of  law  decision
the panel sought to identify the  principles  that  should  govern  judicial
assessment of medical reports on  persons  claiming  to  be  the  victim  of
trauma.  At [29] it stated:

    "29. From leading cases dealing with medical evidence in asylum-related
         cases it is clear that those writing medical reports  are  expected
         to keep within certain parameters. As expert  witnesses  they  have
         duties under Practice Direction 10 of the Practice  Directions  for
         the Immigration and Asylum Chamber for the First-tier Tribunal  and
         the Upper Tribunal. They are to follow the guidance  given  in  the
         Istanbul Protocol, especially [186]-[187]  dealing  with  different
         degrees of consistency[1] and [162][2] dealing with objectivity and
         impartiality  (SA  (Somalia)  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302  [30]).  When
         considering causation of injuries said to have  been  inflicted  by
         torture or other forms of  ill  treatment,  they  are  to  consider
         possible alternative explanations. As stated  in  SA  (Somalia)  at
         [28]:


                  'It is also desirable that,  in  the  case  of  marks  of
             injury  which  are  inherently  susceptible  of  a  number  of
             alternative or "everyday" explanations,  reference  should  be
             made to such fact, together  with  any  physical  features  or
             "pointers" found which may make the particular explanation for
             the injury advanced by the complainant more or  less  likely'.
             (See also RT (medical  reports,  causation  of  scarring)  Sri
             Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00009)


49. The decision further noted that those writing  medical  reports  are  to
ensure where possible that before forming  their  opinions  they  study  any
assessments that have already been made of the  appellant's  credibility  by
the immigration authorities and/or a tribunal judge ("It is  essential  that
those  who  are  asked  to  provide  expert  reports,  be  they  medical  or
otherwise, are provided with the documents relevant to the matters they  are
asked to consider. Failure to  do  so  is  bound  to  led  to  the  critical
scrutiny of the expert's report, and  may  lead  to  the  rejection  of  the
opinions expressed in that report...." (SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA  Civ  155
[30]; BN (psychiatric evidence discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279  (IAC)
at [49], [53])). When the materials a doctor has regard to include  previous
determinations by a judge, they should not conduct a running  commentary  on
the  reasoning  of  the  judge  who  has  made  such  findings,  but  should
concentrate on describing and evaluating the medical evidence  (IY  (Turkey)
[2012] EWCA Civ 1560  [37].  Doctors  should  bear  in  mind  that  when  an
advocate wishes to rely on their medical report to support  the  credibility
of an appellant's account, he will be expected to  identify  what  about  it
affords support to what the appellant has said and which  is  not  dependent
on what the appellant has said to  the  doctor  (HE  (DRC,  credibility  and
psychiatric reports) Democratic Republic of Congo [2004] UKAIT 000321).  The
more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming that  the  account  given  by  the
appellant was to be believed, the less likely it is that significant  weight
will be attached to it (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA  Civ  306  [23]).  Doctors
need to understand  that  what  is  expected  of  them  is  a  critical  and
objective analysis of the injuries and/or symptoms displayed. They  need  to
be  vigilant  that  ultimately  whether  an  appellant's  account   of   the
underlying events is or is not credible  and  plausible  is  a  question  of
legal appraisal and a matter for the tribunal judge, not the expert  doctors
(IY [47]; see also HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [17]-[18]).


50. From the above it was said to be clear that the status  that  a  medical
report has as independent evidence  is  entirely  a  matter  of  weight  and
assessment. As stated in SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 at [21]:


         'Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert  (or
         indeed any) evidence is a matter for the  trial  judge...A  judge's
         decision not to accept expert evidence does not involve an error of
         law  on  his  part,  provided  he  approaches  that  evidence  with
         appropriate care and gives good reasons for his decision'. (see  to
         similar effect Y and another (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362).


It was observed that even where a  medical  expert  relies  heavily  on  the
account given by a client, that does not  entail  that  his  or  her  report
lacks or loses its status as independent evidence, although  it  may  reduce
very considerably the weight that can be attached to it.

51. I have to apply this body of learning in the  context  of  an  appellant
who has not given evidence before a Tribunal Judge.  I have to rely  on  the
record of her evidence as given to the immigration  authorities  and  to  Dr
Hartree, together with hospital records from  a  Chinese  hospital,  GP  and
therapist observations and the diagrams appended to Dr Hartree's reports.  I
have to take account of Dr Hartree's detailed evidence which considers  that
notwithstanding various shortcomings the appellant has  given  a  relatively
consistent and credible account.

52. Mr Jarvis has sought to  argue  that  I  should  regard  Dr  Hartree  as
relatively inexperienced and someone who appears habitually to  believe  her
patients, but I see no reason to  doubt  that  she  has  developed  relevant
expertise in relation to victims of trauma through her work at the  HBF  and
that she has sought to apply Istanbul Protocol principles in good faith  and
to regard her  primary  obligation  as  being  to  assist  the  Tribunal  in
establishing the truth. That said,  Dr  Hartree  herself  acknowledged  that
cultural factors were relevant to evaluation of trauma and  its  causes  and
because the appellant was her first Chinese patient she  felt  it  necessary
to draw on the experience/expertise of others, the interpreter Ms Huang  and
Dame Bamber.  As  I  will  come  to  later,  Dr  Hartree  also  acknowledged
methodological shortcomings in her use of Istanbul  Protocol  guidelines  in
her first report.

53. Given, as I go on to explain, that I think Dr Hartree  was  entitled  to
find that the appellant has serious psychological problems  (depression  and
complex PTSD), I must apply the guidance given  in  the  joint  Presidential
Guidance Note No. 2, 2010. Child, Vulnerable Adult and  Sensitive  Appellant
Guidance  and  in  particular  I  must  consider  at  every   turn   whether
discrepancies in a vulnerable person's evidence might be explained in  terms
of his/her age, vulnerability or sensitivity. The fact  that  the  appellant
did not give evidence either to the First-tier Tribunal or  to  me  was  not
simply a matter of her own choice but was supported by  medical  opinion  as
to her fitness to give evidence.

54. My assessment is that, even  taking  into  account  the  fact  that  the
appellant is a vulnerable witness who has complex PTSD, I  do  not  consider
her asylum claim is credible.

55. Before turning to my principal reasons, I would  note  that  whilst  the
appellant's account of the time she spent in  China  upon  return  from  New
Zealand has not been consistent, I attach no negative weight to that  aspect
of her account.  It is true that when asked about last  known  addresses  by
the officer completing the bio data information form in June 2010, she  said
she spent only two months in China before  travelling  to  the  UK;  whereas
elsewhere her account involved her spending over a  year.   Given  that  the
New Zealand authorities  recorded  her  as  being  deported  from  China  in
September 2004 and that the student visa on which she travelled  to  the  UK
was not valid until 20 December 2005 (it was valid  from  21.12.2005  to  31
October 2006) it is clear that the period must have been at  least  fourteen
months. Whilst two months and  fourteen  months  are  drastically  different
periods of time, I am prepared to accept  that  the  appellant  cannot  have
meant the former.

56. Turning to my principal reasons for finding the appellant not  credible,
the first concerns the lack of consistency in her core account  of  why  she
was at risk. Her account of having been  tortured  by  government  officials
because of suspicion she was connected with a man who was spying for  Taiwan
is significantly different from that which she originally gave  to  the  CID
on 20 June 2010 when she  was  recorded  as  having  "expressed  a  fear  of
returning to China because a group of people will be looking for  me  and  I
may be killed... " and said the problem involved 'money and  love'  but  she
did not want to talk about it.

57. The appellant's account as given at her asylum interview was that  after
she was released from detention by the Chinese  authorities  she  spent  the
next six months in hospital  after  which  her  parents  then  arranged  her
travel to the UK.  There is no mention in this account  of  the  authorities
visiting her in hospital or even of her  believing  she  was  being  watched
when she was in hospital or after she was discharged  from  there.   Yet  in
her screening interview of  December  2010  her  account  is  of  continuous
adverse attention from the authorities including by way of them  "following"
her ("I have been raped by government officials and they bully me, they  hit
me.  They do everything.  They follow me, they harass  me.   The  government
thinks I am undercover from Taiwan..."); see also  5.3  ("...the  government
officials have been trying to hunt me down").

58.  The  respondent  has  submitted  that  it  was  implausible  that   the
appellant's parents could have been able to locate the appellant  after  she
was detained.  Against that, Ms Clarke has argued  that  the  appellant  had
given a very plausible explanation, namely that  when  her  parents  visited
her flat they were able to infer she was being detained from the  fact  that
her flat showed signs that she and her boyfriend had been  raided.  However,
the appellant herself did not originally say anything to  suggest  that  her
parents had tracked her down through making  enquiries  of  the  authorities
and the background country information does not suggest that when  it  comes
to persons suspected of spying against the government the authorities  would
disclose their whereabouts to family members.

59. The appellant has not given a consistent account of the  period  of  her
detention.  In her asylum interview she said it was  three  months,  stating
that "I didn't know [how long] at the time, but found out after I came  out,
maybe even more" (Q33).  According to Dr Hartree's  report  of  27  February
2012 the appellant estimated that she was detained in prison for  about  2-3
months.   In  her  Statement  of  Additional  Grounds,  however,  she   made
reference to being locked up for only a couple of days.   Dr Hartree  sought
to explain the appellant's different accounts in terms  of  her  having  "no
concept of time" as to the period involved.  However, I consider that to  be
a very one-sided description even of the appellant's accounts  as  given  to
the doctor, during which, for example, the  appellant  when  describing  her
claimed period in  detention  plainly  mentioned  a  series  of  events  and
experiences that could not have taken place in the space  of  a  few  weeks.
Further, Dr Hartree's observation does not adequately address the fact  that
in her screening  interview  and  asylum  interview  on  December  2010  and
January 2011 respectively and in her witness statement of February 2012  the
appellant was in general able to give  an  account  which  was  in  my  view
accurately  described  by  Judge  Lingard  as   "generally   chronologically
cohesive"  ([88]  of  her  determination).  The  account  she  gave  of  her
detention in her asylum interview showed a  particular  capacity  to  recall
details of past events and she also showed  capacity  to  recount  addresses
where she had lived in the UK dating back to 2007, she was  able  to  recall
the month and year she left Beijing and flew to  Heathrow,  the  months  and
years for which her student visa was valid, the precise dates on  which  her
most recent Chinese passport was issued (despite the fact the  original  was
destroyed), the date she  last  saw  her  partner  prior  to  the  screening
interview as well as dates relating to her education and when  she  met  her
former partners/boyfriends. It may be that not all  of  these  details  were
accurate but the  appellant's  ability  to  furnish  such  detail  does  not
indicate someone who has chronic or significant problems of  recall  in  the
context of her asylum claim.

60. A further factor I count against the appellant is that she was  able  to
depart China using her own passport.  If her main account is to be  believed
her  three-month  detention  and  ill-treatment  was  because  the   Chinese
authorities suspected her of being a Taiwanese spy or an  associate  of  the
same.  The COI makes clear that  in  China  under  the  Regulations  of  the
Peoples Republic of China, on Exit and Entry Frontier Inspection adopted  in
1995, Chinese nationals wishing to exit the country are  required  to  apply
to the proper bureaucratic institution for permission to leave the  country,
granted as  an  exit  certificate  or  exit  registration  form.   Nationals
applying for exit for private persons shall be granted approval unless  they
fall under the categories of exclusion listed in Article 8.  This  provision
states that approval to exit China shall not be granted to  persons  falling
within listed categories, including persons whose exit will, in the  opinion
of the competent department of China's State Council, be  harmful  to  state
security or cause a major loss to national interests.  If, as the  appellant
maintained, the authorities continued to have an  adverse  interest  in  her
after her release from detention, then it is very unlikely  that  she  could
have travelled out of China on her own passport.  The fact that her  parents
may have applied on her behalf does not alter this fact.

61. Linked to this, the appellant's account fails to demonstrate that,  even
if it were believed that  she  had  been  detained  for  three  months,  she
continued to  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the  Chinese  authorities.   As
remarked upon already, she makes no mention in her asylum  interview  or  to
Dr Hartree of them seeking to locate her when  she  went  into  hospital  or
thereafter (Q52).

62. It is the appellant's main contention that she fled  China  in  fear  of
further persecution from the Chinese authorities, but when she came  to  the
UK in early 2006 she did  not  claim  asylum.   Even  when  apprehended  for
shoplifting and informed by an interviewing officer taking her bio  data  in
June 2010 that she could claim political asylum, she did  not  claim  asylum
until 8 December 2010, over four  years  after  arrival  in  the  UK.     Ms
Clarke has sought to maintain that there were a number of valid reasons  why
the appellant did not claim until that date.  In my judgment,  however,  the
appellant is an  intelligent  woman.   Whatever  her  precise  psychological
problems, she had managed since arrival to find  employment,  accommodation,
access medical care and  undertake  educational  courses.   She  would  have
known about the possibility of claiming asylum from her contact with  others
whilst living in the UK.  Further, she had already been  deported  from  New
Zealand for overstaying  so  will  have  been  well  aware  of  the  serious
consequences of remaining in  another  country  without  good  cause.   When
detained in the UK she showed sufficient  awareness  of  legal  remedies  to
locate the names of a number of solicitors.

Dr Hartree's Evidence
63. Dr Hartree's evidence occupies an important  place  in  the  appellant's
case.  She has prepared four reports between February 2012  and  April  2013
and has seen the appellant a number of times.  Dr  Hartree  is  one  of  the
doctors who carry out work for the HBF which is  one  of  two  organisations
recognised by UKBA as having  relevant  medical  expertise  in  relation  to
victims of trauma.  Dr  Hartree  is  also  an  experienced  medical  expert,
having done a  number  of  reports  previously.   Whilst  her  reports  draw
heavily on the appellant's account,  they  are  also  based  on  a  clinical
examination of the  appellant's  scarring,  Chinese  hospital  records  and,
latterly, GP records  and  therapist  feedback.   Her  opinion  that  it  is
impossible to say how old scars are once they are  six  months  old  accords
with the background medical literature. Before proceeding further, I  should
highlight  that  Dr  Hartree's  reports  and  oral  evidence  show  a  clear
understanding on her part that whilst her medical assessment has  a  bearing
on the credibility of the  appellant's  asylum  claim  it  is  ultimately  a
matter for the Tribunal, taking account of the entirety of the evidence,  to
make findings on that  issue.  As  will  become  clearer  in  a  moment,  my
findings diverge from those of Dr Hartree in many respects, but that is  not
to be seen as anything more than a  doctor  and  a  judge  performing  their
respective roles as best they can.

64. From her reports I am satisfied that the  appellant  has  mental  health
problems and I see no reason to question Dr  Hartree's  diagnosis  that  she
suffers from depression and complex PTSD with psychotic  features  and  that
she has a number of scars as mapped on  diagrams  included  in  the  report.
However, the weight  I  consider  appropriate  to  attach  to  Dr  Hartree's
opinions as to the causation of her mental health problems and her  scarring
is reduced by a number of factors.

65. First, it is clear that when she first assessed the appellant's  account
of ill-treatment whilst in detention in China Dr  Hartree  had  reached  her
conclusions  without  sufficient  consideration  of   possible   alternative
causes.   It  is  to  be  recalled  that  the  Istanbul  Protocol  describes
ascending degrees of  likelihood  of  attributed  causation,  starting  with
"consistent  with",  "highly  consistent  with",  then  "typical   of"   and
"diagnostic of".  "Typical of" is described as  being  "[of]  an  appearance
that is usually found  with  this  type  of  trauma,  but  there  are  other
possible causes".

66. In her first report of 27 February 2012 at  [97]  Dr  Hartree  describes
the scar on the appellant's head  (S1)  as  being  "typical  of  its  stated
attribution of being pushed onto a sharp corner of a heater  when  assaulted
in prison".  Yet  nowhere  in  the  lead-up  to  this  conclusion  does  she
consider alternative causes for it; except to rule  out  accidental  causes.
The same applies to S2.  In the same report Dr Hartree  describes  scars  S3
and S6-12, S13, S19 and S20 as "typical of" its attribution, which was self-
harm by the appellant in reaction to her  ill-treatment  in  prison.   Again
there is no exploration of self-harm in reaction to  other  possible  causes
and settings (e.g. in reaction to domestic  violence).   S14(a)  and  S14(b)
and S23 are said to be "highly consistent with" malnutrition in the  context
of ill-treatment in prison, again without any exploration of other  possible
causes or settings.

67. Of particular concern is that to the  extent  Dr  Hartree's  reports  do
explore domestic violence as a possible alternative cause, such  exploration
is extremely limited.  The only specific analysis of it in her first  report
occurs at [132(a)], when she notes "there is no history to  suggest  assault
occurring other than during  [the  appellant's]  imprisonment.   She  seemed
frank with me about the violence from her  ex-partner  Danny,  and  did  not
describe assault by him  other  than  on  her  neck  and  restraint  to  her
wrists".  Yet  as  [21]-[24]  she  had  described  violence  from  Danny  as
"frequent", and over the last two years as occurring "four  times  a  month"
and had added  that  such  violence  was  very  likely  underplayed  by  the
appellant.  Mention is made of one blow  whose  location  is  not  specified
being followed by a severe headache which resulted in her attending A  &  E.
At [24] she had observed that the appellant was "reticent  about  disclosing
to me the extent or frequency of the violence from Danny".

68. At [189] Dr Hartree makes a comment which strongly suggests she had  not
maintained a clear picture of the history of  the  appellant's  relationship
with Danny. She states  that  "I  note  the  history  of  domestic  violence
developed after her immigration  detention,  which  suggests  that  ...  the
power balance changed  significantly  after  this"  (her  first  immigration
detention was in mid- 2010. Yet earlier she had described the  appellant  as
having met Danny much earlier and his  violence  to  her  beginning  in  the
second or third year of their (four-year) relationship [20]-[22].

69. I regret to say that I find Dr Hartree's  assumption  that  scarring  by
Danny was confined to neck injuries (see [132(a)]) quite at  odds  with  her
earlier observations at [21]-[24] and really  quite  unsatisfactory.   If  a
patient is "reticent" about the frequency and extent of  injuries,  then  it
is difficult to understand why the doctor  should  proceed  to  accept  what
that patient has "describe[d]" at face value.  (At [138] Dr Hartree  appears
to consider that an alternative cause  is  "severe  and  prolonged  domestic
violence" but does not otherwise explore this).

70. Dr Hartree's failure to  properly  approach  evaluation  of  alternative
causation in the form of domestic violence is made more  surprising  by  the
fact that in her 26 March 2012 report  she  notes  at  [28],  fourth  bullet
point, that the opinion she was given by colleagues at HBF  with  experience
of Chinese patients included that "[i]f the client has  suffered,  s/he  can
be defensive about the person who has hurt them, and tend to minimise  their
own hurt".

71. In response to observations made by the First tier Tribunal judge on  Dr
Hartree's treatment of the issue of domestic violence,  Dr  Hartree's  third
and fourth reports seek to address this matter more specifically.

72.  In  her  fourth  report  Dr  Hartree  states   that   the   appellant's
relationship  with  Danny  was  explored  further  and  that  although   the
appellant continued to show difficulty in speaking about her experiences  of
torture, domestic violence and her fears about return to China [61], it  was
now clearer to her that although the  appellant's  relationship  with  Danny
had "some  physical  violence"  its  most  prominent  aspect  was  emotional
control [10].  At [67] she also refers to his  "economic  control"  although
noting  at  [13]  that  his  physical  violence  had  involved  hitting  the
appellant and that she had attended A & E  [on  6  May  2010]  with  a  head
injury on one occasion after Danny had hit her [wound was said to have  been
on left side parietal area].

73. My concerns about Dr Hartree's treatment of alternative causes  for  the
appellant's  scarring  are  further  compounded  by  evident  methodological
shortcomings in her first report. At [71] of her fourth  report  Dr  Hartree
sought to qualify her previous statement in her first  report  that  S1  was
"typical of" a deliberate blow that occurred in prison.  She meant  only  to
say, she says, that "the scar and its location was typical of  the  type  of
assault  described,  occurring  in  an  environment  where  formal   medical
treatment was not given."  At [73] she sought  to  discount  an  alternative
cause of the appellant's scars being rapid weight loss.

74. At [73] she states that the head injury recorded by A & E on 6 May  2010
was of a lump without any cut or skin break: "[s]uch  an  injury  would  not
leave a scar".  At [75] she states that those injuries recorded in A & E  on
this date "do not account for scar  S1".   At  [94],  she  states  that  the
history of the appellant's relationship with Danny could  account  for  some
aspects of her mental state, but other parts of the clinical picture  fitted
more closely with her account of ill-treatment  in  prison;  those  included
her nonverbal reactions to questions about her experiences  in  prison;  the
severity of her psychological  presentation;  the  controlling  relationship
between Danny and the appellant being "highly compatible  with  her  account
of torture and  rape  preceding  that  relationship";  and  her  need,  when
distressed, to wrap her legs in a blanket.

75. Strikingly Dr Hartree did not in this  latest  report  address  whether,
even if S1 was not identical with the A & E head injury, it could have  been
caused by violent acts committed by Danny on other occasions.

76. In her oral evidence before me, however, Dr Hartree  sought  to  explain
her treatment of S1 in more detail.  As  already  noted,  her  evidence  was
that since S1 would have caused  heavy bleeding she  would  expect  that  if
this had been caused by Danny, the appellant  would  have  sought  immediate
medical treatment.  However, her oral evidence did not address  whether  the
appellant's reticence about blaming Danny for his violence might have  meant
she relied on cleaning the wound herself. Her own first report had noted  at
[95] when analysing S1  that  its  width  was  wider  than  she  would  have
expected had the injury been stitched which "suggests that it was an  injury
for which she did not receive formal  medical  treatment...".   It  is  also
interesting that there is no mention in the A & E  report  of  any  existing
scar in the same (relatively small) area.

77. In her oral evidence Dr Hartree said that the appellant's account  about
the nature of the violence she suffered at  the  hands  of  Danny  had  only
emerged gradually over time, but it is clear that from the first report  the
appellant was able to tell her enough  for  her  to  describe  the  physical
violence as "frequent".  There is  no  mention  anywhere  of  the  appellant
subsequently saying it was not frequent.  Even if Dr  Hartree  is  right  to
describe Danny as exercising control more through  emotional  than  physical
means, that does not mean, nor did any of the  evidence  before  Dr  Hartree
suggest it meant, that the physical violence was, in fact,  infrequent.

78. Whilst I do not accept  Mr  Jarvis's  contention  that  Dr  Hartree  had
simply started from the assumption that the appellant was truthful  (because
she had been through a filtering process conducted by other HBF  staff),  it
remains a relevant feature of her reports that her primary  concern  was  to
build a relationship of trust  with  the  appellant  and  her  approach  was
consistently to ensure her questioning did not cause the appellant  anxiety.
 Taking Dr Hartree's evidence as a whole, insofar as it  has  a  bearing  on
assessment of the credibility  of  the  appellant,  I  find  it  of  limited
weight. I do not consider that shortcomings in the appellant's evidence  can
be sufficiently explained by the matters set out in  her  reports  and  oral
evidence. In the context of the evidence as a whole it does not persuade  me
that the appellant has  given  a  credible  account  of  detention  and  ill
treatment in China or being targeted by the Chinese authorities.

Chinese Air Force General hospital records

79. I take into account Dr Hartree's opinion  that  the  Air  Force  General
Hospital records said to relate to the admission of the  appellant  to  this
hospital in June 2005 are highly compatible with the appellant's account  of
her history, but, even leaving aside translation  shortcomings,  I  consider
that in the context of the evidence as  a  whole  they  are  unreliable.  As
noted by the First-tier Tribunal judge, there is no satisfactory  indication
who was responsible for  providing  these  papers  to  the  appellant,  from
where, how or when they were obtained or by what  manner  they  reached  the
appellant in the UK. Nor has there been  any  satisfactory  explanation  for
why the records appear to deal only with  the  appellant's  first  admission
and are silent about what is said to have been a further  six  month's  time
as a patient  in  the  same  hospital.  The  fact  that  background  country
evidence indicates that it is easy to obtain  fake  documentation  in  China
adds to my view as to their unreliability.

Risk on return in light of the appellant's medical problems

80. Whilst it is a relevant factor when assessing risk on  return  that  the
appellant has mental health problems, it is not suggested  that  she  is  at
significant risk of committing  suicide  or  undertaking  serious  self-harm
presently.

81. Dr Hartree's opinion was that on return the  appellant's  mental  health
condition could rapidly deteriorate but that  was  based  to  a  significant
extent on the doctor's view that the  appellant  had  experienced  detention
and ill treatment in China at the hands of the  Chinese  authorities  and  I
have found that this view is not borne out  by  the  evidence.  Further,  Dr
Hartree's view was based on acceptance that the appellant would not be  able
to make contact with her parents out of fear they would be targeted  because
of the adverse interest the Chinese authorities had in her, whereas  I  have
found that there was no such adverse interest and there will not be  in  the
future.

82. In such circumstances it is pertinent to recall what Dr Hartree said  in
her  third  report,  namely  that  "separation  from  family  and   country,
particularly separation from her parents, was likely to be  contributing  to
the appellant's  anxiety"  ([41]).  There  is  good  reason,  therefore,  to
consider that the appellant will on return be able  to  reconnect  with  her
parents and, even if that is not  the  case,  that  she  will  benefit  from
return to a country where she shares the same language and culture  and  has
some friendships.

83. So far as the appellant's mental  health  problems  are  concerned,  the
background country evidence certainly  identifies  shortcomings  in  China's
medical services,  but  it  does  not  indicate  that  these  would  not  be
accessible to the appellant. Given my previous findings of fact there is  no
reason  to  consider  that  the  appellant  will  avoid  contact  with   the
authorities for fear of suffering a repetition of previous ill treatment  at
their hands; my finding is that there was no such ill treatment.

84. For the above reasons I find the appellant has not shown that she has  a
well-founded fear of persecution or that she faces a real  risk  of  serious
harm or ill-treatment on return.  Whether  considered  under  Article  3  or
Article 8 (the latter in relation to the appellant's  right  to  respect  of
private  life  and  her  physical  and  moral  integrity),   I  am  entirely
satisfied that her return would not give  rise  to  a  violation  of  either
article.

85. For the above reasons:

The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law and her  decision  has  been  set
aside.

The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
-----------------------
   [1]These state:  "186... For each lesion and for the overall pattern of
   lesions, the physician should indicate the degree of consistency between
   it and the attribution
      (a) Not consistent: the lesion could not have been caused by the
      trauma described;
      (b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by the trauma
      described, but it is non-specific and there are many other possible
      causes;
      (c) Highly consistent: the lesion could have been caused by the trauma
      described, and there are few other possible causes;
      (d) Typical of: this is an appearance that is usually found with this
      type of trauma, but there are other possible causes;
      (e) Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been caused in
      anyway other than that described.
      187. Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all lesions and not
      the consistency of each lesion with a particular form of torture that
      is important in assessing the torture story (see Chapter IV.G for a
      list of torture methods)."

[2] The Court in SA (Somalia) refers to [161] but that appears to be an
error for [162] which begins with the words, "A medical evaluation for
legal purposes should be conducted with objectivity and impartiality".

