
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/01068/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 October 2014                          |On 6 November 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                              THE HON LORD BOYD
                  Sitting As a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                               MR MATIUL ISLAM
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr  M  Hossain  of  counsel  instructed  by  Hossain  Law
Associates
For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 10 February
   1964. He was given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
   Tribunal Judge N P Dickson ("the FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against
   the respondent's decision of 12 February 2014 to refuse to grant him
   asylum and to issue removal directions.

2. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by the FTTJ on 7 March
   2014. Both parties were represented at the hearing and the appellant gave
   evidence. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian
   protection and human rights grounds. The appellant applied for and was
   granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal arguing that the FTTJ
   had erred in law.

3. His appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson ("Judge Dawson") on 6
   May 2014. Judge Dawson found that the FTTJ had erred in law and set aside
   the decision directing that it should be remade in the Upper Tribunal.
   The findings made by the FTTJ in paragraph 44 and 46 of his determination
   were preserved. It was thought that the appeal might serve as an
   appropriate vehicle for updating the country guidance case of H (Fair
   trial) Bangladesh CG [2002] UKIAT 05414. Judge Dawson's Decision and
   Reasons records that the main issues were whether prison conditions would
   infringe his Article 3 human rights, whether he would receive a fair
   trial and whether he would be at risk of the death penalty.

4. In his Memorandum and Directions following a case management hearing on
   24 July 2014 Judge Dawson recorded that neither party was willing for the
   case to proceed as a country guidance case. In the circumstances he gave
   directions, not all of which have been observed, leading to the hearing
   before us. As well as the material before the FTTJ we have a skeleton
   argument and a bundle of documentary evidence from the appellant.
   Although the directions provided for a further witness statement from the
   appellant no statement has been submitted. Mr Hossain informed us that
   the only new evidence in the appellant's bundle was updated medical data
   from the appellant's GP. We have an updated skeleton argument and an
   authorities bundle from the respondent. Mr Jarvis said that the skeleton
   argument superseded earlier ones. The appellant attended the hearing with
   a Tribunal interpreter to assist him but no oral evidence was required or
   given.

5. On 24 July 2013 the appellant made an application for a UK visit Visa
   which was granted for the period from 6 August 2013 to 6 February 2014.
   The appellant arrived in the UK on 22 August 2013 travelling on his own
   valid Bangladeshi passport. He said that he had come here to see his
   mother who was having an eye operation.

6. On 15 November 2013 the appellant applied for an appointment in order to
   make a claim for asylum. He did not attend the appointment on 30 December
   2013 but did attend the subsequent appointment on 20 January 2014 at
   which stage he claimed asylum. This was followed by the respondent's
   decision of 12 February 2014. There is a lengthy reasons for refusal
   letter from the respondent dated the same date.

7. The findings of fact made by the FTTJ in paragraphs 44 and 46 of the
   determination were;

      "44. I found the appellant's account of the court proceedings and the
      bail applications to be convincing. He has in my view satisfactorily
      answered these parts of the concerns of the respondent that were set
      out in the refusal letter. I am satisfied that the appellant was
      involved in the meeting of the Awami League when Mr Moziful Islam was
      killed. He has been accused of various crimes and the Supreme Court
      has even become involved relating to his bail application."


      "46. The appellant has also claimed that he was tortured while he was
      in custody. However this matter has not come to the attention of the
      Home Office or the Tribunal until the hearing on 21st February 2014
      when he produced his initial report. There was no mention of any
      torture either in the asylum interview or in the letter from
      Universal Solicitors dated 24 January 2014. In evidence the appellant
      said that he had experienced eye trouble as a result of this ill-
      treatment but in fact he also said at his screening interview that he
      had suffered from eye trouble for a number of years. This was
      confirmed by the letter from Universal Solicitors of 24 January 2014
      and the Screening Interview (3.1). I accept that the appellant was in
      custody from December 2012 to March 2013 but I am not satisfied that
      he suffered ill-treatment from the authorities during this period."

8. Mr Jarvis relied on his skeleton argument and corrected a minor error in
   paragraph 2a where the date when Mr Islam was killed should have been 21
   June 2012 not 3 July 2012. He submitted that the issues in the appeal
   were the question of the death penalty in Bangladesh, whether the
   appellant would receive a fair trial, pre-trial detention and prison
   conditions. He took us through his skeleton argument.

9. Mr Hossain relied on his skeleton argument. He submitted that Bangladesh
   was no longer on the "White List" because of the human rights situation
   in the country. The appellant was the number one suspect in relation to
   the murder of Mr Islam and had the highest profile of all the accused. He
   had health problems, particularly with his eyes. Even if he was not
   sentenced to death he would face life imprisonment which would be
   particularly harsh. A very high proportion of those in prison in
   Bangladesh were in lengthy pre-trial detention. In reply to our question,
   he was not able to say whether if an individual was convicted and
   sentenced to a period of imprisonment in Bangladesh the period spent in
   pre-trial detention would be deducted from the sentence. Whilst the
   appellant had been granted bail on two occasions he submitted that this
   was whilst the investigations were continuing.

10. Mr Hossain asked us to put considerable weight on the evidence of the
   lawyer from Bangladesh whose opinion was that the appellant was highly
   unlikely to be granted further bail. He would be regarded as having
   absconded once and therefore at high risk of absconding again He had been
   expelled from his party, the Awami League. In all the circumstances of
   his case he would definitely be found guilty. Prison conditions in
   Bangladesh were dire and many sick prisoners died for lack of medical
   treatment. There were approximately 1500 prisoners on death row. We were
   asked to allow the appeal.

11. We reserved our determination.

   Prison conditions

12. In SH (prison conditions) CG Bangladesh [2008] UKAIT 000761 the AIT
   took the view that prison conditions in Bangladesh, at least for ordinary
   prisoners, did not violate Article 3 ECHR. However, this conclusion did
   not mean that an individual who faced prison on return to Bangladesh
   could never succeed in showing a violation of Article 3 in the particular
   circumstances of his case. The individual facts of each case should be
   considered to determine whether detention would cause a particular
   individual in his particular circumstances to suffer treatment contrary
   to Article 3. Relevant factors would include whether there was a
   political element to the person being detained, whether it was detention
   awaiting trial or detention in service of a sentence, the likely length
   of detention, the likely type of detention facility, and the individual's
   age and state of health. The appellant claimed that he had been tortured
   whilst in prison in Bangladesh but the FTTJ rejected this claim and that
   finding has been preserved.


13. The appellant relies on the Home Office Operational Guidance Note dated
   September 2003 which includes the following passages;

      "3.13.3. Consideration. Prison system conditions remained harsh and,
      at times, life-threatening due to overcrowding, inadequate facilities
      and lack of proper sanitation. Human rights observers stated that
      these conditions contributed to custody or death. According to
      Odhikar, 58 persons died in prison in 2012 compared with 105 prison
      deaths in 211. In a 4 July 2012 report on the trials of Bangladesh
      Rifles mutineers, HRW documented 47 cases of custody death between
      2009 and 2012, some due to torture or mistreatment.


      3.13.4. The US State Department report that although the constitution
      and law prohibit torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
      treatment or punishment, security forces, including RAB and police,
      reportedly employed torture and physical and psychological abuse
      during arrests and interrogations. Security forces used threats,
      beatings and electric shocks. According to Odhikar, security forces
      tortured at least 72 persons, killing seven. The government rarely
      charged, convicted or punish those responsible.


      3.13.10. Arbitrary lengthy pre-trial detention continued to be a
      problem due to bureaucratic inefficiencies, limited resources, lax
      enforcement of pre-trial rules, and corruption. An estimated 2
      million civil and criminal cases were pending. According to a 2008
      estimate from the International Centre for Prison Studies, nearly 70%
      of prison inmates, or 56,000 prisoners, were in pre-trial detention.
      In some cases the length of pre-trial detention equalled or exceeded
      the sentence for the alleged crime.


      3.13.15. Where individual applicants are able to demonstrate a real
      risk of imprisonment on return to Bangladesh (and exclusion is not
      justified), depending on the factors set out above, a grant of
      humanitarian protection may be appropriate."


14. The respondent submits that, according to Odhikar, there were 59 deaths
   in prison during 2013 and that 54 of them died because of illness. Whilst
   the respondent accepts that conditions in Bangladeshi prisons can, in
   some cases, be harsh and/or life-threatening we consider that it would be
   reasonable to conclude that some of these deaths in prison arose from
   purely natural causes not exacerbated by prison conditions.

15. The respondent submits that in 2013 the total prison population was
   69,968. 70% of this does not equate to 56,000 but we accept that the
   majority of those in prison in Bangladesh are held before trial or after
   trial and before sentence.

16. The appellant was a member of the Awami League and the local secretary
   for that party. He was present at the meeting where there was a clash
   between two groups of the Awami League and Mr Islam was killed. He
   claimed to have been expelled from the Awami League and the respondent
   now accepts this (paragraph 56a of the respondent's skeleton argument).
   He has been accused of murder in relation to the death of Mr Islam. The
   respondent concedes this (again in paragraph 56a of the skeleton
   argument) and we find that there is a political element to the charges
   brought against the appellant. This does not arise as a result of
   conflict between the main political parties but from an internal conflict
   within one party, the Awami League.

17. This appellant has been detained in prison in Bangladesh since the
   death of Mr Islam. We consider that what happened in the courts and in
   prison whilst he was detained assist us in assessing his future treatment
   if he returns and is imprisoned.


18.  In August 2012 the appellant and all the other accused were granted
   "anticipatory bail" by the High Court. In December 2012 the appellant's
   advocate explained that the appellant had missed court dates because of
   ill-health but a Senior Judicial Magistrate decided that the appellant
   had absconded and revoked his bail. It was said that he could be given
   the necessary medical treatment in prison. In January 2013 the appellant
   was represented by an advocate before a Senior Judicial Magistrate in the
   same court. The appellant was not produced for this or an earlier hearing
   and it was directed that the prison prepare a report. Later in January
   2013 the appellant's advocate explained to a Senior Judicial Magistrate
   that the appellant had been admitted to Rangpur Medical College Hospital
   on 14 January 2013 and from there had been referred to the National Eye
   Hospital on 16 January 2013. Bail was refused. However, on 14 March 2013
   in the Rangpur Session Judge Court the appellant's advocate explained
   that he had been unwell and receiving hospital treatment. The court had
   sight of a report from the prison authorities and the appellant was
   granted bail. A court document dated 30 October 2013 indicated that all
   those accused as a result of the same events were on bail. Mr Hossain
   informs us that there were 10 or 11 of them.

19. Whilst we accept that there can be lengthy delays for those held in
   prison awaiting trial or convicted and awaiting sentence the past history
   of the appellant's treatment within the prison and court system indicates
   that he has been able to instruct an advocate on a number of occasions
   and that his representatives have been able to obtain access to the
   courts at both lower and higher levels without serious delays and with
   applications being renewed at short intervals. He has been able to obtain
   appropriate medical treatment including being released from prison in
   order to access this. The evidence does not support Mr Hossain's
   submission that the appellant received better treatment whilst the
   investigation was still pending and that he would be subjected to worse
   treatment and longer delays on his return.

20. There is a lack of clear evidence before us as to whether there are any
   circumstances in which the appellant would be able to obtain bail if on
   his return he was arrested and held pending trial. We note that Mr
   Hossain's skeleton submits that there is no power for the police to grant
   bail after a murder charge has been brought but there is no suggestion
   that a judge or court cannot grant bail in these circumstances. The
   evidence submitted by the appellant at pages 33 to 35 of his bundle,
   whilst indicating that bail has been refused or revoked on appeal in some
   individual cases, does not show the application of any wider principles.
   Mr Siddiq is a barrister qualified in both this country and Bangladesh.
   We are not able to accept the opinion in his letter of 3 May 2014 that a
   court would be highly unlikely to exercise its discretion to grant the
   appellant bail on a murder charge. We accept that the appellant's period
   of absence from the country could tell against him. However, Mr Siddiq
   does not appear to have been informed or have taken into account the fact
   that the appellant was granted bail in Bangladesh at a time when it was
   known that he was accused of murder, even if he had not been formally
   charged. His previous experience of being able to obtain bail because he
   needed medical treatment indicates that he may well be able to do so if
   his health problems recur.

21. Assessing the reports of prison conditions and delays in awaiting trial
   in Bangladesh in the light of the appellant's particular circumstances
   and experiences we find that he has not established that there is a
   reasonable likelihood that he would suffer either persecution for a
   Convention reason or infringement of his Article 3 human rights.


   Fair trial


22. The case of H (Fair Trial) Bangladesh [2002] UKIAT 05410 is no longer
   country guidance and has not been replaced.

23. In order to succeed under Article 6 of the European Convention of Human
   Rights, the appellant must able to show substantial grounds for believing
   that there is a real risk of a breach of his right to a fair trial. His
   entitlement to a fair trial is defined in that Convention as;


      "Article 6 - Right to a fair trial
     1. In the determination of ... any criminal charge against him,
        everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a
        reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal
        established by law. Judgment shall be pronounced publicly but the
        press and public may be excluded from all or part of the trial in
        the interests of morals, public order or national security in a
        democratic society, where the interests of juveniles or the
        protection of the private life of the parties so require, or to the
        extent strictly necessary in the opinion of the court in special
        circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of
        justice.
     2. Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent
        until proved guilty according to law.
     3. Everyone charged with a criminal offence has the following minimum
        rights:
           a) To be informed promptly, in a language which he understands
              and in detail, of the nature and cause of the accusation
              against him;
           b) To have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of
              his defence;
           c) To defend himself in person or through legal assistance of
              his own choosing or, if he has not sufficient means to pay
              for legal assistance, to be given it free when the interests
              of justice so require;
           d) To examine or have examined witnesses against him and to
              obtain the attendance and examination of witnesses on his
              behalf under the same conditions as witnesses against him;
           e) To have the free assistance of an interpreter if he cannot
              understand or speak the language used."


24. We find that the conclusion in R on the application of Zakir Husan v
   Secretary of State EWHC 189 (Admin) ruling against the certification by
   the Secretary of State on the basis that there was in general in
   Bangladesh no serious risk of persecution of persons entitled to reside
   there or the removal of such persons would not in general contravene the
   UK's obligations under the human rights convention does not provide any
   material help either to the appellant or the respondent in determining
   whether on return to Bangladesh the appellant would obtain a fair trial.

25. The respondent argues that whilst there is some corruption within the
   lower first instance level of the Bangladeshi courts the evidence overall
   shows that the level of corruption at the higher appellant levels is not
   endemic or significant and that seen in its entirety the legal system
   does provide a fair trial. The nature of corruption at the lower level of
   the judicial system is not reasonably likely to lead to an unfair
   convictions based on false accusations. Mr Hossain in his skeleton and
   submissions says little about the risk of the appellant not obtaining a
   fair trial beyond the arguments that he would not get a fair trial
   because he was accused of the murder of an Awami League leader and had
   been expelled from the party and that he would have no control over
   whether his case would be dealt with by the Speedy Trial Tribunal. The
   report at page 41 of the appellant's bundle relates to representations by
   two independent United Nations human rights experts urging the Bangladesh
   government to halt the execution and allow a further appeal of an
   individual convicted of murder and sentenced to death on the basis that
   he did not receive a fair trial. We note that there had been a trial
   outside the mainstream criminal jurisdiction system, by the Bangladesh
   International Crimes Tribunal. The facts differ from those in this case
   because that individual had exhausted his appeal remedies under the
   system as it stood.

26. Whilst we accept the evidence submitted by the respondent that "Speedy
   Tribunals" have been set up to help deal with the backlog of cases within
   90 to 120 days and that these can deal with crimes including murder there
   is no clear evidence as to whether the appellant's case would be dealt
   with by such a Tribunal.

27. Paragraph 19 of the respondent's skeleton sets out a number of matters
   which, it is argued, indicate that overall there is a fair system of
   judicial oversight. In summary these are; the withdrawal of two proposed
   appointments to the High Court Division following adverse media scrutiny;
   the High Court overturning the conviction and death sentence issued by a
   Special Tribunal which was found to have been based solely on a newspaper
   report; the Supreme Court declaring a mandatory death sentence provision
   unconstitutional on the basis of the constraint of judicial discretion to
   consider the credibility of evidence and witnesses; the acquittal of four
   death-row convicts who had been sentenced to death in 2008 for their
   alleged part in the killing of eight political leaders and activists; the
   increase in judges salaries in 2013; the establishment of Speedy
   Tribunals; the implementation by the government in 2007 of most of 12
   directives detailed by the Supreme Court which aimed to separate the
   lower judiciary from the Executive; the Law Ministry whilst carrying out
   the posting transfer and promotion of judges in this subordinate courts
   does so in consultation with the Supreme Court; legislative reforms
   intended to guarantee the independence of Tribunals; amendments to the
   rules of procedure including the right to the presumption of innocence,
   the right to a fair and public hearing with counsel of their choice, the
   right to apply for and be granted bail, a prohibition on convicting a
   person twice for the same crime, a prohibition on requiring the accused
   to confess guilt, placing the burden of proof of proving guilt beyond
   reasonable doubt on the prosecution and the creation of a victim and
   witness protection system; a second Tribunal has been set up to share the
   growing workload of the 2010 International Crimes Tribunal. Finally, the
   War Crimes Committee of the International Bar Association considered that
   the 2010 amended legislation provided "a system that is broadly
   compatible with international standards".

28. The "National Household Survey on Corruption in Bangladesh - 2007"
   report indicated that less than half of households had used bribery
   whilst interacting with Magistrates or Judge Courts in both urban and
   rural areas; the level of bribery in the High/Supreme Court and Special
   Court was negligible and the number of judges receiving or negotiating
   bribes was negligible. Whilst it is disturbing to note the number of
   households using bribery whilst interacting with the lower courts the
   indication that the levels of bribery were negligible at high levels is
   more encouraging.

29. The respondent's submissions in relation to political influence on the
   judiciary are that whilst there is a lack of transparency as to the
   relationship between the Executive and the lower courts there was little
   reliable evidence to show the judges were subjected to political
   influence in decision-making and that the attempts to separate the
   judiciary from the Executive have been of some effect.

30. We have not been shown any evidence which might militate against the
   respondent's argument that the High/Supreme Court is subject to routine
   political pressure which adversely affects decision-making. On the other
   hand the evidence from Odhikar does indicate general public suspicion of
   the decision-making of the National Committee for Withdrawing Politically
   Motivated Cases on the basis that most of those dropped were against
   leaders and activists of the ruling Awami League whose cases, as a
   result, bypassed the judiciary. If, as a result of what he is thought to
   have done, and having been expelled from the Awami League, the appellant
   does not benefit from a decision from this committee it does not provide
   evidence that politically motivated interference against him would be
   brought to bear on the higher judiciary.

31. The Awami League were in power in Bangladesh from 1996 until October
   2001 and from December 2008 until now. The party was in power when the
   alleged killing of Mr Islam took place, when the appellant was arrested
   detained imprisoned, bailed and released. They would be the party in
   power if he was returned now.

32. The appellant's treatment by the courts in Bangladesh does not indicate
   that he has suffered political interference, undue delays, denial of
   appropriate hearings or proper legal representation. On the contrary he
   has been represented by an advocate of his choice, hearings have taken
   place without unreasonable delay and he and those accused with him have
   been able to obtain bail.

33. We find that in line with Othman (Abu Qatada) v the United Kingdom
   8139/09 [2012] ECHR 56 (17 January 2012) and the authorities reviewed in
   that case the appellant would need to establish that he would suffer a
   "flagrant denial of justice" to bring himself within Article 6. He has
   not shown that he falls within any of the forms of unfairness cited as
   examples in Othman.

34. We find that on the appellant's own evidence as to what has happened to
   him, viewed in the light of the country evidence before us he has not
   been treated unfairly by the courts and there is no evidence to show that
   the courts have shown a lack of independence for example by bribery or
   political pressure. In the past he has not suffered flagrant denial of
   justice.

35. The fact that he has not suffered flagrant denial of justice in the
   past is some indication but only part of the question of what may happen
   to him on return. In the light of all the evidence, including the country
   information and the information about his personal circumstances, we find
   that he has not established that there are substantial grounds for
   believing that if he is removed to Bangladesh he will be exposed to a
   real risk of being subjected to a flagrant denial of justice.

Death penalty



36. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules provides that;

      "A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the United
      Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
           i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of entry
              in the United Kingdom;
          ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2
              of The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
              (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
         iii) substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
              person concerned, if he returned to the country of return,
              would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is
              unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself of
              the protection of that country; and
          iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection.


             Serious harm consists of:
           v) the death penalty or execution;
          vi) unlawful killing;
         vii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a
              person in the country of return; or
        viii) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person
              by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of
              international or internal armed conflict."


  37. What is meant by "substantial grounds" in subparagraph (iii)? In our
      opinion this part of the definition is not to be equated with a
      standard of proof. "Substantial grounds" means what it says - there
      are grounds which have substance to them. A "real risk" is one which
      is not fanciful or speculative or theoretical.

  38. It is also clear that given that there is at least the prospect of the
      imposition of the death penalty we have to approach our task with
      anxious scrutiny. If we find that a real risk has been established it
      is for the respondent to dispel that risk; Saadi v Italy [2008] EHRR
      179 at paragraph 129.

  39. It is common ground that in Bangladesh murder is one of the crimes
      punishable by death under the Penal Code. It is also common ground
      that a conviction for murder does not automatically result in a death
      sentence. Section 302 of the Penal Code provides; "whoever commits
      murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and
      shall also be liable to fine".


  40. The respondent argues that the background evidence does not reveal a
      reasonable likelihood of the appellant being subjected to the death
      penalty even if convicted of murder. The appellant submits that "it is
      well known that Bangladesh" would impose on the appellant punishment
      at the highest level, meaning the death sentence. There is no
      objective evidence to support the contention that "it is well known".
      However he also submits that his is the first name on the charge
      sheet. He is regarded as the principal accused and as a former member
      of the Awami League accused of the murder of a rival he is more likely
      to receive the death sentence.

  41. The respondent has provided more detailed information as to the risk
      of a death sentence or execution. There were approximately 247
      executions in Bangladesh between 1975 and January 2005. The most
      recent information, from Odhikar, shows 76 death sentences in 2010, 97
      in 2011, 77 in 2012 and 93 between January and August 2013. Nine death
      sentences were carried out in 2010, four in 2011, one in 2012 and one
      between January and August 2013. Amnesty International reports that
      there were two executions in Bangladesh in the whole of 2013.

  42. In June 2014 there were 1071 prison inmates on death row in
      Bangladesh. Neither the Magistrate's Court nor the Courts of Assistant
      Sessions can pass a final death sentence. Such a sentence can be
      passed by the Courts of the Sessions or the Additional Sessions but
      these cannot be executed until examined and confirmed by the High
      Court Division.

  43. The High Court Division can pass a final sentence of death. There is
      also the opportunity to ask for clemency from the President.

  44. We have already found that the appellant will not be subjected to
      flagrant denial of justice. In the light of what has happened to him
      in the past and current evidence we find that he is likely to have a
      fair trial. He denies the charges brought against him. We have no
      means of judging whether he is more likely to be convicted or
      acquitted. If he is convicted of murder or any lesser charge we do not
      know what extenuating circumstances may be advanced in his favour. The
      respondent has not established that, if convicted, he is more likely
      to be sentenced to a life sentence as opposed to the death penalty.

  45. In our opinion there are substantial grounds for concluding that the
      appellant if convicted would be sentenced to death. The figures show
      that even if there have been in recent years fewer executions
      substantial numbers are being sentenced to death and many remain on
      death row. We note that the appellant is regarded as the principal
      accused and that the murder appears to be relatively high profile,
      particularly since it has a political element to it. We do not know
      whether in those circumstances a court might feel obliged to make an
      example of the appellant or pass a sentence which might be seen as a
      deterrent to others who might engage in acts of political violence.
      Finally we note that no attempt has been made by the respondent to
      obtain any guarantees from the receiving state that the appellant
      would not be sentenced to death.

  46. The figures appear to show that there has been a reduction in the
      number of death sentences carried out in recent years. It may well be
      that if the appellant is convicted and sentenced to death it may never
      be carried out. On the other hand there is no guarantee of that. There
      are still executions in Bangladesh; while they may be few in number
      there is no evidence before us that would enable us to say that the
      appellant would not be one of those executed. In any event a reduction
      in executions in recent years does not mean that that trend will
      necessarily be maintained.

  47. We are satisfied that, without any guarantees from Bangladesh that the
      appellant if convicted of murder would not be sentenced to death, his
      deportation to Bangladesh would not be in accordance with the rules.

  48. We do not consider that it would be in breach of Article 2. In our
      opinion that would only arise if there was the prospect of a death
      sentence following an unfair trial; see Bader v Sweden [2008] 46 EHRR
      13. As we have found we do not consider that a trial would be unfair.

  49. We note the high number of people currently on death row. In Soering v
      UK 11 EHRR 439 the ECtHR concluded that a person convicted and
      sentenced to death who then spends a protracted period of time on
      death row (the "death row phenomenon") might suffer inhuman and
      degrading treatment thereby engaging Article 3 of ECHR. While the
      information that we have before us is limited we do not consider that
      the respondent has dispelled any concern arising from the prospect
      that the appellant could well spend a substantial period of time on
      death row. Accordingly we consider that the appellant's deportation
      would also be in breach of Article 3.

  50. The FTTJ did not make an anonymity direction. We have not been asked
      to make such a direction and can see no good reason to do so.

  51. We conclude that there are substantial grounds for believing that the
      appellant, would, if returned to Bangladesh face a real risk of
      suffering serious harm in the form of the death penalty or inhuman or
      degrading treatment or punishment. Accordingly he is entitled to
      humanitarian protection.

  52. The decision of the FTTJ having been set aside we remake that
      decision. The appellant has not shown that he faces a real risk of
      persecution for a Convention reason. He is not entitled to asylum.
      However, for the reasons we have given, we allow the appellant's
      appeal on humanitarian protection and Article 3 human rights grounds.






       .............................................
       Signed                                                     Date
              31 October 2014
       Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

