

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01274/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 January 2013                            |On 11 February 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             FARAZ BARGHISISTANI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, instructed byParker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Saffer,
      made following a hearing at Bradford on 7 March 2012.


   2. The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the
      respondent made on 20 January 2012, to refuse to grant  the  appellant
      asylum. The appellant claims that he would be at  risk  on  return  to
      Iran.

   3. The appellant sought permission to appeal against the judge's decision
      which was granted on the 28 March 2012 by  Immigration  Judge  Blandy.
      The  appellant  challenged  the  safety  of  the  Judge's  credibility
      findings.

   4. He argued that the judge had made very brief findings of  fact,  given
      inadequate reasons for his conclusions, did not base those conclusions
      on the objective material before him, and in particular committed  the
      fundamental error of making his credibility findings  first  and  then
      going on to reject the documents in the light of those findings.

   5. Mrs  Pettersen  initially  sought  to  defend  the  determination  but
      conceded that the judge's complete failure to refer to the  summonses,
      upon  which  the  appellant  relied  as  evidence   of   the   Iranian
      authorities' interest in him, rendered the decision unsustainable.

   6. The judge erred in law for the reasons stated above.

   7. Both parties agreed that this is a suitable case for remittal  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal under  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
      Statements dated 25 September 2012 because of the nature and extent of
      the judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the decision
      in the appeal to be remade.

   8. The determination of Judge Saffer is set aside. The appeal will be  re
      heard in the First - tier Tribunal at Bradford by a judge  other  than
      Judge Saffer. The appellant's solicitors are  directed  to  serve  all
      evidence upon  which  he  seeks  to  rely  on  the  Tribunal  and  the
      respondent 7 days before the hearing.



Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
