
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal No: AA/01335/2013
     AA/01337/2013
     AA/01339/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Notification issued:         |
|on 10 September 2014                          |on 16 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               H W SIBAKWE + 2
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr K McGuire, Advocate, instructed by Drummond
Miller,  Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer

                         NOTIFICATION OF WITHDRAWAL

 1. This is an appeal against a determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Balloch dated 2  April  2013,  dismissing  appeals  pursued  under  the
    Refugee Convention and the ECHR.

 2. The background is that the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  then  the  Upper
    Tribunal initially refused permission to appeal.  The appellants sought
    judicial review.  The Lord Ordinary, Lord  Glennie,  reduced  the  UT's
    refusal of permission.  We have not been provided with a  copy  of  the
    interlocutor, and there was  no  written  judgement.   The  appellant's
    solicitors were able at short notice to provide us with a copy note and
    transcript of what the Lord Ordinary said at the hearing.  The decisive
    point appears to have been that there was an issue which had  not  been
    recognised as raising a point of law and not of  fact,  namely  whether
    the judge erred in her approach to the medical evidence and engaged  in
    speculation.  It would be for the UT  to  consider  whether  the  point
    justified permission to appeal.

 3. On 4 February 2014 UT Judge Gill granted permission  to  appeal.   This
    was  on  the  view  that  Judge  Balloch  might  have  erred   in   her
    consideration of the best interests of the second and third appellants,
    who are the minor children of the first, by failing to  deal  with  the
    evidence of Dr McTaggart in a supplementary  report  dated  7  December
    2012 that if the condition of the first  appellant  deteriorated  there
    would be an extremely high risk of the appellant harming or killing her
    children.  Permission was refused on the other grounds.

 4. In response to directions, the appellants  filed  a  skeleton  argument
    (prepared by Mr A Caskie, Advocate)  which  says  at  the  outset  that
    although permission has been granted  only  on  grounds  1  and  2  the
    appellants seek to argue the other grounds,  except  4  and  18.   (The
    numbering in the skeleton argument is taken from the  petition  to  the
    Court of Session; grounds are on file from various stages of procedure,
    leading to some confusion in numbering and identification.)

 5. At the outset we sought to define the scope  of  the  hearing  and  the
    issues, which resulted in a useful discussion and  an  agreed  outcome.
    Mr McGuire confirmed that he relied  upon  the  skeleton  argument  and
    sought to argue all grounds.  Mrs O'Brien  took  the  initial  position
    that we should not allow the grounds to be opened wider.   However,  we
    thought that there  would  be  little  difference  between  Mr  Maguire
    addressing us, as he was entitled to do, on whether the grounds  should
    be amended and expanded and on the substance of the further grounds.

 6. We observed that the credibility issues  fell  into  three  categories:
    those related to events prior to departure from Malawi in  2004;  those
    related to abuse of the first appellant in the UK; and those related to
    her mental health condition, and the extent to  which  she  might  have
    invented or exaggerated her problems.  Mr Maguire said that  the  third
    category, and the impact of those problems on the three  appellants  if
    returned, was the main issue he wished to pursue (which is in substance
    the issue on which permission was granted.)

 7. Without closing off further submissions at  that  stage,  we  indicated
    that we were provisionally of the view that there might be substance in
    the grounds going to treatment  of  the  medical  evidence,  which  the
    respondent substantially accepted but  which  the  Judge  substantially
    rejected.  We were concerned that her reasons for doing so  might  have
    been less than adequate.  (We also mention that although the judge said
    she gave that evidence limited weight, in our view she  ought  to  have
    gone on nevertheless  to  analyse  the  consequences  of  return  under
    reference to Y [2009] EWCA Civ 362, as did the refusal  letter,  or  to
    say explicitly why she thought such issues did not arise.)

 8. The appellants tendered an updated report by Dr McTaggart and  evidence
    of the birth of a third child, for consideration if error of  law  were
    to be found.  Mrs O'Brien said that in light of  our  observations  she
    thought the case might best be reconsidered by the respondent as to the
    medical evidence and the best  interests  of  the  children,  including
    risks of self-harm and harm to the children if returned.   However,  if
    the determination were to be set aside in that respect, she would  wish
    its findings in the first two categories mentioned above to stand.

 9. Mr Maguire advised us that as  to  the  first  two  categories  he  had
    nothing to add to the terms of the grounds and the  skeleton  argument.
    We indicated that we would not have sustained those grounds.

10. Mrs O'Brien undertook (a) that  the  respondent  would  reach  a  fresh
    decision in light of all that we have narrated above, and of the up  to
    date circumstances  (b)  that  if  the  decision  was  adverse  to  the
    appellants, it would not be certified so as to restrict their rights of
    appeal.   Having considered how that  agreed  practical  outcome  could
    most conveniently be reached in these proceedings, Mr Maguire moved  to
    withdraw the appeals.

11. In terms of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  Rule
    17, the appeals are recorded as having been  withdrawn  orally  at  the
    hearing, with the consent of the Upper Tribunal.


                                    [pic]
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               11 September 2014
