
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: AA/01148/2015         |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               | |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On       |19 January 2017           |                   |24 January 2017    |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |                                                  |Appellant    |
|           |Aftab [K]                                         |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                  |Respondent   |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |             |

Representation:

For the appellant:         Ms. T Murshed, of Counsel, instructed by Crown  &
                 Mehria Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Afghanistan born on 13 March 1990, appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox  who,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 23 November 2016, dismissed his appeal  against
    a decision of the respondent of 9 January 2015 to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom as an illegal entrant, having refused (for reasons given
    in  a  decision  letter  dated  5  December  2014)  his  asylum  claim,
    humanitarian protection claim and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant's appeal was previously heard before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Geraint Jones QC  who  dismissed  his  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human rights  grounds.  In
    the course of his decision, Judge Jones  stated  (at  para  42  of  his
    decision) that: "As the appellant's daughter is a British  citizen  and
    the alternative country of residence will be Afghanistan, I  arrive  at
    the conclusion that it would not be reasonable to expect her  to  leave
    the United Kingdom".

 3. The appellant lodged an application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, challenging only the decision of Judge Jones to dismiss
    the appellant's appeal  in  relation  to  Article  8.  He  was  granted
    permission to appeal.

 4. The appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  subsequently  listed  for
    hearing before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Woodcraft.  An  application
    was made before Judge Woodcraft for time to be  extended  in  order  to
    lodge an application  for  permission  to  challenge  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds. Judge Woodcraft refused to extend
    time.

 5. Judge Woodcraft concluded that Judge Jones had  not  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's claims under Articles 2 and  3  and  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

 6. In relation to Article 8, Judge Woodcraft accepted that Judge Jones had
    materially erred in law in reaching his decision to dismiss the Article
    8 private and family life claim under para 276ADE and  Appendix  FM  of
    the Rules and Article 8 outside the Rules.

 7. Before me, it was agreed between Ms Murshed and Mr Walker that  it  was
    not clear from Judge Woodcraft's decision whether he decided  that  the
    finding of Judge Jones, that it was not reasonable for the  appellant's
    daughter to leave the United Kingdom, should stand.

 8. Judge Woodcraft remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  ("FtT")
    limited to the appeal under para 276ADE of the Rules, Appendix  FM  and
    Article 8 outside the Rules. He decided  that  the  decision  of  Judge
    Jones to dismiss the appellant's asylum claim claims under  Articles  2
    and 3 of the ECHR and Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    should stand.

 9. The appeal then came to be listed before Judge Fox. The  judge  had  to
    apply, inter alia, s.117B-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  Section 117D defines a "qualifying child" as follows:


          "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of  18  and
     who-


          (a) is a British citizen, or
          (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
     seven years or more;

10. By the date of the hearing before Judge  Fox  (31  October  2016),  the
    Court of Appeal had delivered its judgment in R (MA (Pakistan)) v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705. At para 46 of (MA (Pakistan), the Court of  Appeal
    held that the fact that a child has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    seven years or more must be given significant weight. Para  43  of  the
    judgment reads:

        "46. ... the fact that a child has been here for seven  years  must
             be  given   significant   weight   when   carrying   out   the
             proportionality  exercise.  Indeed,  the  Secretary  of  State
             published guidance in August 2015 in the form  of  Immigration
             Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life (as  a  partner
             or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in  which  it  is
             expressly  stated  that  once  the  seven   years'   residence
             requirement is satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"
             for refusing leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not
             in force when the cases now subject to appeal were determined,
             but in my  view  they  merely  confirm  what  is  implicit  in
             adopting a policy of this nature. After such a period of  time
             the child will have  put  down  roots  and  developed  social,
             cultural and educational links in  the  UK  such  that  it  is
             likely to be highly disruptive if the  child  is  required  to
             leave the UK. That may be less so when the children  are  very
             young because the focus  of  their  lives  will  be  on  their
             families, but the disruption becomes more serious as they  get
             older. Moreover, in these cases there must be  a  very  strong
             expectation that the child's best interests will be to  remain
             in the UK with his parents as part of a family unit, and  that
             must rank as a primary consideration  in  the  proportionality
             assessment."

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Walker accepted that, given the  reasoning
    of the Court of Appeal at para 46 of  (MA  (Pakistan)  in  relation  to
    children who are qualifying children by reason of having lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years or more, the fact that  the  appellant's
    child was a qualifying child by reason of her British citizenship  must
    likewise be given significant weight. Of course, the fact that a  child
    is a British citizen is  not  determinative.  Nevertheless,  Mr  Walker
    accepted that,  in  the  balancing  exercise  that  must  be  conducted
    pursuant to (MA (Pakistan) in reaching a  decision  on  whether  it  is
    reasonable for a British citizen child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,
    significant weight should be given to the fact  that  the  child  is  a
    qualifying child.

12. Mr Walker accepted that Judge Fox did not place significant  weight  on
    the fact that the appellant's daughter is a British  citizen  and  thus
    erred in law in reaching his finding that it would  be  reasonable  for
    the appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom.

13. I am satisfied that Judge Fox did err in law as stated at  paras  11-12
    above and that this error was material to the judge's decision  on  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim under the Immigration Rules and outside the
    Immigration Rules.

14. I therefore set aside his decision in relation to Article 8 under  para
    276ADE and Appendix FM of the Rules and Article 8 outside the Rules.

15. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

16. In my judgment, this case falls within para 7.2(b) notwithstanding  the
    fact that this is the second time that this appeal is being remitted to
    the FtT. This is because of the extent of  the  fact  finding  that  is
    necessary in this particular case. In addition, having  regard  to  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ  327,
    I am of the view that a remittal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  the
    right course of action.

  17. Ms Murshed accepted that the finding of Judge Jones  that  it  is  not
      reasonable for the appellant's daughter to leave  the  United  Kingdom
      cannot stand given that Judge Jones did not take the state's interests
      into account in reaching his decision that it was not  reasonable  for
      the appellant's child to leave the  United  Kingdom  contrary  to  the
      judgment of the Court of Appeal in (MA (Pakistan).  This  was  because
      Judge  Jones  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  the  judgment  in  (MA
      (Pakistan).

  18. (MA (Pakistan) makes it clear that the state's interests must be taken
      into account in reaching the decision whether it is reasonable  for  a
      child to leave the United Kingdom.

19. The appellant must re-serve any documents he wishes to rely upon,  even
    if they have been served previously. None  of  the  bundles  previously
    served will be considered. This is because the documents in the bundles
    have fallen into some disarray. The appellant must strictly comply with
    the directions given below.

DIRECTIONS

1.   Within one month from the date on which this decision is  sent  to  the
    parties, the appellant to serve  a  consolidated  and  fully  paginated
    bundle which contains:

         i.   All witness statements to be relied  upon,  in  order  of  the
             date of the statements.

         ii.  any background material and any other evidence  to  be  relied
             upon.

2.   Not less than ten days before the  hearing  date,  the  appellant  must
    serve a skeleton argument dealing with the issues  to  be  decided  and
    identifying all material from the background  documents  he  wishes  to
    rely upon. He is on notice that  any  material  to  which  the  judge's
    attention is not drawn will not be considered.

The appeal to be listed for hearing before the FtT on the first  practicable
date after 6 weeks from the date on which these directions are sent  to  the
parties.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox involved the making  of
errors on points of law such that the decision to dismiss the  appeal  under
para 276ADE and Appendix FM of the Rules as well as Article  8  outside  the
Rules is set aside.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  re-
make the decision on the appellant's appeal under para 276ADE  and  Appendix
FM of the Rules as well as Article 8 outside the Rules,  by  a  judge  other
than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Geraint Jones QC and Judge Fox.








[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                        Date: 24 January 2017
