
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01187/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 23 July 2013                                 |On 25 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                         ezzat malek ebrashim yacoup
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Mascord, Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ezzat Melek Ebrahim Yacoup, was born on 25 October  1967
    and is a male citizen of Egypt.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 23
    November  2012  and  claimed  asylum  on  4  December  2012.   He   was
    accompanied by his son, also an Egyptian citizen, born on 23  September
    2012.  By a decision dated 20 January 2013, the appellant  was  refused
    leave to enter  and  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  asylum
    application was rejected by the respondent.  The appellant appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge T Jones) which, in a determination dated
    27 March 20-13, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The first ground of appeal asserts that the judge has failed to  choice
    of the appellant when in Egypt to attend private  Coptic  Churches  (as
    opposed to public places of worship) in the light of a decision  of  HJ
    (Iran) 2010 UKSC 31 .  The respondent and the judge accepted  that  the
    appellant is a  Coptic  Christian  and  also  that  he  may  have  been
    assaulted whilst in Cairo.  However, the respondent did not accept that
    the appellant had been assaulted because of his Coptic Christian  faith
    but on  account  of  "domestic  difficulties".   Judge  Jones  was  not
    satisfied "that the appellant was set upon by Muslim extremists/members
    of the Muslim Brotherhood as [the appellant]  would  have  me  believe"
    [32].  He considered it likely that the appellant had been attacked  by
    members of his wife's family who  are  also  Coptic  Christians.   That
    finding of the judge has not been challenged in the grounds of appeal.

 3. As regards the application of HJ, Mrs Pettersen,  for  the  respondent,
    submitted that the appellant had never advanced his case on  the  basis
    that  he  had  been  prevented  from  openly  expressing   his   Coptic
    Christianity in Egypt for fear of being persecuted  as  a  consequence.
    In his written statement dated 26 February 2013, the appellant spoke of
    his worship in private homes in Egypt noting that, "people  now  prefer
    to pray at private homes rather than attend an official church to avoid
    harassment in the street".  Miss Mascord, for the appellant,  submitted
    that the judge had not really engaged the HJ point, notwithstanding the
    fact that it had not been expressed with any vigour  before  him.   The
    judge appeared to have believed that the enthronement of a  new  Coptic
    Pope [27] was an indication that, whilst  many  may  prefer  to  attend
    private churches, they were still free to  worship  openly  with  other
    Coptic Christians in public places without fear of harm.

 4. It would have  been  helpful  if  Judge  Jones  had  sought  to  engage
    explicitly with the application of HJ.   Although  the  judge  did  not
    believe that the appellant had, as he had claimed,  been  set  upon  in
    Cairo because of his religious faith he did not go on to reject all  of
    the appellant's evidence as unreliable.  It is not entirely clear  from
    the determination whether the judge  found  that  the  appellant  would
    modify  his  behaviour  and  worship  in  private  in  order  to  avoid
    persecution.  It is not clear whether the "harassment  in  the  street"
    referred to in the appellant's statement would amount to persecution in
    any event.  On the other hand, the appellant does  not  assert  in  his
    statement nor did he appear to  say  in  oral  testimony  that  he  had
    restricted the practice of his faith out of a fear of persecution.

 5. I find that there is a paucity of evidence as to the importance to this
    appellant of the open expression of his Coptic  Christian  beliefs.   I
    find that it is not surprising that Judge Jones did not focus upon this
    aspect of the case because it was not put to  him  on  that  basis.   A
    fundamental element of the appellant's claim, namely that he  had  been
    singled out for assault in Cairo because he was a Coptic Christian, was
    explicitly rejected by the  judge.   In  short,  whilst  he  refers  to
    worshipping in private, the appellant has  not  asserted  that  he  was
    caused any kind of distress by doing so or that he would have preferred
    to have worshipped in a public church.  Those assertions have only been
    made after the promulgation of Judge Jones's determination.  The matter
    is further complicated by what the judge says  regarding  the  internal
    flight alternative.  Whilst Ms Mascord in her oral submission said that
    the evidence showed that there  was  persecution  of  Copts  throughout
    Egypt, the written  grounds  do  not  advance  that  argument  and  the
    background evidence before Judge Jones justifies, in  my  opinion,  his
    finding at [33] that the appellant could move away from  the  north  of
    Egypt  and  settle  elsewhere  where  Copts  are  more   numerous   and
    consequently at reduced risk of harassment or harm.  It  follows  that,
    even if the appellant did satisfy the HJ test  in  his  home  area  and
    worshipped in private mainly out of a fear of  persecution,  there  are
    areas of Egypt where it would not be unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
    relocate where he would not need to alter the practice of his faith.

 6. I am not satisfied that the judge has erred in law in failing  in  this
    particular instance to examine in detail the  appellant's  reasons  for
    worshipping in a private home. There was  no  evidence  before  him  to
    explain the appellant's reasons for worshipping in  that  way.  The  HJ
    point has been raised by the appellant subsequent to  the  promulgation
    of the judge's determination. I find that, on the evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, there would have been  no  reason  why  the  judge
    would have concluded that the appellant was a refugee for  HJ  reasons.
    Further, even if I am  wrong  in  that  conclusion,  I  find  that  the
    appellant has not  successfully  challenged  the  judge's  findings  as
    regards internal flight within Egypt.  Coptic  Christians  represent  a
    very substantial minority within  Egypt  and  the  background  evidence
    indicates there are parts of the country where  they  are  sufficiently
    numerous to be able to  practise  their  faith  openly.   Even  if  the
    appellant had a problem in his home area,  he  could,  as  Judge  Jones
    found, relocate without undue hardship.

 7. The remainder of the grounds deal with the availability  of  sufficient
    protection for this appellant as a Coptic Christian and draw  attention
    to evidence which indicate that Coptic Christians, whilst they  may  in
    general be tolerated, do not hold high rank or positions  of  authority
    within the Egyptian state or society.  I do  not  consider  that  these
    arguments are sufficient to undermine Judge Jones's findings  regarding
    internal flight which,  set  against  the  background  of  the  country
    material in front of him, were sound.

 8. Mention was made at the Upper Tribunal hearing that the  Tribunal  will
    soon  be  considering  a  country  guidance  case  relating  to  Coptic
    Christians in Egypt.  Two appeals (AA/02126/2012 and AA/02127/2012) are
    listed for hearing for possible country guidance at Field House, London
    on  17-18  September  2013.   No  doubt  both  the  appellant  and  the
    respondent will  consider  their  respective  positions  following  the
    promulgation of that Tribunal's determination. As at the  date  of  the
    hearing of the instant appeal in the Upper Tribunal, I  find  that  the
    appeal should be dismissed.







DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 31 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
