
                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01215/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th August 2016                  |On 9th November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge DEANS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     FT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr E MacKay, McGlashan MacKay Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  a
    panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising  Judge  Boyd  and  Mr  A  E
    Armitage allowing an appeal by FT  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the
    Claimant").

 2. The Claimant was born on 14th October 1968 and is  a  national  of  the
    DRC.  He has a wife and four children, with whom he resides in the  UK.
    He arrived in the UK in 1992.  In 1997 he was convicted on  two  counts
    of handling stolen goods and using a false instrument.  He  received  a
    prison sentence of nine months and was recommended for deportation.  He
    was served with a reasons for deportation letter on 9th  February  2007
    and an appeal against this was dismissed.   On  14th  November  2007  a
    deportation order was made  against  him.   On  11th  December  2014  a
    decision was made to refuse asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights claims made by him.  It is against this refusal that the present
    appeal was brought.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  expressed  some  reservations   about   the
    credibility of the Claimant but appeared to have accepted that  he  had
    had some involvement with the  High  Council  of  Congolese  Resistance
    (HCCR).  In the view of the Tribunal, however, the authorities  in  the
    DRC were interested only in anti-government people with  high  profiles
    and the Claimant did not have a high profile.  He would not face a real
    risk of persecution upon return to  the  DRC  owing  to  his  political
    opinion or imputed political opinion and he was not entitled to refugee
    or humanitarian protection.

 4. The Tribunal then went on to consider the Claimant's private and family
    life in the UK.  The Tribunal observed that over  a  nine  year  period
    from 1994 until 2004  the  Claimant  was  regularly  in  trouble.   His
    maximum sentence was twelve months, imposed in 1994, but there was then
    a nine months' sentence imposed in 1997.  There  was  a  further  eight
    weeks' sentence in 2003.  This was for driving with excess  alcohol  in
    his bloodstream.  The Claimant received a two month  sentence  for  the
    same offence in February 2004.  There were no further convictions after
    this date.

 5. The Claimant married in 2015 but he was already in a relationship  with
    his wife. They have four children, born in 2007, 2009, 2010  and  2014.
    All the children were born in the UK and have lived  here  since  their
    birth.  The Claimant's wife has indefinite leave to remain, having been
    in the UK since 2001.  She was born in Zimbabwe but has been in the  UK
    since she was 15 years old.  She was aged 30 at the time of the hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal in April 2015.

 6. The  Tribunal  observed  that  the  Claimant's  offences  were  largely
    historic.  They were in the main  offences  of  dishonesty  and  drink-
    driving.  It was clear the Claimant had  had  an  alcohol  problem  but
    there was no evidence that this had persisted.

 7. The Claimant's relationship with his wife began in  2003,  just  before
    his last conviction.  The two younger children are British citizens and
    the two older children, like their mother,  have  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  The recommendation for deportation by the court  was  made  in
    1997, some eighteen years previously.

 8. The Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the  Claimant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a  qualified  person  and  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  parental  relationship  with  qualifying   children.    The
    Tribunal considered whether deportation  would  have  an  unduly  harsh
    effect on the partner or children.  It was clear  the  children  had  a
    close relationship with the Claimant and it would not be in their  best
    interests for him to be deported.  Not least because the  two  youngest
    children were British citizens it would not be  appropriate  to  expect
    them to leave with their mother to live in the DRC, which was a country
    entirely alien to them.  Having regard  to  the   public  interest,  as
    required by Section 117C of the 2002 Act, the Tribunal was satisfied on
    the basis of the evidence that the public interest  was  outweighed  by
    the personal  circumstances  of  the  Claimant,  including  his  family
    circumstances.

 9. Having  made  this  finding,  the  Tribunal  then  in  the  penultimate
    paragraph of its decision stated  that  there  were  good  grounds  for
    considering Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and concluded  that
    it would be disproportionate to remove the Claimant from the UK.

10. In its decision the Tribunal allowed the appeal on human rights grounds
    and stated in addition that the deportation order was revoked.

Application for permission to appeal

11. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by the Upper
    Tribunal on a number of grounds.  The  first  of  these  was  that  the
    Tribunal had made a material misdirection in  law.   It  was  contended
    that the Tribunal was  wrong  to  find  good  grounds  for  considering
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  As found in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA 1192
    the Immigration Rules are a complete code.  The Tribunal had failed  to
    identify very compelling circumstances over and above  those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  The Tribunal had  failed  to  apply  these
    Rules.

12. In terms of section 117C(5) the  Tribunal  was  required  to  determine
    whether the effect of the Claimant's deportation on the children  would
    be unduly harsh.  In this respect it was contended  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to consider whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to
    live in the country to which  the  Claimant  was  to  be  deported  and
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in  the  UK
    without the Claimant.  The Tribunal had only attempted  to  answer  the
    first of these questions and had failed to identify facts  which  could
    be described as inordinately or excessively harsh.  Reliance was placed
    on KMO (Section 117 - unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 543.  The Tribunal  had
    failed to make a finding as to whether it would be unduly harsh for the
    children to remain in the UK without the Claimant.

13. It was further contended that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  consider
    adequately the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  national
    offenders.  The Tribunal had failed  to  consider  the  three  powerful
    aspects of the public interest which needed to  be  addressed  in  each
    deportation case, as summarised in OH (Serbia)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  694.
    These were the risk of re-offending by the person concerned;  the  need
    to deter foreign criminals from committing serious crimes; and the role
    of deportation as an  expression  of  society's  revulsion  of  serious
    crimes and in building public confidence in the  treatment  of  foreign
    citizens who have committed serious crimes.  The Tribunal had erred  by
    approaching the appeal from a neutral starting  point  instead  of  one
    heavily weighted in favour of deportation.

14. It was contended that the Tribunal had  failed  to  apply  sub-sections
    117B(4) and (5) to the appeal, which required little weight to be given
    to  a  private  life  or  a  relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner
    established by a person at a time when  a  person  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully.  In addition little weight should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status was precarious.  The Claimant had never been granted
    any form of leave but  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  take  this  into
    consideration.

15. Finally it was submitted that a mere finding that the  Claimant  looked
    after the children whilst his wife worked was inadequate reasoning  for
    concluding that it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain  in
    the UK without him.

16. In granting permission to appeal, the Upper Tribunal observed that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal might stand up to scrutiny or  that
    a similar decision might be made if the existing decision was set aside
    but the Secretary of State's grounds were arguable.  In  particular  it
    might be that the Tribunal had  not  given  sufficient  weight  to  the
    Claimant never having had permission to be in the UK.  It might be that
    the Tribunal had not asked itself or had not explained why it would  be
    unduly harsh to expect the Claimant's children  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without him.

Submissions

17. At the hearing Mr Matthews addressed me on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State.  He submitted that the appeal was subject to Section 117C of the
    2002 Act, which had come into force on 6th April 2015.   The  case  for
    the Secretary of State was that the Tribunal had misdirected itself  in
    law and had failed to give adequate reasons.   The  Tribunal  erred  by
    refusing the appeal under the Immigration Rules and under  Part  5A  of
    the 2002 Act and then considering Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   Mr
    Matthews acknowledged that there might be a question as to whether this
    error was material.  He nevertheless sought to rely on three  decisions
    of the Court of Appeal in LW (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 369, AJ (Angola)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 and MF (Nigeria) (cited above).

18. Mr Matthews observed that at paragraph 41 of the decision  it  appeared
    that the Tribunal might be finding that the  Claimant  succeeded  under
    the Rules.  There were,  however,  two  parts  to  the  test  of  undue
    harshness depending on whether the family  would  be  accompanying  the
    Claimant or not.  The reasoning in paragraph 43 did not  reflect  this.
    Reference by the Tribunal to reasonableness  was  irrelevant.   If  the
    Tribunal had had Section 117B(6) in mind, this was not relevant  to  an
    appeal where the Claimant was to be deported.  The Tribunal had  showed
    a lack of appreciation of the law.  Although at paragraphs  35  and  36
    the Tribunal appeared to have referred to the relevant provisions  they
    did not carry through the reasoning process in a proper manner.

19. Mr Matthews further submitted that the Tribunal had failed to take into
    account that a deportation order had already been  signed.   An  appeal
    had been dismissed in 2007.  Deportation action had been  commenced  in
    1997.  This had been suspended to consider  an  asylum  claim  but  the
    Claimant had continued to offend.  In the 2007 appeal the Tribunal  had
    accepted that deportation was conducive to the public good.

20. Mr Matthews acknowledged that all the children had been born since 2007
    but he submitted that family life was precarious.  The Tribunal  stated
    at paragraph 41 that the welfare of the children  was  "paramount"  but
    this was an error of law.  The welfare of the children  was  a  primary
    but not a paramount consideration.

21. On the question of undue harshness, Mr Matthews sought to rely  on  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450.
    This required a balancing exercise.  The more serious the offending the
    less the likelihood of showing undue harshness.  Here the offending was
    largely historic and the longest sentence was of a year, the  next  was
    nine months.  This put the case in  the  medium  range.   It  was  also
    necessary to take account of the Claimant's immigration  history.   The
    Tribunal did not have before it the decision in MM (Uganda) but had  to
    show that they had applied the law as it was then in force, taking into
    account relevant factors and giving adequate reasons.

22. Mr Matthews further submitted that it was beyond  the  jurisdiction  of
    the Tribunal to revoke the deportation order.  The decision  should  be
    set aside and re-made.

23. For the Claimant, Mr MacKay submitted that  this  was  a  well-reasoned
    decision which took full account of the Claimant's  history,  including
    his offending.  The Tribunal had  taken  full  account  of  the  public
    interest weighing in favour of deportation.  After giving  full  weight
    to this factor the Tribunal concluded that it would be unduly harsh  to
    remove the Claimant.  This decision should stand.

24. Mr MacKay continued that the Claimant's offences were largely historic.
     His relationship with his wife commended in 2003, just before his last
    conviction.  The Tribunal gave clear consideration to this history  and
    found there was a less pressing need for deportation after the lapse of
    time since the last offence.  The Claimant was in a  relationship  with
    his children and was an  active  father.   The  Tribunal  had  properly
    conducted a balancing exercise taking account of  the  public  interest
    and the immigration history of  the  Claimant.   At  paragraph  41  the
    Tribunal  had  taken  account  both  of  the  effect  of  the  children
    accompanying the Claimant to the DRC and of them remaining  in  the  UK
    without him.

25. On the question of what was unduly harsh, Mr  MacKay  referred  to  the
    decision in KMO.  The Tribunal  had  followed  the  reasoning  of  this
    decision.  The children had all been born in the UK.  The Tribunal  had
    taken into account  all  the  relevant  considerations,  including  the
    seriousness of the Claimant's offences.  The Tribunal  had  taken  into
    account the definition of "unduly harsh" at paragraph 41 and had  taken
    account of the previous appeal at paragraphs 6 and  24.   The  Tribunal
    was entitled to have regard to  the  lack  of  any  enforcement  action
    against the Claimant over a lengthy period as well as the fact that  he
    had not offended since 2003.

26. In reply, Mr Matthews submitted that at paragraph 41 the  Tribunal  had
    only asked part of the question of whether the  Claimant's  deportation
    would be unduly harsh for his  children.   This  was  the  question  of
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect them  to  accompany  him  to
    DRC.  The Tribunal had not considered whether it would be unduly  harsh
    for them to be separated from him if they  remained  in  the  UK.   The
    Tribunal did not follow a properly structured  approach  and  erred  by
    treating the best interests of the children as paramount.

27. Mr Matthews submitted further that the  Tribunal  had  made  a  factual
    error by describing the Claimant's wife as working whereas in  fact  at
    the date of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  she  was  on
    Employment Support Allowance and was at home.  This might  be  a  minor
    error but it did affect part of the Tribunal's reasoning.

Discussion

28. Some of the arguments for the  Secretary  of  State  may  be  addressed
    fairly briefly.  First of all, the  Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    revoke the deportation order.  This part of the decision is  simply  of
    no effect.  It may, however, be severed from the decision  as  a  whole
    and does not necessarily lead to a conclusion that the decision  should
    be set aside.

29. The question of whether the Claimant's wife was working at the date  of
    the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  raised  in  the
    application for permission to appeal and formed only the final part  of
    Mr Matthew's closing submission, after the submission for the  Claimant
    had been made.  Mr Matthews submitted that this  nevertheless  affected
    the Tribunal's reasoning.  I do not agree.  The Secretary of State  has
    emphasised the finding  in  paragraph  41  of  the  decision  that  the
    Claimant  looked  after  the  children  while  his  wife  was  working.
    According to the Secretary of State this was an inadequate  reason  for
    finding that it would be unduly harsh to expect the children to  remain
    in the UK without the Claimant.

30. I do not consider that the  Tribunal  ever  expected  this  observation
    about the Claimant looking  after  the  children  while  his  wife  was
    working to be regarded as a  significant  reason  for  finding  in  his
    favour.   It  was  merely  a  passing  observation  to  illustrate  the
    existence of family life between the Claimant  and  his  children.   In
    this appeal it has not been disputed that the Claimant is the father of
    the children and that the children live with the Claimant and his  wife
    as a family unit.  This is the essential feature which establishes  the
    existence of family life.  The question of  who  in  the  household  is
    working and who is looking after the  children  is  of  only  secondary
    importance.  The important point is that the children live  with  their
    father and mother and have a relationship with their father.

31. There is in effect a clear finding by the Tribunal  that  the  children
    and the Claimant enjoy family life together.  In addition, the Tribunal
    pointed out that the two younger children are British citizens and  the
    two older children have indefinite leave to remain.  It  was  suggested
    on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  Tribunal  did  not
    demonstrate why it would not be appropriate or why it would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to accompany their father to the DRC.   In  this
    specialised jurisdiction, having regard to the recent  history  of  the
    DRC and the prevailing circumstances there, little  needs  to  be  said
    about why it would be unduly harsh to expect children who  are  British
    citizens, or who have lived a number  of  years  in  the  UK  and  have
    indefinite leave to remain, to  relocate  to  the  DRC.   The  Tribunal
    rightly did not consider that this would be anything other than  unduly
    harsh and it was not necessary for the  Tribunal  in  this  specialised
    jurisdiction to express more detailed reasoning on this point.

32. Mr Matthews submitted that the  Tribunal  had  not  addressed,  or  not
    properly addressed, the second question in relation to undue harshness,
    which was whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to  be
    separated from the Claimant following  his  removal  to  DRC.   It  was
    acknowledged by Mr Matthews that there was a balancing exercise  to  be
    conducted here and the outcome of the balancing exercise  would  depend
    to an extent upon factors such as the  Claimant's  immigration  history
    and the seriousness of the offences  he  had  committed.   Mr  Matthews
    submitted that having been sentenced to imprisonment for a  year,  this
    showed that the Claimant fell into  the  mid-range  of  seriousness  of
    offences.  While this is so, the Tribunal pointed out in  its  decision
    that the sentence of twelve months was imposed as long ago as  December
    1994.  A nine month sentence was imposed in 1997.   There  was  then  a
    further sentence of eight weeks in 2003 and a  final  sentence  of  two
    months in 2004.  In the balancing exercise the Tribunal was entitled to
    take into account not only the seriousness of  the  offences  but  also
    when they were committed and the length of time which elapsed since the
    Claimant's last conviction.

33. So far  as  the  Claimant's  immigration  history  was  concerned,  The
    Tribunal observed that the Claimant entered the UK in 1992 and  claimed
    asylum upon arrival.  The Tribunal was aware that the Claimant had  not
    had leave to remain.

34. It is contended for the Secretary of State that the  Tribunal  has  not
    set out the factors taken into account in finding that  the  Claimant's
    removal would be unduly harsh, particularly were  his  children  to  be
    separated from him.  Again, having regard to the specialised nature  of
    this jurisdiction and the findings made by the Tribunal in relation  to
    family life, one wonders exactly what the Tribunal  should  have  spelt
    out but failed to do so.  The obvious fact is that were the Claimant to
    be removed to DRC and the children to remain in  the  UK  the  children
    would no longer have their father living in the family unit with  them.
    They would only be able to  maintain  contact  with  him  through  long
    distance communication, except for whatever possibility there might  be
    of visiting the DRC at some point.  What the Tribunal  was  finding  at
    the date of the hearing in April 2015 was that if the Claimant were  to
    be removed then the children, aged 8 (almost 9), 6 (almost  7),  4  and
    under 1, would be deprived of the close contact with  their  father  as
    part of the family unit which they had enjoyed all their lives.   I  do
    not think it is incumbent upon the Tribunal to set out in  any  greater
    detail why it would be unduly harsh for the children  to  be  separated
    from their father.   I  accept,  of  course,  that  if  the  Claimant's
    offences were more serious, more recent, or more persistent,  then  the
    balancing exercise might have resulted in a different outcome  but  the
    fact is that in this appeal the Claimant's offences  and  history  were
    not such as to outweigh the effect on the children of  being  separated
    from him.  This is the conclusion which the Tribunal  reached  and  was
    entitled to reach, even if its reasoning  was  not  spelt  out  in  the
    degree  of  detail  which  the  Secretary  of  State  would  regard  as
    appropriate.

35. There is an issue as to whether the Tribunal erred by not acknowledging
    that the Immigration Rules in  relation  to  foreign  criminals  are  a
    complete code.  On this point, it is difficult to argue that  paragraph
    43 of the decision, where the Tribunal looked at Article 8 outside  the
    Rules, was anything  other  than  erroneous.   It  was,  however,  also
    unnecessary.  I am satisfied that at paragraph 42  the  Tribunal  found
    that the appeal would succeed under section 117C of the 2002 Act, which
    is a statutory provision applying Article 8 in  respect  of  claims  by
    foreign  criminals.   Again  in  the   context   of   the   specialised
    jurisdiction of the Tribunal, this provision did not need to be set out
    in  detail.   Under  section  117C(5)  there  is  an   exception   from
    deportation for a person in the position of  the  Claimant  who  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  partner  or  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child
    and the effect of the Claimant's deportation on the  partner  or  child
    would be unduly harsh.  In my view it was the finding of  the  Tribunal
    at paragraph 42 that the effect of the Claimant's  deportation  on  the
    children would be unduly harsh and  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  this
    basis.

36. There are still one or two minor issues to be addressed.   Mr  Matthews
    submitted that the Tribunal erred at paragraph  41  by  describing  the
    best interests of the children as paramount  rather  than  primary.  Mr
    Matthews' submission on this  issue  is  correct  in  law  but  has  no
    material affect on  the  Tribunal's  reasoning.   Mr  Matthews  further
    submitted that it was wrong for the Tribunal to refer to  the  question
    of reasonableness in relation to the children being expected  to  leave
    the UK.  This test was to be found in section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act,
    which has no application to a person  who  is  liable  to  deportation.
    Again, Mr Matthews' point is correct in law but  not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal and its underlying reasoning.

37. I have accepted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a
    number of  errors.   These,  however,  are,  for  the  reasons  I  have
    explained, not material to the principal findings made by the  Tribunal
    and the underlying basis for them.  The Tribunal found at paragraph  42
    that the public interest in the Claimant's deportation  was  outweighed
    in this instance by the Claimant's genuine and subsisting relationships
    with his partner and children, which was the finding the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to make in the circumstances of this appeal.  The errors  made
    by  the  Tribunal  are  not  material.   In  particular,  the  supposed
    consideration outside the Rules at paragraph 43  of  the  decision  can
    simply be severed from the rest of the decision, as  can  the  decision
    that the deportation order is revoked.  The way in which  the  Tribunal
    should have expressed their decision was  that  it  was  allowed  under
    section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act.  This is the decision of the Tribunal,
    as set out at paragraph 42, and I do not consider it material that this
    was not repeated in the final summary as  expressed  by  the  Tribunal.
    The Tribunal was entitled to allow the appeal and  did  not  materially
    err in so doing.



Conclusion

The making of the decision did not involve the  making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order to protect the anonymity  of
the children.  I have not been asked to vary this order and  it  remains  in
force.  Unless and until a Tribunal or court orders otherwise, the  Claimant
is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  order  applies
both to the Claimant and to the Secretary of State.  Failure to comply  with
this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

