
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01106/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th August 2013                            |on 9th August 2013           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                IRUM SHAHZADI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Al-Hassan instructed by Sheirs Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Robson promulgated following a hearing at  Bradford  on  15th
        March 2013 in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the
        respondent's refusal to grant indefinite leave  to  remain  outside
        the Immigration Rules.


     2. As announced in court I find, through no fault of Judge  Robson  or
        the Presenting Officer, that  I  am  satisfied  there  has  been  a
        procedural irregularity sufficient to amount to a material error of
        law.  Accordingly the determination must be  set  aside  with  here
        being no preserved findings.


     3. The grounds on which permission to appeal was  sought  refer  to  a
        number of failings by the appellant's previous  representatives  in
        their conduct of the matter; including advising the  appellant  the
        hearing before Judge Robson had been adjourned when no  such  order
        had been made.  It was for this reason she  failed  to  attend  the
        hearing. The previous solicitors also failed to file  documents  in
        support of the appeal which was why  there  was  no  such  evidence
        before Judge Robson. The appellant's current  solicitors  wrote  to
        the previous solicitors on 27th May 2013 setting out  a  number  of
        issues of concern although no response has  been  received.  It  is
        understood a referral to  the  Legal  Services  Ombudsman  alleging
        negligent practice is to follow.


     4. The effect of the failings of the previous representatives has been
        to deny the appellant the opportunity to  have  her  case  properly
        considered by the tribunal. She was not told she had to  attend  to
        answer questions and no effort was made to obtain  the  documentary
        evidence relevant to the issues in her appeal.


     5. I have considered the Senior Presidents Practice Statement relating
        to remitting appeals to the First-tier Tribunal and  consider  this
        is an appropriate case on the facts as the appellant  has  not  yet
        had a fair hearing before that tribunal. It was  accepted  by  both
        advocates that it was appropriate for the appeal to be remitted and
        accordingly the following directions shall apply:


     i.   The determination is set  aside  with  there  being  no  preserved
   findings. The  appeal  shall  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   sitting  at  Bradford  to  be   heard   by   salaried   judge   of   that
   Tribunal at 10 AM on Monday, 4 November 2013 with a time         estimate
   of 2 hours (appellant and two witnesses). The issues         are  limited
   to Article 8 ECHR only.


     ii.  Further  case  management  directions  issued  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  appearing  on  the  notice  of   hearing   must   be   complied
   with.


     iii. An Urdu interpreter is required.

   Anonymity.


     6. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) has no  request  was
   such an order was made and       the grounds do  not  establish  such  an
   order is necessary.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5th August 2013


