
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01654/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 1st October 2013                             |On 4th October 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel, Counsel instructed on behalf of
                    Quality Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan whose age is in dispute  seeks
    permission to appeal the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Shimmin) who dismissed his appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
    made on 6th February 2013 to refuse his application for asylum and  for
    leave to remain under the Human Rights Act.

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. The background of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant claimed that
    he was an Afghan national of the Pashtun race who came from  a  village
    in the Wardok Province.  He is the eldest of five children.  His father
    left Afghanistan in 2001 and claimed asylum which  was  refused  but  a
    grant of exceptional leave to remain was made on 7th July 2001.  He was
    given indefinite leave to remain in 2005.

 4. Since the Appellant's father left Afghanistan, it is said that  he  had
    returned to visit his family there and in Pakistan.  The basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim relates to his fear  of  the  Taliban.   He  gave  an
    account that they would throw  letters  into  the  schoolyard  advising
    children they should  be  attacking  Americans  rather  than  attending
    school.  On one evening in August  2012,  the  Appellant  was  standing
    outside a mosque talking to two friends, and four  armed  Taliban  tied
    their hands and took them on a short motorbike ride to a nearby  house.
    Reference was made to the Appellant's father being in  London  and  his
    uncle's employment as an interpreter for  the  Americans  in  Kandahar.
    The Appellant was told that he and his friends would be carrying out  a
    suicide attack.

 5. The next morning the Appellant  and  his  friends  were  taken  to  the
    Taliban's mountain base close by.  They were treated "very nicely"  and
    "very kindly" by the Taliban and were given training in  advance  of  a
    planned suicide attack on a police base in Kabul.   The  Appellant  was
    told that he would be dropped off ten kilometres from  his  target  and
    make his own way there.  The Appellant made it clear to the Taliban  he
    did not wish to carry out the suicide bombing and expressed this to the
    Taliban.  He and his friends pleaded to be allowed  to  spend  a  final
    night with their families.  The Taliban agreed and two of them returned
    to the village with the Appellant and his  friends.   They  were  given
    twenty minutes to  say  goodbye  as  the  Taliban  waited  outside  the
    Appellant's front door.  The Appellant heard his friend being shot dead
    outside his property for refusing to take part in the  suicide  bombing
    and the Appellant's family pleaded with the Taliban to spare  him.   At
    that point he escaped from the rear of the house into the mountains.

 6. It is said that the Appellant returned the next day to  find  out  what
    had happened.  The  Taliban  had  beaten  the  Appellant's  mother  and
    grandfather and burnt the Appellant's uncle's guest room and  vehicles.
    That afternoon the family raised US$15,000 to  pay  an  agent  for  the
    Appellant to leave.  He travelled  by  lorry  passing  through  Greece,
    Italy and France arriving in the United Kingdom on 5th December 2012.

 7. In a decision of 6th February 2013  the  Respondent  refused  to  grant
    asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended) and  a  decision  was
    made to remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under the 1971 Act.  The  reasons  for  that  decision  were
    contained in a letter dated 6th February 2013.  The Respondent did  not
    accept that the Appellant  had  given  a  credible  account  concerning
    events in Afghanistan and furthermore that in  the  light  of  the  age
    assessment  report  undertaken  by  the  Liverpool  City  Council,  the
    Appellant was not a minor but it was concluded that he was aged over 18
    years.

 8. The Appellant exercised his right to appeal and the matter came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin)  on  8th  July  2013.   In  a
    determination promulgated on  8th  July,  he  considered  the  evidence
    before him and reached the conclusion that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    minor, he found the account given by the Appellant  to  be  implausible
    and inconsistent concerning events in  Afghanistan  and  dismissed  his
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds, including Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 9. An application was made to appeal  that  decision  and  permission  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Designated  Judge  Shaerf)  on  5th
    August 2013.

10. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Miss Patel appeared on
    behalf of the Appellant who had settled the grounds for  permission  to
    appeal and Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer appeared  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State.  Miss Patel relied upon the grounds that she
    had drafted dated 22nd July 2013. She   supplemented  them  by  way  of
    oral submissions.  In respect of the  first  ground  advanced,  it  was
    submitted that the judge at paragraph 14 of the  determination  made  a
    fundamental mistake of fact.  It was set out in that paragraph that the
    Appellant's father had claimed asylum on 17th  April  2002,  which  was
    refused on 5th August and the appeal dismissed on 3rd January 2003  but
    was granted indefinite leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  the  legacy
    provisions on 17th June 2011.  Those facts  related  to  an  individual
    other than the Appellant's father and whilst the judge was reminded  of
    this, he had recited that at paragraph 14  of  the  determination.   In
    fact the Appellant's father came to the UK claiming asylum in  February
    2001, that claim was refused but he was granted  exceptional  leave  to
    remain in July 2001 and then was granted indefinite leave to remain  in
    2005.  Miss Patel submitted that this mistake of fact demonstrated that
    the judge had failed to give anxious scrutiny to the  Appellant's  case
    and in this respect invited the court to consider the decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  844.   She  submitted
    that a mistake of fact such as this constituted an error of  law.   She
    submitted further that it was a material error because it affected  the
    judge's view of the Appellant's father and his general credibility as a
    witness.  She submitted that the judge had made  findings  against  the
    Appellant and that was based on paragraph 14.

11. In respect of the second ground,  she  made  no  oral  submissions  but
    relied upon what was set out in the grounds as drafted namely  that  as
    the judge decided to make an anonymity direction that was contradictory
    because he found the Appellant not to be at risk.

12. In respect of the third ground, Miss Patel  submitted  that  the  judge
    erred in his assessment of the Appellant's age.  She submitted that the
    Afghan ID card that had been submitted was given very little evidential
    weight because it was based on the observation of a registrar  who  had
    produced the ID certificate.  However she submitted, the conclusions in
    the age assessment carried out by Liverpool Social  Services  was  also
    based on the observations of the social workers and therefore could  be
    seen as no different.  The judge was  wrong  therefore  to  prefer  the
    Liverpool Social Services assessment over the ID card.  The judge  also
    assessed the Appellant's age based on his own observations at paragraph
    37.  Furthermore in respect of his age, she submitted that the judge in
    reaching a conclusion on his credibility should have taken into account
    the fact that even if he was over 18 the difference between his claimed
    date and assessed age was small and therefore he should have considered
    him as a minor.  She submitted that there was no "bright line"  between
    suddenly turning 18 and failing to be treated as a minor.

13.   As regards the country evidence, she submitted that the judge did not
    take into account the UNHCR report submitted at paragraphs 13 to 14  of
    the Appellant's bundle.  She further submitted that he made an  adverse
    finding under Section 8 of the 2004 Act on the basis that the Appellant
    could have claimed asylum in Greece, Italy or  France.   She  submitted
    since Greece and Italy were not considered to be  safe  countries  then
    they were not safe for the Appellant.  His failure to claim  asylum  in
    France would  not  be  determinative  of  the  case.   As  to  internal
    relocation, it was submitted that the Appellant's father had only lived
    in Kabul for a short period of time and that relocation would have been
    unreasonable in all the circumstances.

14. The last point raised in the grounds relates  to  Article  8.   It  was
    submitted that the judge was wrong in reaching the conclusion that  the
    Appellant did not have a family life  with  his  father  and  that  the
    Appellant did have more than emotional ties with  him  because  he  was
    being financially supported to him and was living with him.

15. Ms Pettersen on behalf of  the  Respondent  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response that had been sent to the Tribunal dated 15th August 2013.  In
    that reply, it noted that whilst the  judge  did  quote  the  incorrect
    immigration history at paragraph 14 it was not a material error because
    the immigration history of the Appellant's father did  not  infect  his
    reasoning on the credibility of the  Appellant  or  the  issue  of  the
    assessment of the Appellant's age.  Indeed the  asylum  interview  upon
    which the judge relied when reaching a conclusion of assessment of  age
    was in fact this Appellant's father's interview.  Ms Pettersen  invited
    the Tribunal to consider the factual elements of  the  decision  of  ML
    (Nigeria) (as cited) noting that in that case the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal contained a number of serious errors but in this case the
    factual error at paragraph 14 could not be seen to  be  significant  or
    material given that the judge did not refer to those facts when  making
    any assessment upon the Appellant's age or on the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant, relying on the evidence that had been produced  properly  in
    respect of the Appellant's father.  She said it was significant that he
    had referred to the interview in May 2001 and there  was  no  confusion
    that this referred to the Appellant's father.

16. In respect of the age assessment  she  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to place more weight upon  the  age  assessment  completed  by
    Liverpool Social Services.  She submitted that the judge  did  consider
    the ID card at paragraphs 33 and 34 but did not reject it based on  the
    fact it was made on the observations of the registrar  but  dealt  with
    the contradictions in the evidence as to how it had been obtained,  its
    timing and production and also that it did not fit  with  the  evidence
    given in the Appellant's father's asylum interview when he referred  to
    his son at the time he arrived in 2001 as aged 9.   She  submitted  the
    report should not be subject to criticism.  It was  a  detailed  Merton
    compliant report in which  the  social  worker  had  taken  a  detailed
    history.  The Appellant could have challenged the age assessment report
    but chose not to and the reasons for the findings of the social workers
    were such that the judge is entitled to place weight upon them.

17.  As to the credibility or plausibility of the Appellant's account,  the
    judge did consider the  background  evidence  correctly.   The  refusal
    letter at paragraph 19 (page 6) summarised  accurately  the  background
    material including the UNHCR report and  evidence  from  Dr  Giostuzzi.
    The report relied upon by Miss Patel did not differ from that  evidence
    other than to make it clear that the definition of  forced  recruitment
    by way of fear and intimidation was too narrowly defined.   Nonetheless
    that was not the Appellant's account.  His account was that he had been
    kidnapped outside the mosque.  Thus the Appellant's case  did  not  sit
    well with the background material.

18. As to internal relocation, the Appellant had a number of  relatives  in
    Kabul and that his father had previously rented accommodation in  Kabul
    for a period of  three  months  to  enable  him  to  visit  his  family
    relatives including his wife and children for a three month visit  when
    visiting from the United Kingdom.  The Appellant was  found  to  be  an
    adult, fit and healthy and was therefore able to relocate.   There  was
    nothing that would be unreasonable on the findings  of  fact  made  for
    this Appellant to relocate internally.

19. As to Article 8, the judge found the Appellant was an adult and  whilst
    he might live with his father, his father had been separated  from  him
    and outside of Afghanistan since 2001.   There  was  no  evidence  that
    there was any dependency other than normal emotional ties and whilst he
    was being financially supported by him that was  because  he  chose  to
    live with his father.  The Appellant's father had  visited  Afghanistan
    and Pakistan since he had been in  the  United  Kingdom  to  visit  his
    family members.  Ms Pettersen reminded the Tribunal that when the judge
    heard the case the Appellant, on the judge's findings was 21  years  of
    age and this was not the case of someone living with his father  having
    just turned 18.  The Appellant had other family members in  Afghanistan
    including his mother and siblings.  His father was not a refugee having
    made visits back in recent years, the Appellant was not  at  risk  when
    returned and thus it would  be  proportionate  for  him  to  return  to
    Afghanistan.

20. Miss Patel by  way  of  reply  referred  to  the  visits  made  by  the
    Appellant's father namely one in Afghanistan and one in  Pakistan.   As
    to the identity document she  submitted  that  the  judge  should  have
    preferred the evidence of the Appellant and his father and  that  there
    had been no contradiction.

21. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions:

22. The first ground advanced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  relates  to  a
    mistake  of  fact  that  the  judge  made  at  paragraph  14   of   the
    determination.  At  paragraph  14  the  judge  recorded  the  following
    details.

         "The Appellant's father claimed asylum on 17th April 2002 and  this
         was refused on credibility grounds on 5th August 2002.   An  appeal
         was dismissed on 3rd January 2003.  ...The Appellant's  father  was
         granted indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK  in  the  'legacy'
         backlog clearance exercise on 17th June 2011."

    It is common ground between the parties that  the  history  recited  at
    paragraph 14 in respect of the Appellant's  father  is  incorrect.   It
    appears that in the original bundle that evidence was exhibited at  E1.
    A further bundle was then produced before the hearing which did contain
    the correct details of the  Appellant's  father  including  his  asylum
    interview, and screening interview.  It is plain from the Tribunal file
    before me that in respect of the enclosures at section E the judge  has
    written  "not  this  case  -  see  separate  letter"  and  across   the
    determination the judge has written in large letters "not  this  case".
    The correct facts are that the Appellant's father came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in February 2001 and  claimed  asylum.   That  application  was
    refused but he was granted exceptional leave to remain which  was  then
    followed by indefinite leave to remain in 2005.

23. Thus it is submitted by Miss Patel that the judge  made  a  mistake  of
    fact that was so fundamental that the judge had failed to give  anxious
    scrutiny to the Appellant's case and relies upon the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844.  She submits  that
    the Appellant's father was a witness at the hearing and at paragraph 36
    the judge assessed his evidence about the age of his son and  that  his
    assessment of that evidence  was  seriously  impacted  by  the  judge's
    consideration of the  wrong  immigration  history  of  the  Appellant's
    father.

24. I have considered the decision of  ML  (Nigeria).   It  is  clear  from
    reading that case that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  that
    appeal contained serious errors which were identified by the  Court  of
    Appeal  in  its  judgment.   The  description  by  the  judge  of   the
    proceedings was in error; he identified the bundle but  referred  to  a
    skeleton  argument  when  none  had  been  produced,  he  recorded  the
    Appellant's  case  as  set  out  in  the  screening  interview,  asylum
    interview and statement.  However there was no screening  interview  or
    asylum interview setting out the case advanced  on  the  basis  of  his
    homosexuality.  The only interview that had been before him was an  old
    one which did not relate to the present facts.   There  was  a  serious
    error where a paragraph was inserted (see paragraph 7 of the  Court  of
    Appeal decision) referring to the EPDP threatening  the  Appellant  and
    him being  attacked  and  a  reference  was  made  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in that  paragraph.   That  paragraph  had  nothing  to  do
    whatsoever with the Appellant and appears to have  been  inserted  from
    another case.  There was also reference to the Grounds  of  Appeal  and
    the  skeleton  argument  where  there  was  no   such   document.    In
    submissions, the judge referred to Counsel who in  fact  had  not  been
    Counsel in the case but someone else.  It is entirely clear that  there
    were a series of factual errors in  ML  (Nigeria)  and  that  it  could
    constitute an error of law if significant to the conclusion.

25. Whilst it  is  the  position  that  a  series  of  factual  errors  may
    constitute an error of law,  it  is  plain  that  the  errors  must  be
    material or significant to the overall conclusions (see paragraph 10 of
    the decision of ML (Nigeria)).  It is  common  ground  that  the  judge
    recorded at paragraph 14 some details in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    father wrongly.  However it is further  plain  from  the  determination
    that when reaching a decision upon the Appellant's  father's  evidence,
    his evidence was considered and assessed upon his correct  history  and
    evidence.  Contrary to the assertions in the grounds,  when  the  judge
    assessed the Appellant's age, he  considered  a  number  of  pieces  of
    evidence.  At paragraph 36 he gave  consideration  to  the  Appellant's
    father's asylum interview which was undertaken on 15th May 2011.  There
    is no dispute that  this  assessment  of  the  evidence  related  quite
    properly to  this  Appellant's  father.   At  paragraph  36  the  judge
    recorded this:-

         "I find the most damning evidence against the Appellant's claim  to
         be aged 17 comes from his father's asylum interview  undertaken  on
         15th May 2001.  At question  40  he  was  asked  the  ages  of  his
         children and he stated '9, 7, 4 and 1' (at that date  he  only  had
         four children).  As the Appellant is the eldest  child  that  would
         make him aged 21 today.  The Appellant's father attempts  to  blame
         his statement of ages in 2001 on incorrect interpreting but I  find
         the questions put to him is short, simple and clear and unlikely to
         be misinterpreted.  His answer is likewise very  simple  consisting
         of the  most  basic  numerals.   Furthermore,  if  the  interpreter
         incorrectly interpreted 9 he must have incorrectly interpreted  the
         other numerals as the age sequence and gaps are correct."

26. That evidence referred to and assessed at  paragraph  36  was  evidence
    which had been produced in a supplementary bundle prior to the  hearing
    which included the Appellant's father's  screening  interview  and  the
    substantive interview.  There is no dispute that  the  judge  correctly
    referred to the Appellant's father and the matters contained within his
    own asylum interview.

27. Contrary to the assertion made by Miss Patel that the mistake  of  fact
    at paragraph 14 coloured the judge's approach of the credibility of the
    Appellant's father, it is  plain  from  paragraph  36  that  the  judge
    carefully assessed the evidence given by the Appellant's father  during
    his asylum interview when he arrived in the United Kingdom in 2001  and
    when the family circumstances in Afghanistan would have been  fresh  in
    his mind.  The judge quite properly looked  at  the  contents  of  that
    interview  when  making  an  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  father's
    evidence in relation to his age and in particular his  explanation  for
    giving what he said was incorrect information.  As noted  at  paragraph
    36, the explanation given was  that  the  ages  of  the  children  were
    incorrectly interpreted.  The judge considered the interview itself and
    noted the nature of the questions put to him which  were  short  simple
    and  clear  and  the  judge  found  that  they  were  unlikely  to   be
    misinterpreted.  He  also  considered  that  if  that  explanation  was
    correct and that he had incorrectly interpreted the age 9 then he  must
    have incorrectly interpreted the other numerals as the age sequence and
    the gaps were correct.  There is no suggestion whatsoever that in  that
    assessment the evidence was based on a wrong assumption of the  history
    but on the correct evidence given by the Appellant's father.  Thus I do
    not find that that ground is made out.

28. The second ground  relates  to  the  judge  having  made  an  anonymity
    direction in which it is said it was inconsistent with the finding that
    he subsequently made that he would not be at risk.  There is  no  merit
    whatsoever in that ground.  The contents of paragraph  2  are  entirely
    clear and demonstrate no contradiction whatsoever.

29.  As to  Ground  3  this  relates  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's age.  The judge took  into  account  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in Rawofi (age settlement - standard  of  proof)  [2012]  UKUT
    00197 (IAC) reminding himself that where age is disputed in the context
    of an asylum appeal, the burden is on the Appellant and the standard of
    proof is a reasonable degree of likelihood (see  paragraph  31  of  the
    determination).  The judge took into account and analysed a  number  of
    pieces of evidence before him including the Appellant's  own  evidence,
    an Afghan ID card that had been produced, evidence of  the  Appellant's
    father and a Merton compliant age assessment carried out  by  Liverpool
    City Council.  He said this at paragraph 32 - 38:-

         "32. The Appellant's evidence to me was that he was aged  16  years
             on arrival and is now 17 years old.  He based this on what his
             mother told him when he was in Afghanistan and what his father
             told him after he joined his father in the United Kingdom.

         33.  The Appellant also relies on an Afghan  ID  card  dated  which
             states, 'AGE: based on observation, he has been determined  to
             be 15 years old, 1391'.  The Iranian year 1391 is 2012 in  the
             Gregorian calendar and so the Appellant will be 16 or  17  now
             in 2013.   I  give  very  little  evidential  weight  to  this
             document  because,  from  its  face,  it  is  based   on   the
             observation of the Registrar who produced the ID card.  I find
             that the assessment of age based solely on the  appearance  of
             the subject is notoriously unreliable.

         34.  Furthermore, in his witness statement dated 24th June 2013  at
             paragraph 3 the Appellant's father said that the  ID  document
             was obtained when the Appellant was at school and that  before
             admission  the  school  pupils  require  a   date   of   birth
             certificate.  This indicates to me that the  ID  document  was
             needed for the Appellant to start school but,  inconsistently,
             the Appellant's oral evidence was that he had eight  years  of
             education which would mean that he started school long  before
             the ID document was made.  I find that this  further  adds  to
             the Appellant's lack of credibility.

         35.  The Respondent relies on a 'Merton compliant'  age  assessment
             dated 13th December 2012 carried out by two experienced social
             workers who have carried  out  a  detailed  assessment.   They
             conclude that the Appellant is 18 years old.  Because  of  the
             detailed consideration and assessment of many  factors  during
             this preparation I give this assessment evidential weight.

         36.  I find the most damning evidence against the Appellant's claim
             to be  aged  17  comes  from  his  father's  asylum  interview
             undertaken on 15th May 2011.  At question 40 he was asked  the
             ages of his children and he stated '9, 7, 4 and  1'  (at  that
             date he only had four children).   As  the  Appellant  is  the
             eldest  child  that  would  make  him  aged  21  today.    The
             Appellant's father attempts to blame his statement of ages  in
             2001 on incorrect interpreting but I find the questions put to
             him  is  short,  simple  and  clear   and   unlikely   to   be
             misinterpreted.  His answer is likewise very simple consisting
             of the most basic numerals.  Furthermore, if  the  interpreter
             incorrectly interpreted 9 he must have incorrectly interpreted
             the other numerals as the age sequence and gaps are correct.

         37.  Whilst cautioning myself as to  the  unreliability  of  visual
             assessment I find from my observation of the Appellant  during
             the hearing that it is conceivable that he is aged 21 as would
             be the case based on his father's 2001 statement in his asylum
             interview.

         38.  For the above reasons I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  has
             failed to establish, even to the lower standard,  that  he  is
             aged 17.  I am satisfied on all the evidence before me that he
             is over the age of 18."

30. It is argued on behalf of the Appellant that  it  was  wrong  to  place
    weight upon the Social Services  age  assessment  report  because  that
    assessment relied upon the observations of the social workers as to his
    appearance and demeanour.  The judge considered the ID card but gave it
    little weight because it was based on the observation of the  registrar
    who produced the ID certificate.  To that end both relied upon the same
    thing.

31. In my view it was entirely open to the judge to place weight  upon  the
    age  assessment  of  the  Liverpool   Social   Services.    A   careful
    consideration of the report demonstrate that it was carried out by  two
    expert social workers whose qualifications and expertise was documented
    at page 17.  Both were experienced in working with young people and  in
    particular unaccompanied asylum seeking children, one social worker had
    completed over 30 age assessments.  The body of the report was detailed
    and concerned a number of pieces  of  evidence  relating  to  different
    areas of the Appellant's life in Afghanistan in which he  was  able  to
    give free form narrative evidence as well as answering  questions.   At
    pages 15 to 16 they analysed the evidence that they  had  gathered  and
    having done so using their experience had reached the  conclusion  that
    the Appellant was over 18 and they gave him a birth date of 1st January
    1994.  This was a Merton compliant assessment.  I  would  observe  that
    there had been no challenge to this age  assessment  outside  of  these
    proceedings.

32. The judge gave careful consideration to the Afghan ID card  (which  had
    not been placed before the social workers) but gave it  limited  weight
    for a number of  reasons.   The  reasons  given  were  ones  that  were
    entirely open to  him  on  the  evidence  before  him.   Whilst  it  is
    submitted that the judge gave little weight because he claimed  it  was
    based on the observations  of  the  registrar,  there  are  significant
    differences between the detailed observations and analysis  made  in  a
    Merton compliant assessment compared with the ID card that  was  issued
    solely on the basis of the observation of a person who was  working  to
    unknown criteria and standards.  I do not find that that point has  any
    merit whatsoever.

33. Furthermore, it is incorrect to assert that the judge  attached  little
    weight to the ID card because it was based solely  on  observations  of
    the Appellant.  He dismissed  it  for  other  evidence  based  reasons.
    Firstly, the timing and production of the ID card (see the reasons  set
    out at paragraph 34) and importantly at paragraph  36  what  the  judge
    described as the "most damning evidence" came from the Appellant's  own
    father where he had given information in an  asylum  interview  shortly
    after he had left Afghanistan when his family  circumstances  including
    the ages of his children would have been fresh in his memory.   In  the
    interview he gave the age of his eldest child, that is  the  Appellant,
    as being aged 9.  As the judge correctly observed that would have  made
    him 21 at the date of the hearing.  Whilst it is unfortunate  that  the
    judge at paragraph 37 made a reference to his own visual assessment, it
    is plain from the terms  of  paragraph  37  that  the  judge  expressed
    himself with the caveat  that  "whilst  cautioning  myself  as  to  the
    unreliability  of  visual  assessment..."  making  it  plain  that   he
    understood the  unreliability  of  such  an  assessment  however  I  am
    satisfied   that  this  was  only  a  limited  factor  in  his  overall
    assessment which was otherwise based on sound reasoning.   The  judge's
    own visual assessment could not be read as being determinative  of  age
    and was only a limited factor in the assessment  that  the  judge  made
    considering a number of pieces of evidence.  Thus I am  satisfied  that
    the judge considered the issue of  the  Appellant's  age  properly,  in
    accordance with the evidence and reached the  conclusion  that  he  was
    entitled to reach on the evidence before him.

34.   It is further submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the judge did
    not assess his credibility correctly nor did he do so in the  light  of
    the country evidence.  Miss Patel relies upon the UNHCR report  in  the
    Appellant's  bundle  at  pages  13  to  14.   It  is  plain  from   the
    determination  at  paragraph  44  that  the  judge  did  consider   the
    background material concerning forced recruitment to the Taliban.  This
    had been set out at length  in  the  refusal  letter  at  paragraph  19
    (citing  the  Danish  Immigration  Services  Fact-Finding  Mission   in
    Afghanistan relating to the reporting  of  forced  recruitment  of  the
    Taliban) which had made reference to there being no reporting of forced
    recruitment by the Taliban and that most recruits  joined  voluntarily.
    It also made reference to the UNHCR report  about  recruitment  by  the
    Taliban that they had no difficulties in recruiting  people,  they  had
    many volunteers and there was a willingness to join  the  movement  and
    that "forced recruitment is not widely taking place."  At paragraph  20
    the evidence of Dr Giustozzi was quoted in which it  was  said  by  him
    that there was no  real  evidence  of  forced  recruitment  of  suicide
    bombers, referring to young boys being "trained and indoctrinated which
    takes them months to years.  Many of them are madrassa students..."

35. The UNHCR  document  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  endorsed  the  above
    information at paragraph 3.  However it  went  on  to  state  that  the
    report defined "forced recruitment" narrowly  where  individuals  first
    joined the Taliban under the use of threat or immediate violence.   The
    UNHCR report went on to state that the report did not  include  in  the
    definition other  Taliban  recruitment  mechanisms  based  on  "broader
    coercive  strategies"  including  the  use  of  tribal  mechanisms   to
    pressurise individuals into joining the  Taliban.   Thus  it  concluded
    that the  report's  conclusion  that  the  forced  recruitment  is  the
    exception rather than the rule should not be taken to  apply  to  other
    forms of coercive recruitment.

36. That background material has to be seen in the context of  the  factual
    matrix of this particular Appellant's claim.  His case was that he  was
    in effect kidnapped by the Taliban outside the  mosque  and  was  given
    duties and training the next day to carry out a suicide attack.  As the
    facts set out earlier demonstrate, he pleaded to see his family for one
    night, the Taliban agreed and during which time he escaped.   Thus  the
    Appellant's account does not sit  well  with  the  background  evidence
    referring to "broader coercive strategies".  Nor did it fit  well  with
    the background evidence referred to by the judge at  paragraph  44  and
    set out substantively at paragraph 60 of the refusal letter (the Danish
    Immigration Services Fact-Finding Mission and Dr Guistozzi's  evidence)
    where it was recorded there was no real evidence of forced  recruitment
    of suicide bombers, relying on the other forms of "coercive  treatment"
    referred to in the UNHCR document at pages 13 to 14 of the  Appellant's
    bundle.  Thus the  judge  did  consider  the  Appellant's  claim  quite
    properly against the background of the objective material as a whole.

37.   Furthermore it is plain from the determination that he gave a  number
    of reasons as to why he did not  believe  the  Appellant  had  given  a
    credible account of what had happened to him in Afghanistan set out  at
    paragraphs 42 to 46, noting that he did not find it credible  that  the
    Taliban, renowned for their ruthlessness would allow the Appellant  and
    his friends to return to the village to say goodbye to their  families.
    The fact that  the  Taliban  would  have  been  aware  that  they  were
    reluctant recruits and might escape on the Appellant's own evidence, it
    was not credible that the Taliban were waiting outside the  Appellant's
    home while he said goodbye giving them the opportunity to  escape.   It
    was not credible that they did  not  carry  out  basic  precautions  of
    ensuring he did not leave by  the  back  of  the  house.   Nor  was  it
    credible that the Taliban would drop him off ten kilometres  away  from
    the target and allow him to walk with the heavy  weight  of  the  bomb.
    Thus giving him the opportunity to change his mind  or  risk  of  being
    stopped by the security forces.  He  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    explanation that he did not know what a kilometre was to  be  unlikely.
    Furthermore he  found  the  Appellant  had  been  inconsistent  in  his
    statement as to the period he was held by the Taliban;  in  the  asylum
    interview at question 79 he indicated he was held for four days but  in
    the witness statement he was held for a month.

38.   Whilst it is submitted by Miss Patel that the judge should  not  have
    placed weight upon Section 8 of the 2004 Act because Greece  and  Italy
    are not seen to be safe third countries, it is plain from  reading  the
    determination that at paragraph 47, whilst the judge made  a  reference
    to Section 8 noting that the Appellant had failed to  claim  asylum  in
    France, that that was only one factor and that was not determinative in
    any way in respect of this Appellant's case.  The judge had  identified
    a  number  of  reasons  based  on  this   Appellant's   account   which
    demonstrated that he had not given a  credible  or  consistent  account
    without the necessity of relying upon that factor.

39. I have considered the submission made that the judge should have  taken
    into account the fact that he was a minor or even if the assessment was
    right that he was over 18, that there was "no bright line" by which  he
    suddenly became an adult.  The difficulty with that submission is  that
    at the date of the hearing the date  of  birth  given  to  him  by  the
    Appellant's father would have made him 21 years of age  well  over  the
    "bright line".  Even using the  date  of  birth  given  by  the  Social
    Services which would have been January 1994 would have put him over  19
    years of age.  Thus  the  judge  is  entitled  not  to  accede  to  the
    submission that he should be treated as  a  minor  when  assessing  his
    evidence and general credibility.

40. As to internal relocation, the judge did not find the  Appellant  would
    be at risk in his home area and thus the issue of  internal  relocation
    was entirely redundant.  It is plain that the judge dealt with this  on
    an alternative basis.  It was further plain from the evidence  that  in
    making such  an  assessment,  the  Appellant  had  a  number  of  links
    previously with Kabul.  His own evidence was that he knew the city well
    and visited it "lots of times" (see question 8 of the  interview).   He
    had a number of relatives in Kabul including his paternal uncle and two
    paternal  aunts  and  his  father  in  the  UK  had  previously  rented
    accommodation in Kabul for a period of three months so  that  he  could
    visit the Appellant and his family members to join him on a visit  from
    the United Kingdom (see  question  23).   In  those  circumstances  and
    relying upon the fact that the Appellant was not a minor, was otherwise
    fit and healthy and was not at risk the judge was entitled to  find  on
    the alternative basis that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to
    relocate to Kabul.

41. The last issue relates to Article 8.  It is submitted  that  the  judge
    was wrong to find that there  was  nothing  more  than  emotional  ties
    between the Appellant and his father with whom he lived.  It  is  plain
    from the findings of the judge in respect of Article 8 which is set out
    at paragraphs 53 to 59, that the Appellant was not a child but an adult
    and that there  was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  of  any  special
    dependency between him and his  father  above  normal  family  ties  of
    affection.  Whilst it is submitted  that  the  Appellant's  father  was
    supporting him financially, that was only on  the  basis  that  it  was
    because he was living with him.  Had he chosen to live alone, he  would
    have been eligible for support.  Nonetheless there has been no evidence
    identified to the Tribunal that there was  anything  more  than  normal
    emotional ties between the  father  and  the  Appellant.   The  history
    itself demonstrated that his father had left Afghanistan  in  2001  and
    there had been a significant period of time when the parties had  lived
    apart.  The Appellant's father  had  visited  Afghanistan  since  being
    granted leave to remain on a number of occasions.  There has been  some
    dispute about this; Miss Patel submits that  there  was  one  visit  to
    Afghanistan  and  one  to  Pakistan.   However  the  Appellant  in  his
    interview at D9 and D10 (questions 23 and 24) put the number of  visits
    made by his father as between six to seven times.  Whether it  was  two
    visits or more, what is  clear  is  that  the  Appellant's  father  had
    maintained his relationship with his adult  son  and  the  other  close
    family relatives including his wife and other  children  by  visits  to
    Afghanistan.  The Appellant's father is not a refugee and there are  no
    reasons advanced as to why he should not be able to visit in  the  same
    way as he has done before.  In those  circumstances,  it  was  entirely
    open to the judge to make those findings on Article 8 that he  did  and
    it has not been demonstrated in my judgment that there was any error of
    law identified in his approach.

42. Thus I am  satisfied  having  considered  the  determination  of  Judge
    Shimmin that the determination does not disclose any error of  law  and
    thus the decision shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error  of  law.
The decision stands.






Signed                              Date 4/10/2103


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


