
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01552/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  17th October 2014                           |On 24th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                       MR VIJAYAKANTHAN VIJAYARATHANAM

                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against the  decision  of  First-
   tier Tribunal Cameron who, in a  determination  promulgated  on  the  6th
   August 2014, dismissed his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
   refuse his application for asylum and to remove him to Sri Lanka.

2. The present proceedings arise from a fresh claim for asylum.  His  appeal
   against the rejection of a previous claim for  asylum  was  dismissed  by
   Judge Tipping in a determination promulgated on the 5th  September  2011.
   Judge Tipping accepted that the appellant had been detained and  tortured
   in 2010 (an experience in respect of which he  still  bore  the  physical
   scars)  due  to  his  membership  of  the  LTTE  ('Tamil  Tigers').   She
   nevertheless did not find his account of subsequent events credible,  and
   thus concluded that he had failed to substantiate his  claim  to  be  the
   subject of  continuing  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  The
   evidence upon which the appellant based his fresh claim was to the effect
   that the Sri Lankan authorities were  continuing  to  question  his  wife
   about his whereabouts, and thus demonstrating that they continued to have
   an adverse interest in him.

3. The  appellant's  first  ground  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
   predicated  upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal  having  accepted  that   the
   appellant's wife "had actually been detained (not merely  questioned)  on
   account of the suspicion with which the Appellant was held following  the
   Appellant's escape, and further that his father had also  been  detained"
   [paragraph 14 of the application for permission to appeal].  However,  as
   Designated Judge McCarthy pointed out when granting permission to appeal,
   that premise  is  not  borne  out  by  the  contents  of  the  Tribunal's
   determination. Thus, at paragraph 52, Judge Cameron said this:

    I do take into account the new evidence in relation to the  appellant's
    statement that his  wife  has  been  harassed  by  the  authorities  in
    connection with his whereabouts and that this statement appears  to  be
    corroborated by the MPs statement that he was contacted in  2011  about
    this issue however I am not satisfied even to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof that this evidence is  credible  given  the  change  in  emphasis
    adopted by the Sri Lankan authorities towards those who were previously
    members of the LTTE particularly given the findings that the  appellant
    was not a high level member of the LTTE.

4. It is right to say that Judge Cameron subsequently appeared to  backtrack
   somewhat upon his otherwise clear earlier finding that the appellant  had
   failed to substantiate his claim of continued  interest  in  him  by  the
   authorities  [see  paragraph  58  of  the  determination].  I   therefore
   indicated to Mr Lewis that because I had decided (for other  reasons)  to
   re-determine this appeal, I was prepared  to  revisit  this  issue  at  a
   resumed hearing. It is nevertheless my expectation that the issue will be
   argued by reference to  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. I therefore make it plain that any further evidence that may be
   submitted in relation to this issue is likely to be the subject  of  very
   close scrutiny, and the degree of weight that the Tribunal attaches to it
   is likely to be substantially  dependent  upon  the  credibility  of  any
   explanation that is given for its late arrival.

5. The ground upon which I have decided to set aside  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal is that, having apparently accepted the factual basis
   of the appellant's subjective fear of  ill-treatment  on  return  to  Sri
   Lanka - that is to say, his ill-treatment by the authorities in 2010 - it
   thereafter failed adequately to explain why it did not  also  accept  the
   expert  evidence  of  Dr  Camilo  Zapata  (a   Consultant   Psychiatrist)
   concerning the risk of suicide. It was Dr Zapata's evidence that,  whilst
   the appellant did not have "current suicidal plans", if he were  to  fail
   in his asylum appeal the risk of a "completed suicide" would nevertheless
   increase from its currently "high"  level  to  an  "extremely  high"  one
   [paragraphs 55 and 56 of the  addendum  to  his  report].  Judge  Cameron
   stated that it  was  "relevant  to  note  that  the  appellant  does  not
   currently have active suicidal thoughts and  there  are  no  plans  made"
   [paragraph 68: emphasis added]. Whilst it is obviously the  case  that  a
   Tribunal can only make findings of fact by reference to past and  present
   circumstances, it is equally obvious  that  any  assessment  of  risk  is
   necessarily an exercise in predicting future possibilities. In this case,
   the Tribunal's consideration of the likely situation for the appellant on
   return to Sri Lanka was confined to  its  finding  that  there  would  be
   "mental health professionals" available to him in Colombo [paragraph 69].
   The Tribunal thus reached its conclusion that the appellant would not  be
   at risk of suicide on return  to  Sri  Lanka  by  combining  Dr  Lapata's
   assessment of the appellant's present  state-of-mind  (that  is  to  say,
   whilst he is in the United Kingdom) with its own finding  that  treatment
   for that condition would be available to him upon his  future  return  to
   Sri Lanka. A rational  assessment  of  the  matter  would  have  involved
   consideration of the appellant's predicted state-of-mind on return to Sri
   Lanka, within the context of the mental health  facilities  and  familial
   support that would be available to him at  that  time.  I  therefore  set
   aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the ground that  it  did
   not conduct a rational  assessment  of  the  risk  of  suicide  upon  the
   appellant's forced return to Sri Lanka.

6. Unfortunately, by the time that I had concluded that  there  had  been  a
   material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination of  this
   appeal, there remained insufficient time to hear  the  arguments  of  the
   representatives relating to  the  re-making  of  the  decision.  It  will
   therefore be necessary to list  the  matter  for  a  resumed  hearing  on
   another date.

7. For the  avoidance  of  doubt,  and  subject  to  what  I  have  said  at
   paragraphs 4 and 5 above, the factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal
   are preserved.

Decision

8. The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and its decision  is
   set aside.

Anonymity not directed.





Signed                                  Date


Judge of the First-tier Tribunal                 17th October 2014
