

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01752/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st April 2016                           |On 19th May 2016              |



                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                                    [N M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood - Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by [NM], a citizen of Zimbabwe born  [  ]  1974.   He
    appeals against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Siddiqi
    issued on 23rd June 2015 dismissing on asylum and human rights grounds
    the appeal of the Appellant against the decision of the Respondent made
    on 16th January 2015 to refuse to grant asylum and to remove  him  from
    the United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Page who found that  the  grounds  amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the conclusions reached by  the  Judge.   Application
    was made to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on  10th  September  2015  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Blum granted permission.  He said:

         "2.  The grounds contend that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law
             by refusing  to  grant  an  adjournment,  at  the  Respondent's
             request, to obtain a typed copy of  the  interview  transcript,
             and by then relying on a reference in the Reasons  for  Refusal
             Letter to evidence given in the interview transcript  when  the
             Home Office  Presenting  Officer  indicated  he  would  not  be
             relying on the interview record.

           3. It is arguable that the Judge acted in a  procedurally  unfair
             manner  in  refusing  a  further  opportunity  to  obtain   the
             interview  transcript  as  the  transcript  may  have  provided
             evidence  that   the   Appellant's   account   was   internally
             inconsistent.   It  is  also  arguable  that,  in  relying   on
             information extracted from the interview in circumstances where
             the Home Office Presenting Officer indicated  no  reliance  was
             going to be placed on it, the Judge  acted  in  a  procedurally
             unfair manner.

           4. The grounds further contend that  the  Judge  failed  to  make
             specific findings of fact in relation to the Appellant's  claim
             that his cottage was set on fire with him inside and  that  his
             car was criminally damaged.  While making  reference  to  these
             events the Judge does not appear to make any  factual  findings
             (paragraphs 37 to 40).  It is arguable that the Judge failed to
             make necessary factual findings in respect of core  assertions.
             In concluding that the demands from his uncle and [N] were  not
             politically motivated it is also arguable that the Judge failed
             to contextualise  the  demands  in  respect  of  the  political
             climate in 2008, the fact that the Appellant had given funds to
             a church which opposed Mugabe and that [N] was a war  veteran."



 3. Mr Wood had asked the Presenting Officer on the day of the hearing,  Mr
    Dillon, to provide a copy of his hearing minute from  that  day.   This
    was done.  The relevant parts of the note say:

         "This was a difficult case, as we had not complied with  directions
         following two CMRs over two months to produce a typed transcript of
         the  Asylum  Interview  Record  which  unfortunately   was   really
         exceedingly difficult to read to the extent that it  could  not  be
         relied upon at all (neither the IJ, rep or myself could  read  more
         than the odd answer).

         Mr Wood quite reasonably requested an adjournment but as there were
         two very comprehensive statements the IJ decided to proceed.  I had
         little choice given our failure to comply  but  to  accept  that  I
         would not rely on the AIR in the cross-examination nor any part  of
         the refusal letter which referred to the interview.  This was not a
         problem  as  the  refusal  letter  relied  mainly  on  the  witness
         statement."

 4. Mr Wood submitted at the hearing before me that an  adjournment  should
    have been granted.  He also submitted that the Judge failed to properly
    consider the  background  information  on  Zimbabwe  in  assessing  the
    Appellant's credibility.  Mr Wood referred in particular to an extract
    from the 2007 COIS Report  confirming  that  CIO  operatives  had  been
    deployed in the area in which the Appellant  lived  because  they  were
    concerned about non-governmental organisations  meddling  in  politics.
    He also failed to give proper weight to the fact that  the  Appellant's
    mother is an MDC supporter and has been granted refugee status  in  the
    UK.

Findings on error of law.

 5. Judge Siddiqi accepted that the  main  issue  in  the  appeal  was  the
    credibility of the account given by the Appellant.  She noted that  the
    Appellant had given a detailed account of the dispute between  him  and
    his uncle.  She went on to say that having considered the evidence  she
    found that there was no political motive for the action that the  uncle
    took against the Appellant. It was done for economic reasons.  She gave
    clear findings on this matter.

 6. I do accept that the Judge did, in paragraph 53, say that the Appellant
    attended six vigils in the UK.  I accept that it may be the  case  that
    she took this information from the refusal  letter  when  it  had  been
    decided that the refusal letter would not be taken into  account.   The
    submission made, however,  is  that  according  to  his  statement  the
    Appellant said that he continued to attend vigils so  long  as  he  was
    financially able to.  He did not say in his statement how  many  vigils
    he attended and in fact "continuing to attend vigils when  I  have  the
    money" and "attended six  vigils"  are  not  mutually  exclusive.   The
    Appellant may not have attended more than six but even if he  did  this
    does not affect the findings that the Judge  made  about  the  risk  on
    return of an Appellant who was not  politically  involved  in  Zimbabwe
    returning there.  It was agreed to go ahead with this hearing  and  not
    to adjourn it because there were two comprehensive statements from  the
    Appellant giving a very detailed account of why he was  seeking  asylum
    in the UK and why he feared persecution on return.  Judge Siddiqi dealt
    with the points he made in the statements.  She gave sound reasons  for
    the decision she made.  I do not think it was necessary for her to make
    findings on the alleged burning of his cottage since she found  him  to
    be incredible in any event and if his uncle had done it this would also
    have been found to have been for economic and not political reasons.

 7. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a
    material error of law.  I would comment that it  is  unacceptable  that
    having been directed  twice  to  provide  a  typed  transcript  of  the
    interview the Home Office has failed to do so.  This  resulted  in  two
    further hearings that had to be adjourned at great expense.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 12th May 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


