
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01413/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 April 2017                       |On 8 May 2017                        |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    H K O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms H Foot, Counsel, instructed by Bindmans LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Therefore the Secretary of State is the Respondent and H K  O
    is once more the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Henderson (the judge), promulgated on 8  February  2017,
    in which she allowed the Appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  his
    removal from the United Kingdom would be contrary  to  its  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention and would also breach  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.  The Appellant's  protection  claim  has  always
    been predicated squarely on the assertion that he is gay, and would for
    that reason  be  at  risk  if  returned  to  Nigeria.   Throughout  the
    protracted history of this case the Respondent has accepted that if  in
    fact the Appellant is gay he would be at risk on  return  to  his  home
    country.  However the Respondent has maintained her  rejection  of  his
    sexuality at all times.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was first dealt with within  the  Detained  Fast
    Track procedure.  Tribunal Judge Hembrough dismissed the  appeal  on  5
    February 2015.  In light of the  litigation  in  the  Detention  Action
    cases, that decision was set aside.  The appeal then went before First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cohen,  and  he  dismissed  it  by  a   decision
    promulgated on 29 March 2016.  His decision was challenged,  and  by  a
    decision dated 4 August 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt found  there  to
    be material errors of law. She remitted the matter back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.  In this way  the  appeal  came
    before the judge on 13 January 2017.

The judge's decision

 4. At paragraph 5 the judge notes the Respondent's concession as  to  risk
    on return if the Appellant were in fact gay.

 5. Under the sub-heading 'Findings of Fact' the judge proceeds  to  recite
    much of the evidence before her.  Her  findings  as  such  really  only
    begin from paragraph  35  onwards.   She  makes  reference  to  certain
    supporting evidence adduced on behalf of the Appellant, but deems it to
    be of limited assistance to his claim.  There is  reference  too  to  a
    medical report from Dr J Reicher, which is said to contain a consistent
    account of the Appellant's history  and  was  also  supportive  of  the
    nature of scarring on the Appellant's body.

 6. Under the next  sub-heading  of  'Conclusions'  with  a  subheading  of
    'Credibility', the judge states at paragraph  41  that  she  found  the
    Appellant to be a credible and honest witness.  She makes reference  to
    his demeanour at the hearing and then goes on in subsequent  paragraphs
    to accept his evidence as to possible inconsistencies relied on by  the
    Respondent. She also refers once again  to  the  medical  report.   She
    notes certain omissions in the evidence, makes reference to  section  8
    of the Immigration and Asylum (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004
    Act, and also to the cultural context in which she  was  assessing  the
    Appellant's claim.

 7. Then under the sub-heading 'Is the Appellant gay?' the judge refers  to
    the well-known cases of Kaja [1995] Imm AR1 and Karanakaran v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2003] 3 All ER 449  and  Ravichandran
    [1996] Imm AR 97.  In paragraphs 47 to 49 she states and then re-states
    the need for protection cases to be viewed in the round and, of course,
    on the lower standard of  proof.   It  is  perhaps  worth  setting  out
    paragraph 49 of her decision in full:

         "49. On the basis of the evidence before  me,  I  have  taken  into
             account the disparate pieces of evidence as referenced in Kaja
             and overall I find that the appellant has established  on  the
             lower standard of proof that there is a reasonable  likelihood
             that he is gay.  There are some pieces of  evidence  (or  lack
             thereof) which may indicate to the contrary,  but  looking  at
             the evidence in the round,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
             satisfied the burden of proof (on the lower standard) in  this
             case."

    On this basis the appeal was allowed (given the core  finding  of  fact
    and the Respondent's concession as to risk on return).

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The  Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  take  issue  with  the  judge's
    credibility findings.  It is said that her findings of fact are limited
    in nature, that she has  given  insufficient  reasoning  for  her  core
    finding that the Appellant was gay, has  placed  weight  on  immaterial
    matters such as the Appellant's demeanour at the  hearing,  has  placed
    insufficient weight on the lack of corroborative evidence, that she had
    failed to have due regard to the delay in claiming asylum, and that she
    had had no regard to the  Appellant's  past  conviction  for  obtaining
    and/or using a false passport.  In summary, the grounds assert that the
    judge has not in fact assessed the evidence in the round.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer by
    a decision dated 6 March 2017.  He makes  reference  to  the  assertion
    that the reasons  provided  were  inadequate  and  confirmed  that  all
    grounds may be argued.

The hearing before me

10. At the outset of the hearing I ascertained  that  all  relevant  papers
    were in order including the rule 24 response provided by Ms Foot.

11. Mr Staunton relied on the grounds of appeal and confirmed that this was
    an out and out challenge against the judge's credibility findings.   He
    went through the grounds of appeal and submitted that as  a  result  of
    the errors alleged therein the judge's decision was unsafe.

12. Ms Foot relied on  her  rule  24  response.   She  submitted  that  the
    findings were open to the judge, that the judge had  taken  a  balanced
    view of the evidence in the  round,  had  taken  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence in combination with the medical report, written  evidence  and
    the cultural context to the claim, and  her  findings  and  conclusions
    were entirely open to her.

13. Mr Staunton had nothing to add by way of reply.

Decision on error of law

14. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are
    no material errors of law in the judge's decision.

15. I remind myself of  the  need  to  view  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the round and in a fair and sensible manner.  I also remind
    myself of the fact that when any judge  sets  out  their  findings  and
    conclusions there must always be some form of order  to  their  written
    decisions: there will always be a sequence,  and  this  is  why  it  is
    important to look at the decisions in context and in  a  holistic  way.
    In so doing my overall conclusion is that the judge has  very  properly
    expressly directed herself to the need to take all relevant aspects  of
    the evidence into account, to weigh all of these  disparate  pieces  of
    evidence up, and to reach an overall conclusion based on  the  evidence
    in the round and applying the lower standard of proof.  What is said in
    paragraphs 47 to  49  of  the  decision  significantly  undermines  the
    assertions set out in the Respondent's grounds.

16. Taking a number of the specific points set out in the grounds in turn I
    reach the following conclusions.

17. First, the judge was fully entitled to take the  Appellant's  demeanour
    at the hearing into account.  It is clear that this was not  conclusive
    of credibility in any way but was, in the context of  the  case  before
    her,  a  relevant  factor  given  that  his  explanation  for  apparent
    inconsistencies in the evidence and late disclosure  of  his  sexuality
    were due in part to his own personality (amongst other things).

18. Second, the judge has quite clearly had in mind the absence of  certain
    corroborative evidence.  It is apparent from paragraph 49 that she  was
    well aware of concerns as to  elements  of  the  evidence  or,  as  she
    herself stated, the lack thereof.   In  my  view  the  judge  has  gone
    through the evidence with care and has clearly set out that  which  she
    regarded as being of greater or lesser  weight.   It  is  important  of
    course to remember that weight is a matter for the tribunal of fact.

19. Third, in my view the Respondent is  misreading  the  judge's  decision
    when the grounds state that she had already made her mind up  that  the
    Appellant   was   credible   before   considering   other    evidential
    difficulties.  As I have mentioned already, paragraphs 47 to 49 clearly
    disclose that the judge had at the forefront of her mind  the  need  to
    look at the evidence as a whole.   The  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    demeanour at the hearing was not the sole basis for  her  finding  that
    the Appellant's evidence was credible.  As Ms Foot rightly pointed  out
    in her submissions, the judge had regard also to  the  medical  report,
    the explanations put  forward  by  the  Appellant  as  to  the  alleged
    inconsistencies relied upon by the Respondent  in  her  refusal  letter
    and, importantly, the  cultural  context  of  this  case  (namely  that
    homosexuality in Nigerian culture is a taboo subject or,  at  the  very
    least, highly contentious).

20. Fourth, whilst it could have been dealt with more  clearly,  the  judge
    did have section 8 of the 2004 Act in  mind  when  making  her  overall
    assessment of credibility.  It would never be conclusive and the judge,
    as  I  have  already  mentioned,  did  have  in  mind  the   evidential
    shortcomings in the Appellant's case (see paragraph 49).

21. Fifth, as to the failure of the judge to have regard to the Appellant's
    conviction when making  her  overall  credibility  assessment,  several
    points are of note.  First, that this issue was  never  raised  in  the
    Respondent's reasons for refusal letter.  Second, that from my  reading
    of the Record of Proceedings this was not the subject of  any  specific
    oral submissions made at the hearing  before  the  judge.   Third,  the
    judge was clearly aware of the conviction and it would do a  disservice
    to her for me to conclude that she had completely  disregarded  it  for
    the purposes of reaching her findings and conclusions.  Finally, as  Ms
    Foot points out in her rule 24 response, if a particular point  is  not
    expressly put to the Tribunal it becomes all the more difficult for  an
    aggrieved party to  criticise  the  judge  for  failing  to  explicitly
    address it at some point thereafter.

22. The judge directed herself correctly. She had regard to the evidence as
    a whole. She made sustainable  findings  thereon.  The  Respondent  had
    conceded the issue of risk on return. In light  of  this,  the  judge's
    decision is sound.

Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is therefore dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                  Date: 5 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 5 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

