
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01309/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th September 2018                        |On 15th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer of
                    the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



1.   I have anonymised the Appellant because of the nature of his case.

The background

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran. His date of birth is 14 September
1996.  His claim for asylum was refused by the Secretary of State on 8
January 2015.  The Appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was
dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C Burns, in a decision that
was promulgated on 15 April 2015, following a hearing at Birmingham on 24
March 2015.  The Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds and
under Articles 2, 3, 6 and 8 of ECHR.

3.   The Appellant was refused permission to appeal by the First-tier
Tribunal (the "FTT") the Upper Tribunal (the "UT"). The decision of the UT
was quashed by order of His Honour Judge Pearce issued on 11 May 2018,
following the grant of permission by Holroyde LJ in the Court of Appeal.
The salient parts of Lord Justice Holroyde's decision read as follows: -

"I do, however, see at least arguable merit in the ground of appeal
relating to the likelihood that the claimant's being imprisoned for draft
evasion if returned to Iran.  It is in my judgment arguable that at paras
45 and 54 of his judgment the FtT Judge accepted the expert evidence that
there was a real risk of such imprisonment, but then failed properly to
consider the submissions as to whether such imprisonment would be
disproportionate and/or would give rise to a real risk of serious harm.  It
may be that, upon analysis, the argument will be unsuccessful; but in my
view it has not thus far received due consideration.  Given the potential
consequences of an error of law in this regard, I am by a narrow margin
persuaded that there is a compelling reason why permission to apply for JR
should be granted."

4.   The Vice President of the Upper Tribunal Judge Ockelton granted
permission on 4 June 2018 in the light of the decision of Holroyde LJ.  The
matter came before me on 24 September 2018 to determine whether Judge Burns
made an error of law. I heard submissions from both parties.

The decision of the FTT

5.   The FTT dismissed the Appellant's claim on refugee grounds.  The judge
rejected the Appellant's claim to be at risk on return based on his support
for the KDPI. The judge found the Appellant not credible.  The judge went
on to consider risk on return and in doing so applied SB (risk on return-
illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 0053, in which it was found that illegal
exit was not a factor which in itself was a significant risk factor.
Before the judge there was expert evidence of Roya Kashefi.  The judge
attached little weight to this evidence in respect of the Appellant's
alleged activities with KDPI.  The judge concluded as follows at paragraph
45: -

"At paragraph 35 and beyond in the expert's report, the expert deals with
difficulties that the Appellant may face for failing to complete his
military service.  This would lead to a sentence of imprisonment which of
itself would not mean that the Appellant is a refugee entitled to
protection under the 1951 Convention or that this imprisonment would amount
to inhuman or degrading treatment under Article 3."

6.   Mr Mills conceded that if I decided that the judge made a finding that
the Appellant would be imprisoned, in the absence of a counter or cross-
challenge, the appeal must be allowed on Article 3 grounds.  It is common
ground that prison conditions are sufficient to meet the threshold to
engage Article 3.  Mr Mills primary submission was that there was no such
finding by the judge.  He urged me to consider paragraph 45 together with
paragraph 54.

Article 3

Conclusions

7.   The only sensible reading of paragraph 45 is that Judge Burns found
that the Appellant would be imprisoned on return.   I conclude that the
judge unambiguously concluded at paragraph 45 that the Appellant, having
failed to complete his military service, would be imprisoned.  The
description of "some difficulties" at paragraph 54 does not undermine this
finding when it is considered in the context of the judge having failed to
appreciate that imprisonment crossed the Article 3 threshold. There was no
counter challenge raised by the Secretary of State in the event that the UT
found that there was a finding made that the Appellant would be imprisoned
(for example that the finding was not open to the judge or that it was
inadequately reasoned).

8.   There is a material error of law because the judge concluded that the
Appellant would be imprisoned and contrary to the law as it presently
stands, he concluded that this would not lead to the UK breaching its
obligations under Article 3.

Further submissions made by the Appellant

9.   This was not the end of the matter because the Appellant's case as
presented by Mr Draycott is that imprisonment will amount to persecution,
and the Appellant should be granted refugee status.  Thus, according to Mr
Draycott, the judge erred in dismissing the claim on asylum grounds.

10.  The submissions advanced orally and in Mr Draycott's skeleton argument
went well beyond the grant of permission.  The UT has a free-standing duty
to take obvious points in an Appellant's favour (the "Robinson duty").
However, I reject the submission advanced on behalf of the Appellant that
the issue now raised was such an obvious point giving rise to a duty to
hear it.

11.  Mr Draycott drew my attention to [14] the decision of the judge which
reads; "It was agreed that the Convention reason was that the Appellant
claimed to have a well-founded fear of persecution in Iran on the basis of
his imputed political opinion" in support of his submission that it was not
a new point but had been considered by the FTT.   It was Mr Draycott's view
that the judge was referring at [14] to draft evasion in addition to the
Appellant's claim to have connections with the KDPI.  In his view it
follows that it is not necessary for the grounds to be amended to allow him
to challenge the decision on protection grounds.

12.  Mr Mills, in response, submitted that the issue of draft evasion was
advanced before the FTT on the basis that return to Iran would breach the
UK's obligations under Article 3 and not that it amounts to persecution.
According to Mr Mills the judge at [14] referred to the Appellant's core
claim to be at risk on account of his involvement with KDPI.  In any event,
Mr Mills indicated that he was able to engage with the arguments now
advanced by Mr Draycott. He did not consider himself to be disadvantaged by
the last-minute advancement of a wholly new ground of appeal challenging
the judge decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

13.  I proceeded to hear submissions on the new issue. However, I do not
accept Mr Draycott's wholly opportunistic and misconceived interpretation
of [14] of the decision of the FTT. He sought to advance a wholly new
argument which was not advanced before the FTT and which has not been
raised in the grounds of appeal.  Mr Draycott must be aware that this is
the case because he represented the Appellant at the hearing before the FTT
and drafted the skeleton argument. In addition, he drafted the grounds of
appeal to the UT.  The arguments raised on an appeal are limited to the
grounds for which permission has been granted.  I refuse permission to
amend the grounds.  In any event, there is no substance in the argument now
advanced for the reasons I will go on to explain.

14.  The argument now advanced is out in full in the skeleton argument.   I
do not need to repeat it here in any detail. I have summarised the
arguments advanced and which he expanded upon in oral submissions.  The
Appellant argues that the treatment he will be subjected to falls with
Articles 9 and 10 of the Qualification Directive.    In support of the
argument Mr Draycott relied on MI (Fair Trial, Pre-Trial Conditions)
Pakistan CG [2002] UKIAT 02239 and EM (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2014] 2 WLR 409.  The Appellant relied on the decision
of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights at paragraphs
102 to 111 of Bayatyan v. Armenia [2011] 54 EHRR 467 and Shepherd v Federal
Republic of Germany [2015] 3 WLR 611 CJEU).  It was submitted that within
relevant international materials the definition of conscientious objector
is construed broadly with reference to paragraph 11 of the UNHCR's
Guidelines on International Protection No. 10 "Claims to Refugee Status
related to Military Service within the context of Article 1A (2) of the
1951 Convention ..." of 12 November 2014.

15.  The Appellant argued that the judge erred in failing to engage with
the fact that being subject to imprisonment for draft evasion prima facie
gives rise to the Convention reason; namely on political grounds, with
reference to the UNHCR's guidelines. In addition, it was argued that the
Appellant is a member of a social group. In support of this the Appellant
relied on paragraph 56 of Advocate General Sharpston's opinion in Shepherd.
The Appellant relied on PK (Draft evader; punishment; minimum severity)
Ukraine [2018] UKUT 00241 to support his argument that in general the
imposition of a custodial sentence upon a draft evader will normally result
in persecution.

16.  Reliance was placed on the Respondent's Country Policy Information
Note (the "CPIN") Iran: Military service (October 2016 - 24 October 2016)
with reference to paragraphs 2.4 to 3.14. The CPIN indicates that the
longer the period of draft evasion, which stands at more than four years in
the Appellant's case, the greater the risk of prosecution and imprisonment
upon return to Iran.  Mr Draycott argued that draft evaders may have a
distinct identity, being perceived as being different.  Reference was made
to page 21 of the CPIN at 7.2.5: -

"Middle East Eye reported that:

             'Between 30,000 and 35,000 people have already been arrested
             this year for attempting to dodge military service, [General
             Moussa Kamali, Chief Conscription Officer for the Iranian
             armed forces] said.  'The process of identifying and arresting
             fugitives will be intensified this year,'

Kamali said.'"

17.  Mr Draycott submitted that the Appellant would be perceived as an
opponent in the light of draft evasion and that he is a failed asylum
seeker of Kurdish ethnicity.  He will be interrogated and mistreated.
Reliance was placed on SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran
CG [2016] UKUT 00308.   AB and Others (internet activity - state of
evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 was also relied on in support of the
submission that although the authorities do not chase everyone, it is
likely that the Appellant will come to their attention.

18.  Mr Mills submitted that the Appellant was not found to be political.
He has no personal history that would give rise to him being marked out.
Being a Kurd and/or a failed asylum seeker is not sufficient to establish
imputed political opinion.  He submitted that there is nothing in the CPIN
which would suggest that Kurds are marked or targeted.

The Appellant's protection claim

Conclusions

19.  I find that the Appellant will be treated like any other draft evader.
He has committed a criminal offence because he simply does not want to do
military service. This is probably because it is a significant interference
with his life. As found by the judge he does not have a political opinion
and he will be treated as somebody who has simply broken the law. There is
no evidence to support an argument that draft evaders who are Kurds and/or
failed asylum seekers will be discriminated against or treated
disproportionately.

20.  There is no dispute that the Appellant is a draft evader.  If Judge
Burns is correct and he will be imprisoned, any sentence imposed on him
would not come within Article 9 of the Qualification Directive. The
evidence before me does not establish that the criminal justice system
relating to draft evasion in Iran and the penalties imposed are not
compatible with human rights entitlement.  This is not made out in the
CPIN.  There is no evidence that the penalties are applied
disproportionately for any reason.

21.  The evidence does not establish that there is a nexus between draft
evasion and political opinion in Iran. Whilst there is evidence of an
increasing number of draft evaders and the process of tracking them down
has intensified (see 2.4.12 and 7.2.5), the evidence is not sufficient to
establish that the Appellant will be considered as a political opponent
because he is a draft evader (and a Kurd).

22.  At no time in these proceedings has the Appellant advanced a case that
he is a conscientious objector or that he is anything other than someone
who does not wish to complete military service.  It is not his case that he
refuses to complete military service because this would associate him with
breaches of IHL. The argument under Article 10 and the argument that the
Appellant is a member of a particular social group has no substance on the
facts of this case.

23.  AB does not establish that this Appellant if subjected to arbitrary
interview will be perceived as a political opponent.  I have considered
what the UT stated in SSH and HR particularly at [34]: -

         "34. It was not suggested to us that an individual  faces  risk  on
             return on the sole basis of being  Kurdish.   It  was  however
             agreed that being Kurdish was relevant to how a returnee would
             be treated by the authorities.  For example,  the  Operational
             Guidance  Note   refers   at   3.12.14   to   the   government
             disproportionally targeting minority groups, including  Kurds,
             for arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention and physical  abuse.
             No examples however have been  provided  of  ill-treatment  of
             returnees with no relevant adverse interest factors other than
             their Kurdish ethnicity, and we  conclude  that  the  evidence
             does not show risk of ill-treatment to such returnees,  though
             we accept that it  might  be  an  exacerbating  factor  for  a
             returnee otherwise of interest.  Accordingly, we conclude that
             it has not been shown that a person in the position  of  these
             appellants faces a real risk on return to Iran either  on  the
             basis of what would happen to  them  when  questioned  at  the
             airport or subsequently if they were convicted of  an  offence
             of illegal exit. With regard to HR specifically, it  does  not
             appear to be disputed that  he  is  Kurdish  and  that  he  is
             undocumented:  hence  we   see   no   reason   for   remittal.
             Prosecution for illegal  exit  is  an  outcome  not  generally
             experienced by such returnees, and where it  does  occur,  the
             most likely sentence in relation to the  illegal  exit  charge
             would be a fine. It has not been shown that there would  be  a
             real risk of prosecution  under  Article  500  for  propaganda
             against the state on the basis of having made an asylum  claim
             which was found to be false.  Accordingly  these  appeals  are
             dismissed"

24.  The UT in SSH and HR or AB did not make findings which support the
Appellant's case that he would be interrogated and mistreated because of
his ethnicity and/or he is a failed asylum seeker. It is possible that he
will be arrested for draft evasion; however, the background evidence does
not establish that he is at risk of being of interest to the authorities
for any other reason. The UT did not deal with the issue of draft evasion
in either of the above cited cases.  However, the evidence does not
establish that a lawful arrest for draft evasion, would become
discriminatory or that the penalty would be disproportionate because of the
Appellant's ethnicity and/or because he is a failed asylum seeker.  If
Judge Burns is correct, and the Appellant is imprisoned, as opposed to
receiving the penalties described in the background evidence, this will
give rise to the UK breaching its obligations under Article 3. However,
there is no substance in the arguments now advanced by the Appellant that
he would be persecuted on account of his real or imputed political opinion
or because he is a member of a particular social group.   The judge's
decision to dismiss this appeal on protection grounds is lawful and
sustainable.

Error of Law

25.  The judge erred because he found that the Appellant would be
imprisoned on return and that this would not amount to a breach of Article
3. It is acknowledged by the Secretary of State that prison conditions in
Iran reach the high Article 3 threshold. It follows that the decision of
the judge to dismiss the appeal under Article 3 is set aside.  I remake the
appeal, allowing it on Article 3 grounds.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under Article 3

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 9 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
