
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01549/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     MR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Acharya, Acharyas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fujiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Iran, born on 3 April 1979. He  arrived
in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on 1 November 2004.  The  basis  of
his claim is that he was a member of the workers communist  party  of  Iran,
known as the Heckmatist party. He attended a party meeting at the  house  of
a friend, which was attacked by Hezbollah and the Appellant received a  blow
to the head. He  managed  to  escape  and  subsequently  fled  the  country.
Following his arrival in the United Kingdom  he  joined  the  UK  branch  of
Heckmatist and has attended demonstrations against the  Iranian  authorities
in front of the Embassy and other buildings. He also formed  a  relationship
with a Turkish national, Ms A and helps her to care for  her  autistic  son,
E. His application was refused by the Respondent on 16 January 2015  and  he
appealed against that decision.

2.    The appeal hearing came before First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lamb  for
hearing on 20 May 2015.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  2  July  2015  he
dismissed the appeal, essentially on the basis that  he  did  not  find  his
evidence credible in respect of his political involvement prior to  arriving
in the United Kingdom [81] and he  was  not  satisfied  that  his  political
involvement in the  United  Kingdom  would  cause  him  to  be  at  risk  of
persecution on return to Iran [82]. He did not accept that he had  formed  a
family life with Ms A and her son, who would become 18 on 26 June  2015  and
even if he had, his removal to Iran would be proportionate [96]-[100].

3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought in time  on  the
basis that the Judge: (i) failed to give proper consideration to  the  delay
in processing  his  claim  under  the  provisions  of  the  legacy  casework
programme; (ii) failed to give adequate  consideration  to  section  117B(6)
and has not adequately considered whether family life exists;  (iii)  failed
to make any findings as to the impact of removal on the Appellant's  partner
and son; (iv) in relation to the asylum claim, the Judge failed to give  due
weight to the  relevant  evidence  of  the  witness,  H,  that  the  Iranian
authorities monitor demonstrations in London and record who is  involved  in
them and has at [82] in finding that the Appellant would not be detected  as
an atheist acted contrary to the decision in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
in respect of the fourth ground only, on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
that the Tribunal erred "by treating the cynicism with which  it  found  the
appellant had participated in  demonstrations  against  the  Iranian  regime
[paragraph 70] as being of relevance to the question of whether he would  be
at risk  on  return,  especially  given  its  acceptance  that  the  Iranian
authorities (a) monitor such demonstrations and record who  is  involved  in
them [paragraph 67] and (b) would regard the appellant's Marxist  philosophy
and  atheism  "as  being  anti-Islamic"  so  as  to  "put  him  at  risk  of
persecution and ill-treatment" [paragraph 68]."

Hearing

5.    On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Acharya took  me  through  the  Judge's
decision and submitted that at [70] that whilst the  Judge  did  not  accept
what the Appellant said in evidence about his activities in Iran  before  he
left in 2004 he also found that on arrival he was  promptly  in  touch  with
members of the party that might cause him to infer he  had  been  active  in
the party or at least a member of it, previously. At [81] the  Judge  stated
that he had not accepted the Appellant  was  actively  involved  politically
before he left Iran, but he did accept that since his arrival in the  United
Kingdom  he  had  participated  in  demonstrations   against   the   Iranian
government. At [66] the Judge expressly accepted the  evidence  of  H  about
the activities of his party and the involvement  of  the  Appellant  in  the
demonstrations. Photographs were produced showing the  Appellant  holding  a
placard. At [67] the Judge accepted the  evidence  of  H  that  the  Iranian
authorities monitor demonstrations in London and record who is  involved  in
them and that, in light of the background evidence, illegal exit may  result
in imprisonment on return if such a person attracts  the  attention  of  the
authorities for some other reason. At [68] the Judge accepted  the  evidence
of H and the  Appellant  that  the  Iranian  authorities  would  equate  the
Marxist philosophy of the party and the Appellant's atheism  and  therefore,
if he were investigated by the authorities and his  views  become  known  he
would be treated  as  anti-Islamic  and  that  would  put  him  at  risk  of
persecution. However, at [82] the Judge held that he was not satisfied  that
the Appellant's political activity has been of an  extent  or  character  to
constitute a risk on return to Iran he will be investigated and  subject  to
ill-treatment or persecution and there is a similar lack  of  risk  that  he
will be detected as an atheist.

6.    Mr Acharya stated that the nature  of  the  demonstrations  and  where
they were videoed were on YouTube. He drew my attention to the fact  that  a
DVD had been sent to the Home Office at [41]  although  this  had  not  been
seen by Judge Lamb. He also drew my  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  the
Appellant's bundle photographs had been produced at 39-40, 41 & 112  &  114.
There was also a letter from H at pages  2-4  of  supplementary  bundle.  He
submitted that the Judge erred at [70] in that he does  not  deal  with  the
fact that the Appellant attended demonstrations and this would have  brought
him to the attention of the authorities in Iran. He  drew  my  attention  to
pages 10, 11 and 13 of Bundle 2 and the  country  guidance  note  (Australia
June 2013) which refers to the  authorities  in  Tehran  airport  collecting
photographs of Iranians in protest gatherings outside Iran and  that  people
were detained in the airport whilst  their  faces  were  compared  to  these
photographs. He submitted that there was a  material  contradiction  between
the Judge's findings at [70] and [81].

7.    In response, Ms Fijiwala sought to rely on the rule 24  response.  She
submitted that  there  were  no  errors  in  the  determination;  the  Judge
considered the evidence before him and there was  no  contradiction  between
his findings at [70] and [81]. The Judge  does  consider  at  [70]  that  on
arrival the Appellant promptly contacted members of the party but  this  was
not a finding that he was active before arrival. At  [81]  the  Judge  finds
the Appellant was not involved prior to arrival in the UK and the Judge  was
entitled to reach that conclusion. In  respect  of  the  evidence  regarding
monitoring, this was correct but other  factors  had  to  be  considered  in
relation to the Appellant and whether he would attract interest  on  return.
At  [70]  the  Judge  considered  whether   the   Appellant   had   attended
demonstrations in the United  Kingdom  and  that  it  was  unlikely  he  was
involved in many due to him having moved to  East  Anglia.  Frequency  is  a
relevant factor cf. BA Iran at [1] of the headnote.  She submitted that  the
methods are haphazard and it depends on whether information is  known  about
the individual on return. With regard to Headnote [4] there was no  evidence
the Appellant had played a  leading  role.  It  was  accepted  that  he  was
holding a placard in one of  the  photographs  but  does  not  mean  he  was
playing a high level role.  The  Judge  found  that  he  was  an  infrequent
demonstrator who played no  particular  role  in  demonstrations  and  whose
participation is not highlighted in the media. In respect of the  fact  that
he is an atheist at [82] the Judge noted that  he  described  himself  as  a
Muslim in his screening interview and found he would do  so  on  return.  At
[54] the Judge noted that he had made no mention of problems as a result  of
not practicing his faith. Based on BA (Demonstrators in Britain  -  risk  on
return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) the Judge properly dealt with  risk  on
return and the Appellant's sporadic involvement in demos.

8.    In reply, Mr Acharya relied on BA Iran at [69] and submitted  that  he
placed  weight  on  the  fact  that  the   Appellant's   face   is   clearly
recognizable. The Judge accepted at [68]  that  the  Appellant  has  Marxist
beliefs. Whilst the Judge  considered  BA  Iran  he  did  not  consider  the
relevant factors viz where the  Appellant  was  demonstrating,  whether  his
face was identifiable; what was written on  the  placard  and  whether  this
would cause him to be at risk on return.

Decision

9.    I made my decision at the hearing, which was that I found  a  material
error of law in relation to the  manner  in  which  the  Judge  applied  the
guidance in BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)  Iran  CG  [2011]
UKUT 36 (IAC). I now give my reasons for so finding.

10.   The appeal before me was confined to asylum (and Article 3)  only  and
focused on the risk on return to Iran to the Appellant as a  result  of  his
political activities in the United Kingdom  and  his  atheism.  The  Judge's
material findings in this respect are at [66] through to [70] and  at  [79]-
[82]:

    (i)    he accepted the evidence of H about the activities on the  party
    (Hekmatist) and the involvement of  the  Appellant  in  demonstrations,
    evidenced by photographs showing him holding a placard [66];

    (ii)   he accepted the evidence  of  H  that  the  Iranian  authorities
    monitor such demonstrations in London and record who is  involved  with
    them [67];

    (iii)  those who leave Iran illegally without an exit permit face being
    fined on return or sentenced to imprisonment and such illegal exit  may
    be an aggravating factor, if such a person attracts  the  attention  of
    the authorities for some other reason [67];

    (iv)   if the Appellant were investigated by the  authorities  and  his
    views were to become known he would be treated  as  being  anti-Islamic
    and that would put him at risk of persecution and ill-treatment [68];

    (v)    he did not accept what the Appellant said in evidence about  his
    activities in Iran before he left in 2004 but he  also  found  that  on
    arrival he was promptly in touch with members of the party  that  might
    cause him to infer he had been active in the party or at least a member
    of it, previously. He could not find any evidence to indicate  that  he
    was in any way active in the party from 2004 onwards. He was  happy  to
    be photographed taking part in demonstrations with a view to using such
    evidence in support of his application [70];

    (vi)   he did not know whether or not it was true  that  the  Appellant
    left Iran without a passport but it was clear he  arrived  at  Heathrow
    Airport with a false passport and had been assisted in his journey by a
    trafficker [80];

    (vii)  he did not accept  that  the  Appellant  was  actively  involved
    politically before he left Iran. He accepted that since his arrival  in
    the  United  Kingdom  in  recent   years   he   has   participated   in
    demonstrations against the Iranian government in public places and  has
    made himself liable to  be  recorded  by  that  government  as  such  a
    participant. They have been few in number and intermittent [81];

    (viii) he was not satisfied that the Appellant's political activity has
    been of an extent or character to constitute a risk that on  return  to
    Iran  he  will  be  investigated  and  subject  to   ill-treatment   or
    persecution and there is a  similar  lack  of  risk  that  he  will  be
    detected as an atheist - he would expect him to identity as a Muslim as
    he did in his screening interview [82].

11.   I have carefully considered the submissions of both  parties  and  the
decision of the Upper Tribunal in BA (Demonstrators in  Britain  -  risk  on
return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC). It is clear, as  Ms  Fijiwala  pointed
out, that the first headnote states that: "regard must be had to  the  level
of involvement of the individual here as  well  as  any  political  activity
which the individual might have been involved in Iran before seeking  asylum
in Britain." I find that the Judge did not make clear  findings  as  to  the
level of the Appellant's involvement with Hekmatist in  the  United  Kingdom
beyond  attending  a  few  intermittent  demonstrations  at  which  he   was
photographed holding a placard [81]. It is clear from headnote 4  that  this
is insufficient given that the factors  identified  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
include the nature of sur place activity. I find  that  the  Judge  did  not
engage with the theme of the demonstrations and how this would be  perceived
by the regime. Given that the Appellant is a member of a Marxist party  this
is clearly relevant. Whilst the Judge found that the Appellant was  only  an
intermittent attender of demonstrations he did not define what he  meant  by
this nor what, if any, role the Appellant played at the demonstrations.  Nor
did he explore whether the demonstrations had  attracted  publicity  in  the
United Kingdom or Iran and if so, of what nature.  12.  There  was  also  no
analysis  of  the  risk  of  identification,   including   the   extent   of
surveillance and the regime's capacity to identify  individuals.  There  was
evidence before the Judge in respect of the second of these factors, in  the
form of an Australian country guidance note dated June 2013 which was  drawn
to my attention by Mr Acharya and I find  the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
engage  with  this  evidence  and  making  findings  as  to  the   risk   of
identification of the Appellant in the light of it.

13.   The third category constitutes factors  triggering  inquiry/action  on
return. The Appellant's method of exit from Iran  is  clearly  relevant  but
the Judge failed to make a clear finding at [80] as to whether  or  not  the
Appellant left Iran illegally.

14.   It is clear from 2(a) & (b) of the headnote  that  Iranians  returning
to Iran are screened on arrival and that there is a risk  of  detention  but
there is a  not  a  real  risk  of  persecution  simply  for  having  exited
illegally. What is  of  paramount  importance  is  the  level  of  political
involvement in assessing the risk of persecution.  In this respect,  I  find
that  the  Judge  further  materially  erred  in  his  assessment   of   the
Appellant's involvement in Hekmatist before arriving in the  United  Kingdom
in that I accept Mr Acharya's  submission  that  there  is  a  contradiction
between his finding at [70] that he did not accept the Appellant's  evidence
about his activities in Iran before he left in 2004  and  the  fact  he  was
promptly in touch with members of the party after his arrival in the  United
Kingdom might cause him to infer that he had been active in the party or  at
least a member of it previously and his finding at [81] that  the  Appellant
was not actively involved politically before he left Iran.

15.   For these reasons,  I  find  that  the  Judge's  findings  as  to  the
Appellant's involvement with Hekmatist in Iran  cannot  stand  and  findings
need to be made in this respect and  as  to  the  extent  of  his  political
activities in the  United  Kingdom  with  Hekmatist,  bearing  in  mind  the
detailed guidance set out in BA (Iran) and the background evidence  material
to this consideration,  in  order  to  reach  a  clear  and  fully  reasoned
decision as to the risk to this Appellant on return to Iran.

Notice of Decision

16.   The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted for a  hearing
    de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, on the issues of asylum and article
    3 only, to be heard by a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lamb.

The anonymity direction is maintained.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

3 December 2015
