
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/01375/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London       |Determination Promulgated          |
|On 4 December 2014                 |On 13 January 2015                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     NP
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms J Howarth, Irving & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of the Philippines, appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  of  19
    February 2014 to refuse her application for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of her rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears dismissed  the  appeal
    and the appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the appellant is  suffering  from
    End Stage Renal Disease. She entered the UK lawfully in  December  2008
    and was granted leave to enter as a student until 11 December 2010.  On
    25  November  2010  she  applied  for  leave  to  remain  outside   the
    Immigration Rules which was refused with a limited right of appeal. She
    subsequently submitted an application for voluntary departure which was
    withdrawn and resubmitted.  On  15  January  2014  her  representatives
    submitted an application for leave to remain under Articles 3 and 8  of
    the ECHR and that application was refused on 19 February 2014.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings, which are not challenged, are
    set out in paragraphs 42-51 of his determination. The Judge found  that
    the appellant is suffering from renal impairment and requires  dialysis
    three times a week without which  she  would  be  expected  to  fatally
    relapse within two to three weeks. She has been  on  NHS  funded  renal
    dialysis since May 2009 for part of which she has  not  been  eligible.
    She suffered from serious issues in relation  to  her  kidneys  and  TB
    before she came to the UK but she did not  know  that  she  had  kidney
    disease requiring a transplant or dialysis before March 2009 as she did
    not seek treatment before then, she obtained a job and played sport  in
    the UK. After she  started  working  in  the  UK  her  kidney  function
    deteriorated and she started to have dialysis. She is not eligible  for
    a kidney transplant in the UK because of her  immigration  status.  The
    appellant has a brother and a sister in the Philippines; they each have
    their own families to support.  A  transplant  in  the  Philippines  is
    wholly beyond her or her family's means even if a suitable donor  could
    be found and may in any  event  be  unsuccessful  because  of  previous
    complications.  The cost of anything more than a short period of  renal
    dialysis in the Philippines would be beyond her or her  family's  means
    because without a transplant it would have  to  continue  indefinitely.
    The appellant would die within 2-3 weeks  of  no  longer  having  renal
    dialysis and in  that  period  health  care  could  not  be  organised.
    Insurance cover for renal dialysis in the Philippines would not  extend
    beyond 45 sessions but it could not be organised to  cover  her  before
    she died because 9 months payment has to be made and in  any  event  it
    could not be organised swiftly enough. Assistance  from  government  or
    charitable institutions would not be  forthcoming  sufficiently  and/or
    would  not  be  enough  to  sustain  the  treatment  she  requires.  In
    conclusion the Judge found that if  she  returned  to  the  Philippines
    renal dialysis could not be available to her before three weeks elapsed
    and in  consequence  she  would  die.  Alternatively  if  it  could  be
    organised within that time it could only be as an emergency which would
    not be maintained beyond an emergency period.

 4. The Judge went on to apply the facts found to the law as it stands. The
    Judge applied the decision in the case of GS and EO (Article 3 - health
    cases) India [2012] UKUT 00397 (IAC) and  found  that  the  appellant's
    removal would not breach Article 3 of the ECHR. He considered Article 8
    outside the Immigration  Rules  and  decided  that  the  appellant  has
    developed a private life in the UK and that her removal would interfere
    with that private life. He  took  into  account  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  concluded  that  the
    removal of the appellant was  not  disproportionate  to  her  right  to
    private life.

Error of law

Article 3

 5. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the  Judge
    failed  to  adequately  reason  his  finding   that   the   appellant's
    circumstances are incapable of amounting to the highly exceptional case
    that engages the Article 3 duty [52]. It is contended that it was  open
    to the Judge to consider Article 3 in the light of Lord  Justice  Kay's
    decision to grant permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  against
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in GS and EO on the basis  that  the
    cases of N v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ
    1369, N v UK Application number: 26565/05 and D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423
    should be revisited. Ms Howarth submitted that the Judge did  not  give
    adequate consideration to the decisions in N v UK and D v UK.

 6. I am satisfied that in considering Article 3 the Judge  had  regard  to
    all of the relevant case law. He considered  all  of  the  evidence  in
    relation to the appellant's medical condition and the circumstances she
    would face upon return to the Philippines. The Judge's findings of fact
    are not challenged. The Judge's conclusion at paragraph 52 is a  direct
    application of the decision in  GS  and  EO  where,  having  considered
    Strasbourg and domestic case law, the Tribunal summarised the  relevant
    principles as follows;

         "85 ...
             (1) (a)   Article 3 imposes an obligation upon a state not  to
                   expel a person to a country where there is a  real  risk
                   that he or  she  would  be  subjected  to  ill-treatment
                   contrary to Art 3 (see, e.g. Soering v UK (1989) 11 EHRR
                   439 and Chahal v UK).
                 (b)   That obligation can arise where  the  source  of  the
                   individual's alleged ill-treatment is  not  directly  or
                   indirectly the responsibility of the receiving state but
                   rather  arises  from  a  naturally  occurring   illness,
                   disease or condition where treatment (in particular life-
                   sustaining treatment) is not available in the  receiving
                   state.


             (2) (a)   An alien, subject to  expulsion,  can  in  principle
                   claim no entitlement to remain in a Contracting State in
                   order to continue to benefit  from  medical,  social  or
                   other forms  of  assistance  (including  life-sustaining
                   assistance)  which  would  not  be  available   in   the
                   receiving state.
                 (b)   Nevertheless, in  D  v  UK  and  N  v  UK  the  Court
                   recognised that in "exceptional" or  "very  exceptional"
                   circumstances an infringement of Article 3  could  arise
                   where a  Contracting  State  returns  an  individual  to
                   another state in which they would be  unable  to  obtain
                   medical  treatment  or  care  for  their  condition   in
                   circumstances where the absence  of  that  treatment  or
                   care could result in the individual's death.
                 (c)   The Strasbourg Court's approach has been cautious  in
                   such  cases  and  its  extension  of  Art  3  has   been
                   incremental and limited.


             (3) (a)   In determining  what  amounts  to  "exceptional"  or
                   "very exceptional" circumstances, the focus is upon  the
                   circumstances in which the individual will find  him  or
                   herself in the country to which they are to be returned.
                 (b)    An  "exceptional"  case   does   not   require   the
                   circumstances to be  unique  or  even  circumstances  in
                   which only a few or  not  many  individuals  might  find
                   themselves. The Strasbourg Court's description of a case
                   as "exceptional" is  no  more  than  a  pointer  to  the
                   extreme  or  compassionately  demanding  nature  of  the
                   individual's circumstances in the receiving country.
                 (c)   The mere fact that the individual faces the  prospect
                   of death because  medical  treatment  and  care  is  not
                   available does not, in itself, bring  the  circumstances
                   within the "exceptional" category.
                 (d)   ... The fact, therefore, that the sending  state  may
                   be required to provide medical care  or  treatment  does
                   not,  in  itself,  exclude  the  case  from   being   an
                   "exceptional" one.


             (4) (a)   The decision maker must make a  holistic  assessment
                   of  the  individual's  circumstances  in  the  receiving
                   country.
                 (b)   The threshold is a high one.
                 (c)   No one factor is necessarily crucial or determinative
                   in  the  dispassionate  judicial  assessment  of   those
                   circumstances.
                 (d)   There is no difference in principle  between  a  case
                   where the individual came to the UK knowingly  suffering
                   from  a  medical  condition  and  where  that  was  only
                   discovered (or  arose)  after  arrival.  The  individual
                   cannot invoke any continuing obligation  on  the  UK  to
                   provide that treatment.
                 (e)   It will be for the individual to prove  that  medical
                   treatment and care will not be available to them in  the
                   receiving country. That may arise because it  is  simply
                   not available or, if available  in  theory,  it  is  not
                   accessible in practice because the individual  does  not
                   have the financial resources to pay for  that  treatment
                   or care, or, alternatively, it is as a practical  matter
                   beyond their reach for example because they  would  have
                   to travel a long distance which is prohibited  by  their
                   health or personal circumstances. As Baroness Hale noted
                   in N v SSHD it is  the  practical  availability  of  the
                   treatment rather than its theoretical availability which
                   is important. We emphasise, however, this  is  a  matter
                   which a claimant must establish on the evidence.


             (5) (a)   The touch-stone identified in the case  law  of  the
                   "exceptional" case is the notion identified in Pretty  v
                   UK (2002) 35 EHRR 1 at [65]:
                        "The very essence of the Convention is  respect  for
                        human dignity and human freedom."
                   As Baroness Hale stated in N v SSHD at [68]:
                        "It would appear inhuman  to  send  [an  individual]
                        home to die unless the conditions there will be such
                        that he can do so with dignity."
                   It is this central notion that lies at the heart of  the
                   Court's decision in N v UK and its understanding of  its
                   earlier decision in D v UK. At [40] the Court said that:
                        "In the D case the  very  exceptional  circumstances
                        were that  the  applicant  was  critically  ill  and
                        appeared  to  be  close  to  death,  could  not   be
                        guaranteed  any  nursing  or  medical  care  in  his
                        country of origin and had no family there willing or
                        able to care for him or  provide  him  with  even  a
                        basic level of food, shelter or social support."
                 (b)   In  N's  case,  both  the  House  of  Lords  and  the
                   Strasbourg Court considered D v UK to be the paradigm of
                   a situation of "exceptional" circumstances.
                 (c)   The case law provides a guide as to the extremity  of
                   the individual's circumstances  which  are  required  to
                   engage Art 3.
                 (d)   The  House  of  Lords  "set  the  test"  in  part  by
                   reference  to  whether  the  individual's  illness   had
                   reached a "critical stage" such that it would be inhuman
                   to deprive  him  of  the  care  which  he  is  currently
                   receiving so that he would suffer an early death without
                   care available to "meet that  fate  with  dignity"  (see
                   Baroness Hale at [69] and Lord Hope at [50]). We do  not
                   understand that to limit the "exceptional"  category  to
                   the facts  of  D  v  UK  itself,  in  particular  to  an
                   individual who is  terminally  ill  in  the  sense  that
                   treatment is not available even in the UK to prevent his
                   or her death from the  underlying  illness  or  disease.
                   That is, in our view, made plain by the recognition that
                   there "may, of course, be other exceptional cases,  with
                   other   extreme   factors,   where   the    humanitarian
                   considerations are  equally  compelling"  (per  Baroness
                   Hale at [70]). Likewise,  the  Court  in  N  v  UK  also
                   recognised that  there  maybe  other  "very  exceptional
                   cases where the humanitarian considerations are  equally
                   compelling" (at [43]).
                 (e)   No such case has yet been identified in the case  law
                   either in Strasbourg or the UK. We  recognise,  however,
                   the  potential  for  other   "compelling   humanitarian"
                   circumstances to engage Art 3 of the ECHR.


             (6) (a)   In D v UK it was  the  cumulative  impact  upon  the
                   individual of his circumstances in St  Kitts  that  made
                   D's case "exceptional". In the absence of  medical  care
                   or family or social support he  would  be  left  to  die
                   without  dignity.  That  factor   contrasts   with   the
                   situation  in  N  where,  although  unable   to   access
                   treatment for her HIV condition, N had the prospects  of
                   some  medical  care  (albeit  not  the  life  sustaining
                   treatment she received in the UK) and family support. It
                   could not, as a consequence,  be  said  that  her  death
                   would occur in circumstances of  indignity  such  as  to
                   reach the  high  threshold  for  "inhuman  or  degrading
                   treatment" under Art 3.
                 (b)   Just as it may not be necessary for the individual to
                   be terminally ill and in the end stages of  his  or  her
                   life  regardless  of  medical  treatment,  likewise  the
                   length of time that the individual will survive in their
                   own country without treatment is  not  determinative  of
                   whether the high threshold in Art 3 has been reached. In
                   that respect, we agree with the view of Toulson LJ in BC
                   (India) (at [4]) that  applying  the  current  case  law
                   binding on us "[t]he  certainty  of  death  in  a  short
                   period without treatment" does not in itself  brings  an
                   individual's  circumstances  within  Art   3.   In   our
                   judgment, that is not a determinative factor  identified
                   in the Strasbourg cases or by the House of Lords in  N's
                   case. As Toulson LJ pointed out:
                        "to  try  to  introduce  some   legal   test   which
                        differentiated  between  someone  who  is  currently
                        alive and will be kept well on treatment but who  on
                        a discontinuance of treatment would die  within  two
                        or three weeks, or on the other hand  within  twelve
                        months, would lead to the question: Where would  the
                        cut off be? Would it be at three weeks, or at  three
                        months, or at six months, or at what  figure?  I  do
                        not see that there can  be  a  workable  legal  rule
                        which said that proximity of death  within  X  weeks
                        engages Article 3, but in X plus 1 week does not."
                 (c)   the rapidity of decline will, however, be relevant in
                   assessing all  the  circumstances  of  their  death  and
                   whether, therefore, any indignity  an  individual  faces
                   (whether for a short or longer period of  time)  engages
                   the protection from expulsion provided by Art 3.


             (7) (a)   Although not raised in these appeals, we  anticipate
                   that  there  may  be  circumstances  which  enhance   an
                   individual's claim that the circumstances on return will
                   be "exceptional" and more likely pass the high threshold
                   of Art  3  to  establish  a  real  risk  of  inhuman  or
                   degrading treatment.
                 (b)   Relevant factors might include,  for  example,  where
                   the  non-availability  of  the  treatment  in  the  home
                   country is due to a discriminatory policy of  the  State
                   for example, on  racial,  ethnic  or  other  prohibitive
                   grounds. In such cases,  it  may  be  that  taking  into
                   account all the circumstances Art 3 is  engaged  or,  at
                   least, a breach of Art 14  read  with  Art  8  could  be
                   established (see, East African  Asians  cases  (1973)  3
                   EHRR 76, E Com HR). In  RS  and  others  (Zimbabwe-AIDS)
                   [2010] UKUT 623 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal considered such
                   an issue albeit found that the evidence  fell  short  of
                   demonstrating a real risk of such treatment.
                 (c)    A  further  potential  factor  may  be   where   the
                   individual to be returned is a young child. There may be
                   a potentially greater effect upon that child of enduring
                   the dying process and may as a consequence  elevate  the
                   indignity of those circumstances sufficiently  to  reach
                   the high threshold  under  Art  3.  Likewise,  a  parent
                   forced to witness the dying process of their young child
                   may amount to a level of  suffering  greater  than  that
                   confronted by an adult dying in such  circumstances  and
                   amount to inhuman and degrading  treatment  (see,  CA  v
                   SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1165 per Laws LJ at [26])."

 7. The Tribunal concluded that it must follow N v SSHD and advised  Judges
    of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers as follows;

         "87. ... Unless and until there are developments at this  level  in
         the case law judges of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chambers  must
         proceed on the basis that the rapidity of  decline  caused  by  the
         withdrawal of medical treatment cannot of itself amount to the kind
         of exceptional circumstance that makes removal a breach of  Article
         3."

 8. That is what the Judge  did  in  this  case.  The  Judge  analysed  the
    appellant's circumstances upon return to the Philippines including  the
    availability of treatment and family support and  came  to  a  decision
    which took account of all of the facts and applied  the  relevant  case
    law.

Article 8

 9. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the Judge  did
    not engage with the legal issues including an assessment as to  whether
    the case come within the 'very rare cases' where a claim could  succeed
    under Article 8 (GS and EO paragraph 85(8)-(10)). It is contended  that
    the Judge's conclusion that 'statute had tied [his] hand' [63] and  his
    failure to consider the material case  law  led  to  an  error  in  the
    proportionality assessment.

10. Ms Howarth submitted that the Judge erred in failing to find  that  the
    appellant has established a private life in the UK. However  the  Judge
    did so find at paragraph 55 of the determination.

11. In conducting the proportionality assessment the Judge  considered  the
    proportion of the appellant's stay in  the  UK  which  was  lawful  and
    during which she had properly received NHS care, the  appellant's  role
    in the community in the UK and the fact that the  appellant  will  have
    the emotional support of her family upon return to he Philippines.

12. The Judge took account of the  factors  set  out  in  section  117B  in
    assessing the public interest including the fact that the appellant  is
    not currently financially  independent,  and  that  she  established  a
    private life and received the benefit of treatment in the UK whilst her
    immigration status was precarious. Ms  Howarth  accepted  that  section
    117B applies in this case. She submitted however that the Judge did not
    attach any weight to the appellant's period of lawful residence in  the
    UK. I am satisfied that the Judge did take account  of  the  period  of
    lawful residence at paragraph 56 where the Judge took  account  of  the
    fact that the appellant was lawfully present in the UK  when  she  fell
    ill and that she initially received NHS  treatment  to  which  she  was
    entitled [56].

13. In considering Article 8 the Judge considered all of the  evidence  and
    all of his findings as well as the  relevant  case  law  and  statutory
    provisions in weighing  the  proportionality  of  the  decision.  I  am
    satisfied that the Judge reached a decision open to him on the basis of
    the evidence and the case law.



Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.



Signed      Date: 9 January 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed      Date:  9 January 2015

A Grimes
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

