
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01731/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 8 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 MINXING LIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu instructed by Fadiga & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China who was born on 17  February  1981.
    On 27 August 2014, the appellant claimed asylum.  His partner  and  two
    daughters were dependents in  that  claim.   On  7  January  2015,  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for asylum  and  on  2
    February 2015 made a  decision  to  remove  him  to  China  by  way  of
    directions.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A
    hearing took place before Judge Metzer on 10 June 2015.  The  appellant
    relied exclusively on Article 8 of the ECHR, abandoning  his  claim  to
    asylum, for humanitarian protection and under Article 3 of the ECHR.

 3. The substance of his claim under Article 8 remained that,  if  returned
    to China, he and his partner would face a real risk of ill-treatment as
    a result of China's 'one child' policy.

 4. In a determination promulgated on 25 June 2015, Judge Metzer  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal under Article 8.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the Judge had failed properly to consider  his  claim  under
    Article 8 because he had excluded consideration of the risk  on  return
    to the appellant and his wife as a result of the 'one child' policy.

 6. On 17 July 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Frankish)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 7. On 4 August 2015, the respondent filed  a  rule  24  Notice.   In  that
    notice, the respondent stated that she did not oppose  the  appellant's
    appeal and invited the Tribunal to remake the decision under Article  8
    at a hearing.

 8. The appeal was listed before me on 5 January 2016.

 9. At that hearing, Mr Richards confirmed on behalf of the respondent that
    she accepted that the Judge's decision could not stand  and  should  be
    set aside.

10. Both Mr Richards and Mr Dieu, who represented the appellant, invited me
    to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.
     It was pointed out  to  me  that  the  appellant's  circumstances  had
    changed and it was desirable that the appellant and his partner had  an
    opportunity to give further evidence.  However, Mr Dieu indicated  that
    neither spoke English sufficiently well to give  evidence  without  the
    assistance  of  an  interpreter.   Unfortunately,  no  interpreter  was
    available at the hearing.  Mr Dieu invited me to remit  the  appeal  on
    the same basis that was  accepted  by  Mr  Richards,  namely  that  the
    hearing should be de novo and that  none  of  Judge  Metzer's  findings
    should stand.

Decision

11. I agree that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an  error  of
    law.  That decision is, as a result, set aside.

12. Having regard to paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, I am satisfied that the appropriate disposal of this  appeal
    is to remit it to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  rehearing
    before a Judge other than Judge Metzer.

13. None of Judge Metzer's findings are preserved and the  sole  issue  for
    the First-tier Tribunal will be whether the appellant  has  established
    his claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:


