
IAC-fH-ck-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01061/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2015                  |On 12 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     J S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal with permission by the  Secretary  of  State  against
    the decision of Judge Goldmeier heard over a  number  of  days  between
    January and June last year concerning the appellant, as I will call her
    and the Secretary of State the respondent as they were before the First-
    tier Judge, who appealed the respondent's decision refusing  asylum  as
    long ago as 14 January 2011.

2.   The judge explained why the hearing had to be as lengthy as it was  and
    it was as Mr Paramjorthy has said today the consequence of there  being
    a good deal of oral evidence and  the  determination  is  very  lengthy
    partly because of that and partly because of the fact that there was  a
    good deal of background evidence but in the end the matter narrows to a
    fairly specific point.

3.   The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  essentially  on  the  basis  that  he
    considered that the appellant would be at risk on the  account  of  the
    activities of her husband who had been convicted  in  this  country  of
    money laundering in 2007 and that, the judge concluded, was an activity
    which would place him and as a consequence her at  risk  from  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities as being indicative of separatist-related activities
    and there  was  background  evidence  that  the  judge  relied  on,  in
    particular from Dr Smith in  relation  to  this.   He  also  took  into
    account, as he was bound to, the country guidance in GJ and some of the
    evidence he referred to specifically in relation to that,  for  example
    evidence of Mr Lewis, the country manager responsible  for  Sri  Lankan
    returns at the Foreign & Commonwealth Office.

4.   The judge's decision was challenged by the Secretary of  State  on  the
    basis that as is said in the first main paragraph of  the  grounds  the
    judge had failed to follow  GJ  and  had  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for finding that the appellant would be  at  risk  due  to  her
    connections with  her  husband.   It  was  noted  that  the  judge  had
    identified that it was this point of his  money  laundering  conviction
    which led the  judge  to  consider  that  she  would  be  at  risk  but
    essentially making the point that as this had  taken  place  two  years
    before the end of the civil war the judge had not factored that in  and
    taken that into account and had not taken into account also the finding
    of the Tribunal in the husband's case that that would not place him  at
    risk.

5.   The judge has to be commended I think in many respects for a very  full
    and careful determination in  which  he  has  maintained  an  admirable
    balancing of and assessing the issues against the  background  evidence
    and he notes at paragraph 398 of the determination  the  conclusion  of
    the panel  in  the  husband's  case  that  with  regard  to  the  money
    laundering he would be  able  to  explain  that  he  was  acting  under
    pressure and that meant he would not be at risk.

6.   But the judge then went on to say at paragraph 399 that as a result  of
    the country guidance case of GJ and the evidence of Mr Lewis, to whom I
    have just referred, there was material  available  that  had  not  been
    before the panel in the husband's case.  The  first,  he  said,  was  a
    better understanding of the enquiries which the Sri Lankan  authorities
    will make and the second was because of their fear of a Tamil  militant
    resurgence the focus of concern had shifted from Sri Lanka to the Tamil
    hotspots abroad and the interest of the authorities as noted in  GJ  he
    considered was  likely  to  be  heightened  in  light  of  active  LTTE
    fundraising about which Europol had reported and in the judge's view on
    the evidence her husband could expect an in-depth  investigation  which
    would be likely to give rise to ill-treatment.

7.   He reminded himself  that  of  course  he  was  not  dealing  with  the
    husband's appeal but the wife's but he noted that they would return  as
    a family unit and he had to take regard of that  reality  in  assessing
    the risk that the appellant faced and that his  profile  was  a  factor
    which would have to be taken into account when assessing  the  risk  to
    her.  She would be expected to tell the truth, the authorities would be
    aware that she had known her husband since 2004 and he went on then  to
    anticipate the kind of questions she would be asked  and  the  kind  of
    problems that she would face.

8.   I think that although it would be easy to say, well, in such a  lengthy
    determination everything must have been considered one cannot obviously
    do that but it is the fact in my judgment  that  the  judge  has  given
    consideration to this particular issue properly in the context  of  the
    relevant evidence.  He was alive to the earlier  determination  but  he
    saw reason why that conclusion was one that did not have to be followed
    in the circumstances before him in light  of  other  evidence  and  the
    country guidance case and the fact that that  had  happened  two  years
    before the end of the hostilities was not a matter which put it outside
    the country guidance risk factors and he assessed the risk  factors  to
    the husband and as a consequence to the appellant  and  concluded  that
    she did face a real risk and in my view that  conclusion  was  properly
    open to the judge and as a consequence I find no error of  law  in  the
    decision and that decision is therefore upheld.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds/human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Date 20 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date 20 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
