
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01283/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     QA
                           (ANONYMITY Order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Gill QC, Counsel instructed by Goodfellows
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 29th April 2015, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to
    grant her asylum or humanitarian protection.

 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 25 December  1959.  She
    is an Ahmadi Muslim. Between 1997 and 2014 she visited the UK  lawfully
    on several occasions. On 10 November 2014 she arrived  in  the  UK  and
    claimed asylum on arrival. The  basis  of  her  asylum  claim  is  that
    shortly before coming to the UK she was involved in  discussions  about
    her Ahmadi faith which lead to  allegations  of  blasphemy  being  made
    against her and that she now fears persecution.

 4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim and in  a  decision
    dated 9 January 2015 described  her  as  having  provided  an  invented
    narrative and  having  supplied  fabricated  documents.  The  appellant
    appealed and her appeal was heard by Judge M A Khan ("the judge") on  8
    May 2015.

 5. At the outset of the hearing, the appellant applied for an  adjournment
    on the basis that the respondent's bundle was only served  at  4pm  the
    day before the hearing (despite reminders being sent) and  consequently
    the appellant had not had a fair opportunity to prepare. The respondent
    did not object to the application. The  bundle  included,  inter  alia,
    three verification reports which had not been seen  previously  by  the
    appellant and which  contained  evidence  supporting  the  respondent's
    allegations against the appellant. The appellant submitted to the judge
    that she needed an opportunity to carry out her own  investigation  and
    provide further evidence.

 6. The judge refused the application for an adjournment. At paragraph 8 he
    explained his reasoning as follows: "Having heard both  representatives
    I considered that the documents in the appellant's bundle would  be  in
    the appellant's knowledge  and  the  information  in  the  verification
    report is clearly mentioned in the refusal letter, which  had  been  in
    the appellant's  solicitor's  possession  since  January  2015..."  The
    judge, however, agreed to hear the other case  on  his  list  first  in
    order to give the appellant's representative's  time  to  take  further
    instructions as necessary.  When  the  matter  returned  to  court  the
    appellant renewed her application for an  adjournment,  elaborating  on
    the reasons she had given earlier. The judge recorded at paragraph 9 of
    his decision the  appellant's  argument  that  because  the  respondent
    seriously challenged her  credibility  her  representatives  needed  to
    obtain evidence to rebut the newly furnished evidence. No objection  to
    this was made by the respondent. Nonetheless, the judge,  at  paragraph
    10, reiterated the position he had stated earlier: that there had  been
    sufficient time for the appellant to collect evidence as she had  known
    since January 2015 the nature of the challenge to her  claim.  At  this
    point the appellant's representative refused to take any  further  part
    in the proceedings.

 7. The judge then heard submissions from the respondent.  It  is  apparent
    from his decision that in considering the appeal he has had  regard  to
    the late served evidence including the verification reports. The  judge
    made adverse credibility findings against the appellant, describing her
    evidence as neither credible nor consistent. He dismissed the appeal.

 8. The grounds of appeal submit that refusal to adjourn  the  hearing  was
    unfair and unreasonable. Objection is also made to the judge taking the
    late served evidence into account without the respondent having made an
    application to extend time. The appellant also raises  several  grounds
    of appeal challenging the substance of judge's approach to the appeal.

 9. At the hearing Mr Gill reiterated the arguments made in the grounds. Mr
    Melvin argued that the appellant was not - and has not shown  that  she
    was - prejudiced by the failure to adjourn.  The  refusal  notice  made
    clear the basis of the challenge made to her claim and therefore  there
    had been sufficient time to prepare her evidence.

Discussion

10. Under Rule 4(3)(h) of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014  a  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge has the power to adjourn a hearing. Pursuant to the over-
    riding objective, as set out in Rule 2, the  Tribunal  must  deal  with
    cases fairly and justly.

11. The key consideration is whether the appellant, in consequence  of  her
    adjournment request being refused, was deprived of a fair hearing.  The
    position is set out in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    00418 (IAC) at paragraphs 7 and 8:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment  refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair  hearing?  Any  temptation  to  review  the  conduct  and
         decision of the FtT through the  lens  of  reasonableness  must  be
         firmly resisted, in order to avoid a misdirection  in  law.   In  a
         nutshell, fairness is the supreme criterion.

         The cardinal rule rehearsed above is  expressed  in  uncompromising
         language in the decision of the Court of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan)
         v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ  1284,
         at [13]:

             "First, when considering whether the immigration  Judge  ought
             to  have  granted   an   adjournment,   the   test   was   not
             irrationality.  The test was  not  whether  his  decision  was
             properly  open  to  him  or  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable  or
             perverse. The test and sole test was whether it was unfair"."

12. This is a case in which the respondent made serious adverse credibility
    findings against the appellant but  only  disclosed  several  documents
    supporting those findings the day before the hearing.  As  recorded  in
    the judge's decision, the appellant made clear to the  judge  that  she
    did not feel able to proceed unless she had time to  consider,  respond
    to, and obtain and prepare evidence to  counter,  the  newly  disclosed
    evidence.  The respondent did not raise  any  objections.  The  judge's
    comment  that  the  appellant  already  knew  the  substance   of   the
    allegations against her does not adequately deal with  the  point  that
    until the day before the hearing the appellant did not  know  what  was
    contained in the evidence underlying the allegations.

13. I am unable to discern from the judge's decision that he addressed  the
    question of whether proceeding without an adjournment would deprive the
    appellant of a fair hearing.  Such an assessment is  necessary  in  any
    case where an adjournment is applied for but particularly in an  asylum
    case, such as this, where the highest standards  of  fairness  must  be
    applied. In this appeal, the appellant's  credibility  was  of  central
    significance and the late served evidence  clearly  pertained  to  this
    issue. Proceeding  without  giving  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to
    properly consider and respond to this evidence deprived her of  a  fair
    hearing.  Accordingly, I consider  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    refusing the adjournment application.

14. Having regard to section  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice  Statement  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier and Upper Tribunal, I
    find that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    re-making.

15. At the conclusion of the hearing the appellant applied for costs on the
    basis that the respondent's Rule 24 notice was contrary to the position
    taken at the First-tier Tribunal where the respondent had not  objected
    to an adjournment. Mr Gill's submission was that the  respondent  ought
    not to have opposed the appellant's appeal on this ground and had  they
    not done so significant costs would have been saved.  I have considered
    the appellant's application but am not satisfied  that  the  respondent
    has acted unreasonably or in a way that justifies the making of a costs
    order. Accordingly, no order for costs is made.

NOTICE OF DECISION

 a) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors  of  law  such
    that it is set aside in its entirety and the  appeal  is  to  be  heard
    afresh.

 b) An anonymity Order is made.

 c) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a judge other than Judge M A Khan.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated                                |

