

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/01698/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |      Decision and Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                          |
|On  2nd March 2016 and 21st April 2016    |      On 26th April 2016             |
|                                          |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     Q Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr N Kannangara, instructed by Anglo Chinese Law
Firm Ltd
For the Respondent:  Mr S Kandola (on 2nd March 2016) and
                                   Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer (on 21st  April 2016)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original
   Appellant/parties in this determination identified as QZ. This  direction
   applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this
   direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings





   1. For the reasons given  in  the  attached  decision  I  set  aside  the
      decision of the FtT to be remade by me.

   2. The preserved findings, as confirmed by Mr Kannangara and  Mr  Tarlow,
      are as follows:


   i) The appellant is an impressive witness;
  ii) The  appellant  has  sufficient  faith  to  substantiate  her  claimed
      Christianity;
 iii) The  priest  of  the  church  she  had  attended  had  denigrated  the
      registered churches as a method of spreading propaganda and it was for
      this reason that she had not attended any of the approved churches.
  iv) The appellant's description of how she escaped and the layout  of  the
      venue where the meeting was  held,  and  that  she  kept  running,  is
      consistent with her being able to escape in the manner she described.
   v)  The  priest  of  the  house  church  she  attended  was  subsequently
      imprisoned for 10 years;
  vi) The appellant was distributing leaflets and may not have realised  the
      risk she was running. Her name was put up on the wall
 vii) She attended a house church and continued to do so after she had  been
      detained for three months. She fled from a raid that occurred on  Xmas
      day. She was able to give names  of  the  people  with  whom  she  was
      involved.
viii) Continuing to worship in the house church as she previously  did  will
      not entail her being at serious risk of being persecuted;
  ix) She has no siblings and returning as a mother with two children and  a
      husband, albeit resulting in some difficulties, those difficulties  do
      not reach the threshold such as to amount to persecution or Article  3
      breach;
   x) The two children are too young to have  established  private  life  of
      their own
  xi) Removal of the appellant (with her two children) will not result in  a
      disproportionate interference with her private and/or family life.


   3. I had given leave to both parties to  adduce  such  evidence  as  they
      wished to rely upon in relation to the nature and consequences of QZ's
      name being put up on a wall in her home are and that she had leave  to
      file and serve a witness statement.

   4. At the resumed hearing on 20th April  2016,  QZ  adopted  the  witness
      statement she had filed and served in accordance with directions.  She
      was not cross examined. The respondent did  not  file  and  serve  any
      additional material; the appellant filed and  served  a  small  bundle
      comprising a document from Baidu Wikipedia,  a  document  in  Chinese,
      Country Information and Guidance China: Christians version  2.0  March
      2016 and an undated article from the Telegraph. .

   5. Mr Kannangara very helpfully identified that he would  be  relying  on
      submissions that  the  appellant  falls  within  the  risk  categories
      identified in the country guidance case  of  QH  (Christians  -  risk)
      China CG [2014] UKUT 86 (IAC). Mr Tarlow in contrast relied  upon  the
      Rule 24 response and confirmed that his submissions were that she  was
      not at risk of being persecuted should she choose  to  worship  at  an
      unregistered church - as per the headnote of QH - and that the  arrest
      warrant was a local warrant with no purchase other than locally.

   6. Although in setting aside the decision of the  FtT,  after  discussion
      with Mr Kandola, I had referred to the two identified errors of law in
      the decision of the FtT namely a failure to consider and make findings
      on how the appellant would behave on  return  to  China  in  terms  of
      religious observance as well as the effect of the wall arrest warrant,
      the appellant did not address  the  first  of  these  in  her  witness
      statement. The appellant did not assert  that  she  would  leaflet  or
      otherwise proselytise her faith. Mr Kannangara did not in  submissions
      assert that she would. His submissions were that  this  appellant  was
      not a person who would merely attend a house church. He submitted  the
      context of her attendance had to be considered and this included:
             (i)  that she had been arrested and detained for three months;
             (ii) that she had continued to attend the house  church  after
             her release from detention
             (iii) that the priest of her house church had been  imprisoned
         for 10 years;
             (iv) that she had previously given out leaflets  although  she
             may not have realised the risk she was running;
             (v)  she had fled from a raid that occurred on Xmas day
             (vi) she was the subject of an arrest warrant which  had  been
             put up on a              wall in her home area.
             (vii) neither of her two children  were  registered.  Although
             the recent liberalisation of the hukou system of  registration
             could have permitted her to live elsewhere, to enable her  two
             children to gain access to education, medical  facilities  and
             so on they would have to be registered wherever  she  went  to
             live. That very process of registration would require  her  to
             notify the new authorities of her origins and this would bring
             her to the attention of the new authorities and thus place her
             at serious risk of the warrant being executed.


   7. The headnote of QH reads as follows:


                   (1) In general, the risk of  persecution  for  Christians
                   expressing and living their faith in China is  very  low,
                   indeed statistically virtually  negligible.  The  Chinese
                   constitution specifically protects religious freedom  and
                   the Religious Affairs Regulations 2005 (RRA) set out  the
                   conditions under which Christian churches and leaders may
                   operate within China.
                   (2)  There  has  been  a  rapid  growth  in  numbers   of
                   Christians in China, both in the  three  state-registered
                   churches  and  the  unregistered  or  'house'   churches.
                   Individuals move freely between State-registered churches
                   and  the  unregistered  churches,  according   to   their
                   preferences as to worship.
                   (3) Christians in State-registered churches
                   (i) Worship in State-registered churches is supervised by
                   the  Chinese  government's   State   Administration   for
                   Religious Affairs (SARA) under the RRA.
                   (ii)    The measures of control set out in the  RRA,  and
                   their implementation, whether by the Chinese state or  by
                   non-state  actors,  are  not,  in  general,  sufficiently
                   severe as to amount to persecution, serious harm, or ill-
                   treatment engaging international protection.
                   (iii)    Exceptionally,  certain  dissident  bishops   or
                   prominent individuals who challenge, or are perceived  to
                   challenge, public order and the operation of the RRA  may
                   be at risk of persecution, serious harm, or ill-treatment
                   engaging international  protection,  on  a  fact-specific
                   basis.
                   (4) Christians in unregistered or 'house' churches
                   (i) In general, the evidence is that the many millions of
                   Christians worshipping within unregistered  churches  are
                   able to meet and express their faith as they wish to do.
                   (ii)    The evidence does  not  support  a  finding  that
                   there is a consistent  pattern  of  persecution,  serious
                   harm, or other breach of  fundamental  human  rights  for
                   unregistered churches or their worshippers.
                   (iii)   The evidence is that,  in  general,  any  adverse
                   treatment  of  Christian  communities  by   the   Chinese
                   authorities is confined to closing down church  buildings
                   where planning permission has not been obtained  for  use
                   as  a   church,   and/or   preventing   or   interrupting
                   unauthorised public worship or demonstrations.
                   (iv)    There may be a risk of persecution, serious harm,
                   or ill-treatment engaging  international  protection  for
                   certain individual Christians who choose  to  worship  in
                   unregistered churches and who conduct themselves in  such
                   a way as to attract the local authorities'  attention  to
                   them or their political, social or cultural views.
                   (v) However, unless such individual is the subject of  an
                   arrest warrant, his name is on a black list, or he has  a
                   pending sentence, such risk will be limited to the  local
                   area in which the individual lives and has their hukou.
                   (vi)    The hukou system of  individual  registration  in
                   rural and city areas, historically a  rigid  family-based
                   structure from which derives entitlement to  most  social
                   and other benefits, has been  significantly  relaxed  and
                   many Chinese internal migrants live and  work  in  cities
                   where they do not have an  urban  hukou,  either  without
                   registration or on a temporary residence permit  (see  AX
                   (family planning scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC)
                   and HC & RC (Trafficked  women)  China  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
                   00027).
                   (vii)   In the light  of  the  wide  variation  in  local
                   officials' response to unregistered churches,  individual
                   Christians at risk in their local areas will normally  be
                   able to relocate safely elsewhere in  China.   Given  the
                   scale of internal migration, and  the  vast  geographical
                   and population size of China, the lack of an  appropriate
                   hukou  alone  will   not   render   internal   relocation
                   unreasonable or unduly harsh.

   8. In her evidence to the FtT, which was not  further  questioned  before
      me, she is recorded as saying


                    35. ....The friend she had stayed with after her  escape
                        was not a member of the church but  she  is  a  very
                        good friend and the friend's parents felt sorry  for
                        her so allowed her to  stay.  They  knew  about  the
                        warrant for her arrest but told her not to leave the
                        house....The appellant  said  she  had  not  brought
                        their arrest warrant with  her  when  she  left  the
                        country. She said that she could  try  and  ask  her
                        parents to see if they could find  a  copy  although
                        she said she was rarely in contact with them....
                    .....


                    49. The appellant was asked if she had managed to obtain
                    a copy of the warrant for arrest and she said  that  she
                    had not obtained it and that the police took the  arrest
                    warrant to show her mother and told her that if she, the
                    appellant, didn't go to the  police  station  then  they
                    would make an arrest warrant and make it  public.  Later
                    she heard from her mother that the  arrest  warrant  was
                    not in made public (sic) or across the country and it is
                    only a local announcement on a wall.....


                    50. The appellant was asked if she could move  elsewhere
                    in China with her children and she said yes she could do
                    so. If she returned to China she could move  to  another
                    place and it would not be a risk but there  would  still
                    be a lot of difficulties  because  of  registration  and
                    healthcare. She said the only reason she  could  not  go
                    back to  China  is  because  of  the  difficulties  with
                    healthcare, children and education as well as dentistry.
                    She said she was concerned when she returns to China she
                    needs to  sort  out  hokou  registration  and  sort  out
                    healthcare, childcare etc and sort these things out. She
                    probably would need to contact the government and she is
                    worried that when she does that they will bring out  her
                    previous record.



         9. Unless a person is the subject of an arrest  warrant,  has  his
            name on a black list or has a pending sentence,  risk  will  be
            limited to the local area in which the individual lives and has
            their hukou.  The Hukou system has been relaxed so people  will
            be able to relocate safely.

        10. In so far as the document entitled Baidu  Wikipedia  is  relied
            upon by the appellant I do not know if that is a translation of
            the Chinese language document that was produced or where it has
            come from. I do  not  place  any  weight  upon  that  document.
            Neither the COI report  not  the  Telegraph  report  deal  with
            arrest warrants or warrants on walls in local  areas.  But  the
            COI report does refer to  increased  harassment  of  those  who
            attend unregistered churches ([2.2.4]) and that there may be  a
            risk  of  persecution  for  certain  individuals  who   conduct
            themselves in such a way as to bring themselves to the  adverse
            attention of the authorities  ([2.2.7]).  In  [2.4.1]  the  COI
            refers  to  the  scale  of  internal  migration  and  the  vast
            geographical and population size of China and that the lack  of
            an appropriate Hukou alone would not render internal relocation
            unreasonable or unduly harsh. [3.1.3] states that the  security
            forces are likely to keep a record of people who  are  detained
            at underground church meetings.

        11. Mr Tarlow submitted  that  the  existence  of  a  local  arrest
            warrant would not put the appellant at risk. He submitted  that
            there was no evidence that  she  would,  on  return  to  China,
            conduct herself in a manner such as  would  bring  her  to  the
            adverse attention of the authorities but that in any event  she
            could relocate with her children and continuing practicing  her
            religion in either a registered or unregistered church. He  did
            not address the submission by  Mr  Kannangara  as  regards  the
            registration of the children. Nor  did  he  refer  to  the  COI
            reference to the security forces keeping a record of those  who
            were or had been detained.


  12. The evidence of increased harassment of those who  attend  underground
      churches was not relied upon by Mr Kannangara to distinguish QH.  That
      was wise of him given  the  paucity  of  that  evidence.  Nor  did  Mr
      Kannangara submit that the appellant would leaflet or  behave  in  any
      way that would bring her to the adverse attention of the authorities -
      again a wise decision given the lack of evidence to that  effect  from
      her. The thrust of his submissions was the requirement to register the
      children to enable access to medical  treatment  and  education  would
      bring her to the attention of the authorities which  would  result  in
      her previous detention becoming known which would, together  with  the
      outstanding warrant, albeit placed locally but nevertheless  recorded,
      result in her being at risk of being persecuted.

  13. QH, considering arrest warrants, does not make a  distinction  between
      wall warrants and those personally implemented. The COI refers to  the
      security forces having a record  of  those  detained  -  as  was  this
      appellant. This appellant escaped from a raid and the security  forces
      - albeit possibly only locally - have a record  of  that.  Bearing  in
      mind the standard of proof required, it is  more  than  reasonable  to
      conclude that any enquiry made of her home area would  result  in  the
      disclosure that she had escaped capture and was wanted  and  that  she
      had previously been detained and attended church after her release. It
      is also reasonable to conclude that any such  enquiry  would  be  made
      when she sought to register the children. There was no  submission  to
      the contrary from Mr Tarlow. It is also reasonable  to  conclude  that
      any such enquiry would lead to the information that the priest of  the
      church that had been raided had been imprisoned for 10 years.

  14. Accordingly I am satisfied that if returned to  China,  the  appellant
      will be a real and serious risk of being persecuted in her  home  area
      and that her whereabouts would become known and thus, in line with QH,
      internal relocation is not an option open to her.

  15. Accordingly I allow her appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal and allow the appeal  on  refugee
    and human rights grounds.


                                    Date 22nd April 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/01698/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |        Decision and Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 2nd March 2016                        |        On 2nd March 2016            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     Q Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  QZ.  This
   direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to  comply
   with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings





   1. QZ's legal representative contacted the Tribunal on the morning of the
      hearing and apologised but said that she would be unable to attend and
      would  like  an  adjournment.  QZ  was  present  but  there   was   no
      interpreter.


   2. Although in normal circumstance I would have granted an adjournment on
      the information provided  by  the  representative,  on  this  occasion
      because of the grounds submitted I decided to discuss the matter  with
      Mr Kandola and establish whether it would be possible to conclude that
      there was an error of law such that the decision be set  aside  to  be
      remade. If that had not been possible I would have adjourned.


   3. In the event Mr Kandola very sensibly acknowledged the shortcomings in
      the decision of the FtT. In particular the failure  of  the  judge  to
      consider and reach a decision on whether QZ would behave in  a  manner
      that could bring her to the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities,
      given her previous conduct and the lack of  consideration  as  to  the
      effect of the placing of her name on a wall as wanted person.


   4. Accordingly I am satisfied that there is an error of law such that the
      decision of the FtT judge is set aside to be re-made.


            Directions


   1. The credibility findings and the factual findings of the FtT judge  on
      her claim have not been challenged and thus stand.
   2. The parties have leave to adduce such evidence as they  wish  to  rely
      upon in relation to the nature and consequences of QZ's name being put
      on a wall in her home area, such evidence to be filed  and  served  by
      4pm on 6th April 2016.
   3. QZ has leave to file  and  serve  a  witness  statement  to  stand  as
      evidence in chief, such statement to be filed and served by 4pm on 6th
      April 2016.
   4. The resumed hearing to be listed for half day  before  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Coker on 21st April 2016.
   5. An interpreter in the Mandarin language to  be  booked  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal.
   6. Liberty to apply.

                                    Date 2nd March 2016
                    [pic]
     Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

