
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01904/2015
                                                               AA/01905/2015
                                                               AA/01908/2015
                                                               AA/01909/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2016                  |On 18 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     PK
                                     NT
                                     RT
                                     ET
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C Hulse instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order in order to  protect  the
    anonymity of the appellants who claim asylum and in  the  case  of  the
    second, third and fourth appellants  are  children.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellants.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



 2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first  appellant  is  the
    mother of the remaining three appellants.  They all entered the  United
    Kingdom on 9 September 2014 as visitors.  On 9 December 2014, the first
    appellant  claimed  asylum  with  the  remaining  appellants   as   her
    dependents.  The basis of her claim was that she feared her husband who
    had been violent towards her arising  out  of  the  fact  that  he  had
    entered  into  a  second  marriage  of  which   the   first   appellant
    disapproved.  She feared serious ill-treatment or being killed  if  she
    returned to Pakistan

 3. On 8 January 2015, the Secretary of State refused the first appellant's
    claim for asylum and those of her children as  her  dependents.  On  15
    January 2015 the Secretary of State made  decisions  refusing  to  vary
    each of the appellants' leave to enter the UK.

 4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
    promulgated on 23  July  2015,  Judge  Holder  dismissed  each  of  the
    appellants' appeals.  The appellants sought permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 17 August  2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Lambert) granted the appellants permission to appeal.

 5. The appeals initially came before me on  24  November  2015.   At  that
    hearing, Mr Richards who (then as now)  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State conceded that Judge Holder's decision  could  not  stand  on  the
    basis that she  had  failed  to  consider  recent  background  evidence
    relating to the risk and potential for internal relocation of  a  woman
    in the position of  the  first  appellant.   As  a  consequence,  in  a
    decision dated 26 November 2015 I  set  aside  the  decision  of  Judge
    Holder on the basis that his decision involved the making of  an  error
    of law.

 6. The appeals were relisted for a resumed hearing on  16  February  2016.
    At that hearing, Mr Richards accepted, having consulted the responsible
    person in the asylum team,  that  the  appellants'  appeals  should  be
    allowed on refugee grounds.  In the light of the risk factors preserved
    from Judge Holder's earlier decision, and taking in to account all  the
    relevant evidence, Mr Richards accepted on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State that the first appellant was at risk and the Pakistan authorities
    would not provide the first appellant with a sufficiency of  protection
    and that it was not reasonable to expect  the  appellants  to  relocate
    within Pakistan.  He invited me to allow the appeals on asylum grounds.

 7. In the light of the Secretary of State's concession, which I considered
    to be responsibly and properly made, I remake the decision  in  respect
    of the each of the appellants and I allow  each  of  those  appeals  on
    asylum grounds.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
