
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Appeal Number: AA/01715/2015
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|on  17 December 2015                     |on 14 March 2016                  |


                                   Before
                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MF
                                                                  Respondent

                                  ANONYMITY


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an Anonymity Order.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


Representation

Appellant:    Mr  I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr  O Manley, of Counsel, instructed by Avon and Bristol
             Community Law Centre



                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department is  the  Appellant,  but
    for ease we refer to the parties as they were known in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT").

The Appellant and proceedings

 2. The Appellant is a national of Gambia, a member of the Serehule  tribe;
    born on [ ] 1986, she is aged 19 years.

 3. The Appellant's parents spilt up when she was young. The Appellant  was
    raped in Gambia in 2009, aged 14, as a result of which she  gave  birth
    to her first child, a daughter. The daughter is still  in  Gambia,  and
    has been subjected to FGM, which has resulted in  health  problems  for
    her. In 2011, leaving her daughter behind with her grandmother  (it  is
    not said if this is paternal or maternal), the Appellant went  to  join
    her mother, who now lived in Spain. Her mother had  married  in  Spain;
    obtaining EEA residence rights, and is still living in Girona.

 4. The Appellant's  mother's  husband  did  not  want  her  to  stay.  The
    Appellant  met  a  male  friend  of  her  mother's,  who  had   Spanish
    nationality but was resident in the UK, and was in  Spain  on  holiday.
    The Appellant became pregnant by him, and she travelled to the UK  with
    him on 15 January 2012. Their child, "F", was born on 16 January  2013.
    The couple separated. The Appellant made  an  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card based on the durability  of  the  relationship.  It  was
    refused. The Spanish national refused to support an appeal. None of the
    documentation of that application was relied upon by the parties.

 5. On 16 December 2013, aged 17, the Appellant applied for Asylum,  naming
    her daughter "F" as a dependent. The application asserted that  if  she
    was returned to Spain she would be unable  to  resist  her  mother  who
    would insist that her daughter go to Gambia for FGM.  By  her  decision
    dated 5 January 2015, the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application for Asylum, finding that  sufficient  protection  would  be
    available from the authorities in Spain, and made a decision to  remove
    her to Spain, her previous country of habitual residence.

 6. The Appellant's ensuing appeal to the FtT  succeeded.  The  appeal  was
    allowed on both Asylum and Article 3 and 8 ECHR grounds.


This Appeal

 7. The grant of permission to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  recognises  the
    arguability of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal, the relevant
    parts of which can be summarised as an underrating  of  the  protection
    available in Spain, and the incoherence of granting Asylum on the basis
    of a potential failure of the Appellant to access the same.

 8. It is not disputed before us that  the  daughter  "F"  is  entitled  to
    Spanish citizenship, with all the attendant EEA rights in  the  UK.  We
    noted that no applications have been made by her to obtain a  residence
    card as a Spanish national, or for the Appellant to be  granted  status
    as the carer of her EEA national child.

 9. We further noted that, because of the involvement of  social  services,
    the probability is that, if removal  of  the  daughter  to  Spain  were
    contemplated (and thus far  there  has  been  no  removal  decision  in
    respect of the daughter), it would be open to social services  to  take
    action through the Courts here if they considered that the child  would
    be endangered, so in fact no risk arises.

10. At the hearing before us, in the course of discussions, Mr. Manley  for
    the Appellant indicated that he no longer sought to defend the decision
    in respect of Asylum and Article 3.

11. We find that the determination is infected by some at  least,  although
    not all, of the matters raised by the Secretary of  State.  We  set  it
    aside for the reasons identified above. For the same reasons we replace
    it with a decision dismissing the  Asylum  and  Article  3  grounds  of
    Appeal.

12. The grounds of appeal brought no  challenge  to  the  allowing  of  the
    Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds. Although Mr Richards indicated
    that alternative arguments might have been  made,  he  recognised  that
    they had not in fact been made, so the decision allowing the appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds cannot be affected by this decision.  In  the  event,
    bearing in mind the position of  the  child  and  the  complexities  of
    nationality, the outcome is probably the correct result.

DECISION

13. We allow the Secretary of State's  appeal  brought  on  Article  3  and
    Asylum grounds and set aside the decision in respect of those  grounds.
    We remake the decision and dismiss the Appellant's appeal on Asylum and
    Article 3 grounds.

14. The decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on Article 8  grounds  was
    not challenged and stands.




                                                           Elisabeth Davidge
                                                 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



                                                     Dated: 18 December 2015
