

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/01248/2015
      AA/01249/2015
      AA/01252/2015
      AA/01258/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Promulgated                 |
|On March 15, 2016                    |on 12 April, 2016           |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                    [N P]
                                    [R M]
                                    [M H]
                                    [Y P]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Butterworth, Counsel, instructed by Vasuki
      Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka. The First-named  appellant
       came as a visitor on February 21, 2013. Her visa expired  on  August
       6, 2013 and she applied for asylum on September 13, 2013. The Second-
       named appellant came as a visitor on March  12,  2013  with  a  visa
       valid until August 6, 2013. He claimed asylum on August 5, 2013. The
       third and fourth-named appellants are dependants on his application.

    2. The second and third-named appellants are husband and wife and  they
       are the parents of first and fourth-named appellants as well as  the
       other daughter who gave evidence on their behalf.

    3. The respondent refused under paragraph 336 HC  395  the  first-named
       appellant's  claim  on  January  9,  2015   and   the   second-named
       appellant's claim on January 12, 2015.

    4. The appellants appealed on January 26, 2015  those  decisions  under
       section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    5. Their appeals came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fisher
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on June  1,  2015  and  in  a
       decision promulgated on June 15, 2015 he refused  their  appeals  on
       all grounds.

    6. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on June 30, 2015. Permission
       refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Chambers  on  July  10,
       2015. Permission renewed to the Upper Tribunal on August 3, 2015 and
       on November 30, 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission.

    7. A Rule 24  response  dated  December  30,  2015  was  filed  by  the
       respondent. In short, the respondent  submitted  the  judge  reached
       findings that were open to him.

    8. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives. I agreed that if there was  an  error  in
       law then it would make  sense  to  remit  the  matter  to  be  heard
       alongside the other daughter's ([HP], date of birth [ ] 1990)  which
       was listed for a hearing at North Shields on May [ ], 2016.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and pursuant  to
       Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I
       extend that order in the light of the sensitive  matters  raised  in
       this appeal arising out of the appellant's international  protection
       claim. This order prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly
       (including by the parties) of the identity  of  the  appellant.  Any
       disclosure in breach of this order  may  amount  to  a  contempt  of
       court. This order shall remain in force unless revoked or varied  by
       a Tribunal or Court.

SUBMISSIONS

   10. Mr Butterworth adopted the reasons given  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Finch who found  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  had  erred  by
       concentrating on the second-named appellant's conviction for forgery
       and the delay in claiming asylum. He submitted the Judge had  failed
       to consider the documentary and other evidence linking  the  second-
       named appellant to an MP who had  been  assassinated  and  the  man,
       [DS], whom he feared. Mr Butterworth argued  these  were  errors  of
       law. Whilst accepting the Judge was entitled to  take  into  account
       the appellant's conviction and elements  of  delay  he  should  have
       looked at the documentary evidence when considering his  credibility
       and the risk on return. There was no  evidence  the  Judge  had  had
       regard  to  any  of  the  following  evidence   contained   in   the
       respondent's bundle namely:

        a. D10 (This letter shows he had more than just links.  Judge  does
           not refer to it. The author of the letter refers to the  second-
           named appellant's arrests and the fact he was both her  and  her
           father's bodyguard).
        b. D39 (The Judge does not consider the letter and even f  he  felt
           it was fraudulent he should have addressed it).
        c. D42 (Further evidence of being arrested and the  Judge  gave  no
           reasons for rejecting it).
        d. D43 (Further evidence of wanting to remand him).
        e. D44 (Further evidence on bail).
        f. D26 (Police report made made on October 15, 2012 by him).
        g. D29 (Further report made on May 3,  2012  claiming  house  burnt
           down. He refers to this in his interview).
        h. D32- (Report made on November 20, 2011 and incident referred  to
           in his interview).

   11. The Judge failed to demonstrate  he  had  considered  any  of  these
       documents. In addition, the respondent was in possession of  all  of
       these documents and sent them to National Fraud unit and  they  made
       no finding they were forged. If the respondent could  not  say  they
       were forgeries, then some degree of weight should have been attached
       to them. At no point has the Judge considered them.

   12. There was also evidence of his political evidence  as  evidenced  on
       pages D15 to D24 of the respondent's bundle.  The  Judge  failed  to
       recognise that the second-named appellant was not only connected  to
       a member of parliament  but  he  was  also  politically  active.  By
       failing to address these documents and he erred.

   13. Whilst there were credibility issues for the second-named  appellant
       it was not open to the Judge to find the first-named  appellant  and
       her sister lacking credibility because of his  actions.  The  First-
       named appellant's evidence corroborated his account. It was an error
       in law to simply say  she  fabricated  her  account  without  giving
       reasons. Her evidence should have  been  given  due  weight.  I  say
       simply saying she fabricated is not enough.

   14. As for delay whilst there was a delay  in  claiming  this  does  not
       explain why no weight  should  be  attached  to  the  documents.  Mr
       Butterworth invited me to find there had been an error in law.

   15. Mr Mangion submitted the Judge did consider all of the evidence  and
       he gave a reason for rejecting the evidence. That reason covered all
       of the  documents  as  he  considered  them  in  the  round  and  in
       considering them he  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  he  had
       concealed matters. It was clear that he  had  rejected  the  second-
       named appellant's account in its entirety. The fact he has skills as
       a forger drastically reduced the weight that could  be  attached  to
       the documents that are now relied on. The fact he was  a  member  of
       party did not assist the issue of him being  a  bodyguard  or  being
       present during the assassination. The Judge had regard to section  8
       credibility issues and the fact the documents were not confirmed  as
       forgeries was not a concession they were genuine. The finding  about
       the witness was open to him because the witness had been outside  of
       Sri Lanka at the relevant time. The findings were open to the  Judge
       and there was no material error.

   16. Mr Butterworth responded there was  nothing  in  para  [32]  of  the
       Judge's decision that demonstrated he had engaged with the evidence.
       Whilst the Judge was entitled to find against him he  still  had  to
       give reasons for his decision and address  the  evidence  especially
       when he was considering the documents in the round.   The  fact  the
       second-named appellant was convicted of forgery  did  not  mean  the
       documents submitted were fraudulent.

   17. I reserved my decision.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   18. The thrust of Mr Butterworth's submissions is that in  deciding  the
       credibility of the second-named appellant's claim the  Judge  failed
       to have regard to a plethora of documents that had  been  submitted.
       In his oral submissions Mr Butterworth referred me to documents that
       he submitted the Judge should have addressed and by failing to do so
       he had materially erred.

   19. At paragraph [4] of the decision the Judge referred to the  fact  he
       had considered all of the documentary evidence as well as  the  oral
       evidence from  two  of  the  appellants  along  with  the  witness's
       evidence. The Judge did not set out which  documents  he  considered
       but even if he had done so the issue I would have had to consider is
       whether he had engaged with that evidence.

   20. In considering the second-named appellant's  credibility  the  Judge
       was troubled by two press reports that appeared in the  respondent's
       bundle. These reports suggested that a prison guard with the second-
       named appellant's name had been convicted of forgery. When initially
       challenged about  these  claims  at  the  hearing  the  second-named
       appellant stated the articles were not about him  but  when  further
       challenged  by  the  respondent's  representative  he  admitted  the
       articles were correct.

   21. It was against the background of that  conviction  for  forgery  the
       Judge considered the  documents  that  had  been  submitted  in  his
       appeal. Between paragraphs [6] and [12] of his  decision  the  Judge
       set  out  matters  raised  in  cross-examination  and  a  number  of
       inconsistencies and the second-named appellant's explanation for not
       claiming asylum earlier than he did. I am left in no doubt the Judge
       was aware of the second-named appellant's  claim  and  what  he  was
       claiming.

   22. The Judge also detailed the first-named appellant's evidence and the
       Judge noted that she backed her father's claim. The Judge then noted
       the evidence given by the second-named  appellant's  other  daughter
       and the fact she feared persecution in her own right because of what
       had happened to her father in Sri Lanka. The Judge did not  set  out
       the representative's submissions but indicated they were recorded in
       detail in his record of proceedings.

   23. At paragraph [25] the Judge noted that credibility was the key issue
       in this appeal. The  Judge  engaged  with  the  evidence  about  the
       assassination incident and described in  detail  the  video  he  had
       watched at the commencement of the hearing.  He  noted  the  second-
       named appellant acted as coffin bearer at the MP's funeral and  that
       members of his family sat close behind  the  deceased's  widow.  The
       Judge further noted the background evidence of the person implicated
       in the MP's killing.

   24. Against this background the Judge considered the credibility of  his
       claims and he did this at paragraph  [27]  of  his  decision.  Where
       appropriate he gave the appellant the benefit of the doubt  but  the
       second-named appellant's answer in the screening interview  at  Q4.1
       and the ''lie" at Q70 of his substantive interview and  his  initial
       denial at the hearing were not  matters  the  Judge  felt  could  be
       ignored because the second-named appellant  had  been  convicted  of
       forgery and was now asking the Tribunal to accept  the  authenticity
       of documents, which he produced, that he said supported his account.



   25. Mr Butterworth submits the  Judge  should  have  either  given  more
       weight to the documents submitted or  given  reasons  for  rejecting
       documents that appeared  to  support  his  account.  In  considering
       whether this amounts to a material error it is important not to take
       arguments in isolation but instead to consider the Judge's  approach
       to the overall claim.

   26. The Judge considered whether the  second-named  appellant  had  fled
       whilst on bail but ultimately he rejected this claim for the reasons
       he went on to give from paragraph [28].  If  what  the  second-named
       appellant claimed was true, then the  Judge  found  it  unreasonable
       that he did not claim asylum when he arrived here. He considered his
       explanation that he was awaiting documents but  found  that  he  had
       acted unreasonably and his lack of action was factor he held against
       him. At the beginning of paragraph [32] he set out why he found  the
       second-named appellant to lack credibility and those factors led  to
       him rejecting second-named appellant's claim.

   27. I do not  accept  the  Judge  had  to  set  out  every  document  to
       demonstrate that he had considered all of the evidence. It is  clear
       he engaged in detail with the second-named  appellant's  claims  and
       whilst the documents could have provided credible  support  for  his
       claim the Judge found for the reasons given in paragraph  [32]  that
       he could not  rely  on  that  evidence.  The  Home  Office  had  the
       documents that were submitted  examined  by  her  fraud  department.
       Whilst  there  was  no  negative  finding  there  was  similarly  no
       acknowledgement they were genuine.

   28. The Judge had to assess  credibility  and  key  to  the  appellants'
       claims was what was  said  to  have  happened  to  the  second-named
       appellant. Whilst the other witnesses provided some support for what
       their father claimed the Judge was not satisfied  that  the  second-
       named appellant's evidence was something that could  be  relied  on.
       The Judge's finding on the  authenticity  of  the  documents  was  a
       finding open to him given the second-named appellant's acceptance he
       had been convicted of forgery in the  past.  The  Judge  accepted  a
       connection with the MP but concluded  that  this  evidence  was  put
       forward to to support his claim. The Judge rejected his claim he was
       suspected of murder after he had considered all of the evidence.

   29. His rejection of the first-named appellant's claim  clearly  had  to
       follow the rejection of her father's  claim.  To  have  allowed  her
       claim would have been perverse bearing in mind her claim  was  based
       on what could happen to her due to her father's alleged  activities.
       No detailed separate findings were necessary.

   30. The Judge's findings were open to him and there is no error in law.




DECISION

   31. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a point of law. I have upheld  the
       original decision and dismiss all appeals.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
