
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01405/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 28 July 2015                      |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                              MR ISMAILA DEMBA
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs J Moore, Drummond Miller LLP
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lea dismissing the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds.



 2) The appellant was born on 19 May 1980 and is a citizen of Gambia.   The
    appellant came to the UK as a visitor in March 2004 to visit  his  then
    girlfriend, whom he had met in Gambia.  While he was here he  heard  of
    his father's death.  His father was killed because of an accusation  of
    witchcraft made against the family.  The appellant feared to return  to
    Gambia and became an overstayer.

 3) According to the appellant his  mother's  family  were  reputed  to  be
    witches and the suspicion of witchcraft fell upon  the  appellant  from
    birth.  When the appellant was 6 or 7 years old he and his brother were
    circumcised with other boys from the village.  This  took  place  in  a
    forest nearby.  A boy who was lying near the  appellant  died  and  the
    spiritual leader of the  village  accused  the  appellant's  family  of
    causing this through witchcraft.  As a result of this the appellant was
    beaten in front of the village by the spiritual  leader.   Subsequently
    an old lady who lived next door to the appellant's family died and  the
    appellant's family were accused of causing this  also.   The  appellant
    was arrested by the police and beaten in detention.  He has scars as  a
    result.  The spiritual leader of the village gave the appellant a  dark
    mixture of herbs, leaves and roots in water to  drink.   The  appellant
    reacted badly to this and this was considered a  sign  that  he  was  a
    witch.  The appellant was constantly harassed when he  left  the  house
    because he was suspected of involvement in witchcraft.  The reason  the
    appellant was mistreated by  the  police  after  he  was  arrested  was
    because the President of the country is against witchcraft.

 4) When the appellant was in the UK his father was arrested and beaten  so
    badly in custody that he died following his release.  According to  the
    appellant, since  that  time  his  mother,  brother  and  sisters  have
    disappeared and he does not know where they are.

 5) The credibility of the appellant's claims  were  contested  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The judge accepted that the  appellant's  account
    was credible in respect of the appellant's family  being  suspected  of
    witchcraft, the influence of the spiritual leader in  the  village  and
    the beatings that the appellant received from the spiritual leader  and
    from the police.  The  appellant's  account  was  consistent  with  the
    background information.  In addition, the appellant's  scars  were  the
    subject of a medical report which stated that the scars were consistent
    with the history of assaults with various types  of  instrument.    The
    judge took into account the numerous scars and the lack of other causes
    suggested.

 6) Before the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  argued  for  the
    respondent that there was a sufficiency of protection  in  Gambia.   It
    was argued for the appellant that there would be  no  effective  police
    protection.  The judge had regard to background information  suggesting
    that there was an avenue for complaints against  the  police  and  that
    there had been  some  disciplinary  action  against  the  police.   The
    appellant did not pursue any of these avenues of complaint.  Given  the
    attitude of the President, however, the judge acknowledged  that  there
    might be difficulties with this.

 7) The judge went on to consider the possibility of  internal  relocation.
    According to the appellant Gambia was a small country "where  everybody
    knew each other".  The judge noted that the population  of  Gambia  was
    estimated to be 1,797,860 as at July 2011 and the capital of Banjul had
    an estimated population of around 50,000.  The judge did  not  consider
    it plausible that everybody would know each other.  It was  argued  for
    the appellant that it would be very difficult  to  relocate  internally
    according to the country information but the judge was not referred  to
    any particular evidence showing this.  The judge was not satisfied that
    it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for the appellant to  relocate
    within Gambia.  He was a young and healthy man who had managed to leave
    Gambia on his own passport, relocate to the UK  and  stay  here  for  8
    years.  The judge found that internal relocation would be a  reasonable
    and viable alternative to seeking international protection.

 8) In the application for permission to appeal  it  was  argued  that  the
    judge had  erred  in  law  in  considering  internal  relocation.   The
    appellant  had  suffered  persecution  at  the  hands  of  the   State.
    According to the Michigan Guidelines on Internal Protection Alternative
    there should be  a  strong  presumption  against  finding  an  internal
    protection alternative where the agents of persecution  were,  or  were
    sponsored by, the national government.   There  was  no  basis  in  the
    judge's decision to  explain  why  this  strong  presumption  had  been
    rebutted or what factors suggested that the officers of the state  were
    rogue state agents.  The appellant's father was arrested and beaten  in
    detention with such severity he later died.  The  persecution  in  this
    case emanated from the state  and  the  state's  attitude  towards  the
    appellant's father precluded the conclusion that  the  persecution  the
    appellant experienced was either committed by rogue officers or  was  a
    one-off event.  Reference was also made to the size of  Gambia  and  to
    the decision of the House of Lords in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5.

 9) The judge's negative assessment of proportionality under Article 8  was
    also challenged in the grounds of appeal.

10) Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  the  judge  made
    arguable errors  of  law  in  her  reasoning  in  respect  of  internal
    relocation.

Submissions

11) In her submission at the hearing before me, Mrs Moore pointed out  that
    the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  accepted  the  appellant's
    evidence as credible.  The appellant had been beaten  and  tortured  by
    the police.  The question before the Upper Tribunal related to internal
    relocation only, which the judge had addressed at paragraphs 42 and  43
    of the determination.  Mrs Moore submitted that  the  judge  failed  to
    take into account that the persecution of  the  appellant  was  by  the
    state, although she accepted the claim the appellant had been  tortured
    by the police and that the appellant's father had died as a  result  of
    mistreatment  in  custody.   The  judge  also   referred   to   country
    information showing that witchcraft is a live issue in Gambia and  that
    the President, who rules in a despotic fashion, is  personally  against
    witchcraft.  The judge did not take into account that it was the  state
    who were carrying out the persecution.  The President had made  this  a
    personal issue.  Police officers had been involved.  It was an error of
    law to ignore these factors.   The  decision  in  respect  of  internal
    relocation required to be re-made.

12) Mrs Moore continued that the judge had  also  looked  at  the  size  of
    Gambia, which was a small country.  The judge formed the view that  the
    population was big enough for internal relocation  to  be  viable.   In
    fact Gambia was the smallest country on mainland Africa and  was  about
    the same size as Northern Ireland in land mass and population.

13) Mrs Moore indicated she was not pursuing the issue under Article 8  but
    that there were errors of law in relation to  internal  relocation,  in
    respect of which the decision  should  be  re-made.   She  pointed  out
    further that there had been no cross-appeal and the credibility of  the
    findings made by the judge should stand.

14) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien confirmed there was no cross-appeal but
    referred to a rule 24 notice dated 19 June  2015.   Unfortunately  this
    rule 24 notice had  not  reached  the  appeal  file.   Mrs  Moore  had,
    however, received a copy  of  the  notice,  which  contended  that  the
    internal relocation finding was correct and paragraph  41  showed  that
    the actions of  the  police  were  in  effect  carried  out  by  "rogue
    policemen".  Mrs  O'Brien  submitted  that  the  appellant's  case  was
    clearly  within  the  spectrum  for  a  finding  of   viable   internal
    relocation.   The  appellant  was  not  in  fear  of  state   sponsored
    persecution notwithstanding the action in 2009 by the President against
    witchcraft.   The  appellant's  problems  pre-dated   this   and   were
    restricted to a certain locality.

15) Having heard the parties on the question of whether the judge erred  in
    law in her reasoning in respect of  internal  relocation,  I  indicated
    that I was not satisfied that the reasons  given  were  adequate.   The
    country information showed that the authorities  in  Gambia  have  used
    witchcraft to persecute persons.  Those might be political opponents of
    the President but other civilians, not involved in politics, might also
    be caught up in this.  In addition, it was  clear  that  Gambia  was  a
    small country, which raised an issue about the  viability  of  internal
    relocation.  I informed the parties that the decision would have to  be
    re-made on the issue of internal  relocation  and  I  invited  them  to
    address me on this.

16) In response Mrs Moore put before me a schedule of relevant passages  in
    the country information, referring particularly to the 2009 round-up of
    supposed witches instigated by the President.

17) For the respondent Mrs O'Brien referred to the use of witchcraft  as  a
    tool of control by the state.  She submitted, however,  that  the  time
    delay was significant in relation to this particular  individual.   The
    round-ups of suspected witches were  at  their  height  in  2009.   The
    appellant could go somewhere else in Gambia.  This was  a  question  of
    balancing risk.

18) In response Mrs Moore referred to the finding that  not  only  had  the
    appellant  been  beaten  in  police  custody  but  more  recently   the
    appellant's father had died as a result of having been beaten in police
    custody.  The President had not changed and he had a personal  interest
    in witchcraft.  If the appellant returned to a different town he  would
    be remembered.  Both the appellant and his father had been  accused  of
    witchcraft.

Discussion

19) In this appeal it has been accepted that the appellant was arrested and
    severely beaten by  the  police  in  custody  because  of  his  alleged
    involvement in witchcraft.  This was before he came to the UK  in  2004
    and, without more might now be considered an event somewhat  remote  in
    time.  Other factors have arisen since then.   The first is  the  death
    of the appellant's father following his mistreatment in  custody  after
    he was arrested for alleged involvement in witchcraft.  In addition  to
    this there is the more recent  involvement  of  the  President  in  the
    persecution of supposed witches.

20) In this regard the main activity by the President took  place  in  2009
    when more than 1000 villagers from a particular district were taken  to
    secret detention centres by  "witch  hunters"  accompanied  by  Gambian
    police and soldiers.  It was said that  they  were  required  to  drink
    hallucinogenic potions as an act of  exorcism.   It  was  indicated  by
    Amnesty International that the President believed that one of his aunts
    had supposedly died from witchcraft.

21) Mrs O'Brien referred to the events of 2009 as having taken  place  some
    time ago.  More recent country information indicates that witchcraft is
    still an issue leading to persecution in Gambia.  The appellant  relied
    among his evidence on a Daily Telegraph Report of 25 November  2015  on
    witchcraft in Gambia.  In this article the President, Yahya Jammeh,  is
    described as a "modern-day version  of  Papa  Doc  Duvalier,  the  late
    voodoo-practising dictator  of  Haiti".   It  was  suggested  that  the
    President had a "previous track  record  of  blending  statecraft  with
    witchcraft."  Reference was made to the 2009 round up of more than 1000
    supposed "sorcerers".

22) This article  refers  to  the  President's  approach  towards  supposed
    witchcraft but gives no specific instance following the 2009  round-up.
    The  other   country   information   before   me,   including   Amnesty
    International reports refers to the abuse of  human  rights  in  Gambia
    where there are enforced disappearances,  extra-judicial  killings  and
    torture.  I was referred by Mrs Moore to  a  Freedom  House  report  of
    January 2012 in which it was  said  that  between  2007  and  2009  the
    President  claimed  that  he  could  personally  cure  HIV/AIDS   using
    traditional herbs.  He also threatened decapitation of homosexuals  and
    warned against causing instability through human rights activism.

23) Although there is no specific evidence  of  action  instigated  by  the
    President since 2009  against  supposed  witches,  the  same  President
    remains in power and the police force which  acts  on  his  behalf  is,
    according  to  the  country  information,  able  to  act  largely  with
    impunity.  Given the size of Gambia I think it is difficult to  suppose
    that were the appellant to relocate his identity and family  background
    would not be discovered.  Questions  would  be  asked  about  where  he
    originated from and in a small country it would  not  be  difficult  to
    find information about his past.  Were the persecution of the appellant
    to recommence, not only would he not be protected by the police but, on
    the basis of his own previous experience  and  the  experience  of  his
    father, it is reasonably likely that the police  would  participate  in
    this persecution.  For these reasons I am not satisfied that there is a
    viable alternative of internal  relocation  for  this  appellant.   The
    decision should be re-made and allowed on asylum grounds.   Given  that
    the  persecution  feared  by  the  appellant  is  on  the  grounds   of
    traditional religious belief and practice, it falls within the  concept
    of persecution by reason of religion in the Refugee Convention.

24) In conclusion, I am satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    did not give adequate reasons for  finding  that  there  was  a  viable
    internal relocation alternative for this appellant.  In particular  she
    did not take sufficiently into account  that  the  appellant  had  been
    persecuted, as was his father, by the police, who  are  agents  of  the
    state.  Given the country information regarding the  behaviour  of  the
    police in Gambia and their lack of accountability, it is not sufficient
    to say that these were rogue police officers or that the persecution of
    both the appellant and his father were one-off events.  The avenues  of
    complaint referred to by the judge in  her  determination  are  largely
    theoretical, given the climate of  impunity  within  which  the  police
    operate.  In addition, the judge failed to explain why in a country  as
    small as Gambia there would not  be  a  reasonable  likelihood  of  the
    appellant's identity and whereabouts being discovered.   Having  regard
    to this error of law the decision of the judge is set aside so  far  as
    it relates to internal relocation and re-made  on  the  basis  set  out
    above.

Conclusions

25) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

26) I set aside the decision.

27) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

28) The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  for  anonymity.   No
    application for such an order has been made before me and having regard
    to the circumstances I do not consider that such an order is necessary.



Fee Award:  Note: This is not part of the determination

As no fee has been paid or is payable no fee award is made.


Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
