
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/01391/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |         Decision and Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                            |
|On 15th June 2017 and                 |         On 01st October 2018          |
|14th August 2018                      |                                       |
|                                      |                                       |


                                                          Before


                                 UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                                          Between


                                                              JM
                                   (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                                             And


               SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


         Representation:


         For the Appellant:     Mr J Kirk, instructed by Elder Rahimi
         solicitors on 15th                 June 2018 and Mr A W Khan,
         Fountain solicitors on 14th August 2018


         For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh on 15th June 2017 and Ms H Aboni
         on 14th August 2018, Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


         Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify the appellant in this determination  identified
         as JM. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings






        1. Following a hearing on 15th June 2017 I found an error of law in
           the decision of the First-tier Tribunal decision dismissing the
           appellant's international protection claim. My decision was
           promulgated on 26th July 2018 as follows:


                   1.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Miles  dismissed   JM's
                      protection claim appeal on asylum  and  human  rights
                      grounds in a decision promulgated on 9 November 2016.
                      The First-tier Tribunal Judge found JM credible  and,
                      in paragraphs 10.14 - 10.17 of his decision sets  out
                      in summary his findings on the  factual  elements  of
                      her claim relied upon, namely:
                    . Her parents were killed in November  2008  by  people
                      who wanted to take their land for the exploitation of
                      oil;
                    . She was lured into working for T who  raped  her  and
                      forced  her  into  prostitution  in  Nigeria   before
                      trafficking her to the UK for the same purpose;
                    . Although she had stopped working as a  prostitute  in
                      the UK when arrested she was a person  trafficked  to
                      the UK from Nigeria for sexual purposes;
                    . She is a single woman without children
                    . She has been diagnosed  with  HIV  but  there  is  no
                      challenge to the respondent's evidence that  relevant
                      treatment for her is available in Nigeria;
                    . She was working illegally in the UK at  the  time  of
                      her arrest;
                    . She would not have a supportive family on her  return
                      to Nigeria;
                    . She has little educational or vocational skills;
                    . There was no evidence or mention made of  any  mental
                      health difficulties;
                    . Her conduct in using false documents demonstrates  an
                      acquisition of skill and experiences which  make  her
                      better equipped to have access  to  a  livelihood  on
                      return to Nigeria.


                   2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge assessed the risk to JM
                      if returned to Nigeria. He set out the headnote of HD
                      (Trafficked  women)  Nigeria  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00454
                      (IAC). The judge concluded that she would not  be  at
                      risk of being persecuted if  removed  to  Nigeria  or
                      that there would be a risk of a breach of Articles 2,
                      3 or 8 of the ECHR.


                   3. The applicant sought permission to appeal, permission
                      being granted by the Upper Tribunal, on  the  grounds
                      that it was arguable the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
                      failed to take into account all material matters when
                      assessing risk on return.


                   4. The grounds relied upon are:


                   i)  Having accepted the appellant was a lone female  who
                      has previously been raped and trafficked and would be
                      returning to Nigeria without a supportive family, the
                      judge  has   erred   in   his   assessment   of   her
                      vulnerability and risk of re-trafficking.
                  ii) The judge failed  to  make  findings  required  under
                      paragraph 276ADE whether there would or would not  be
                      very significant obstacles to her return to her  home
                      country  in  the  light  of  having  been  previously
                      trafficked to the  UK  for  the  purposes  of  sexual
                      exploitation; the judge failed  to  consider  whether
                      there were exceptional and compelling circumstances.
                 iii) The judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  why  the
                      appellant does not satisfy  the  Refugee  Convention;
                      the judge made contradictory findings having held she
                      had little educational or vocational skills but  then
                      stating that she had acquired skills and  experiences
                      that made her better equipped to access a livelihood.


                   5. In his judgment, the First-tier Tribunal judge states
                      that in his view there are an


                      "endless number of potential victims  of  trafficking
                      and traffickers will have an easier task in targeting
                      a woman with  no  knowledge  of  trafficking  or  its
                      consequences rather than the person who has  suffered
                      as a result  and  is  therefore  well  aware  of  the
                      tactics  used  to  entice   individuals   into   this
                      situation".


                      In reaching this conclusion the judge has  failed  to
                      consider the appellant's individual claim and appears
                      to have ignored the country guidance. If what he says
                      is correct (and there is no evidence to suggest  that
                      what he says is as a general  rule  true),  it  would
                      result in any woman who  has  been  trafficked  being
                      able to return in safety to Nigeria. He refers to  it
                      being speculative that the original traffickers would
                      locate a returned victim. Yet  the  country  guidance
                      makes clear that such a scenario is indeed  unlikely;
                      it is not clear why he makes this finding. The  issue
                      is whether an individual is at risk  because  of  the
                      matters set out in the head note and amplified in the
                      judgment of HD.


                   6. The judge acknowledges the appellant has no or little
                      educational or vocational skills yet also finds  that
                      she has acquired skills and  experiences.  He  relies
                      upon her ability to access the NHS in a false name to
                      make a finding that she has acquired  resourcefulness
                      and determination and in control of her own life.  He
                      refers to  her  ability  to  work  "despite  her  HIV
                      status". It is unclear on what basis he considers her
                      HIV status to be relevant to her ability to work.  He
                      fails to take account of the limitations of  what  is
                      offered by NAPTIP and the relevance of that for  this
                      appellant as a victim of trafficking.


                   7. The judge has  failed  to  engage  with  the  Country
                      Guidance other than to set it out  in  the  decision.
                      The starting  point  is  that  she  is  a  victim  of
                      trafficking. The analysis of whether she is  at  risk
                      should flow from that taking account of  all  factors
                      including the extent to which she has  been  able  to
                      access the NHS, was able to leave the person who  was
                      holding her in the UK and is able to work in  the  UK
                      but in the context of what her situation will  likely
                      be in Nigeria.


                   8. The judge failed  to  engage  with  paragraph  276ADE
                      Immigration Rules and failed to make  any  adequately
                      reasoned findings.


                   9. Accordingly the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred  in
                      law in reaching his decision  and  I  set  aside  the
                      decision to be remade. The findings of fact,  as  set
                      out above, are retained.


                       Conclusion


                      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
                      did involve the making of an error on a point of law.


                      I set aside the decision, the findings  of  fact  set
                      out in paragraph 1 are  retained.




                 Directions


                   1. The resumed hearing of this appeal will be listed  on
                      the first available date after 21days.


                   2. Both parties  have  leave  to  file  such  background
                      evidence as they intend to rely upon,  such  evidence
                      to be filed no later than 7 days prior to the resumed
                      hearing.


                   3. If the  appellant  intends  to  rely  upon  paragraph
                      276ADE and, in particular, that there would  be  very
                      significant obstacles to her reintegration in Nigeria
                      and/or  that  there  are  exceptional  or  compelling
                      circumstance which prevent her return there,  she  is
                      to file and serve a skeleton argument on  that  point
                      no later than 7  days  prior  to  the  hearing;  such
                      skeleton to deal with the issue of why  such  matters
                      are not covered in her protection claim appeal.


         2. For some reason the resumed hearing was not  listed  as  I  had
            directed. It came before UTJ Bruce, following the making  of  a
            transfer order, on 13th July 2018. She  adjourned  the  hearing
            because of a new point made on behalf of the respondent  namely
            that the handing down of the Court of  Appeal  judgment  in  MS
            (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594 raised issues as to  the  weight
            to be given to and the relevance  of  the  Competent  Authority
            ("CA")  decision  that  the  appellant  was  NOT  a  victim  of
            trafficking. The respondent submitted that  he  should  not  be
            constrained  from  raising  this  as  a  new  point  given  the
            clarification in the law and invited the Upper Tribunal to  re-
            visit the error of law decision and thereafter remit the appeal
            to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing in accordance with MS
            (Pakistan). UTJ Bruce gave oral  directions  that  the  parties
            file and serve skeleton arguments and  for  the  appeal  to  be
            relisted before me.


         3. On 3rd August 2018, I made the following directions:


                      On 13thJuly 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce  directed
                      both parties to file  and  serve  skeleton  arguments
                      dealing with procedural issues arising from the  late
                      submission of a new point of argument relating to  MS
                      (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.


                      The respondent has filed and served, in the form of a
                      letter dated 26th  July  2018,  submissions  for  the
                      Error of law decision to be re-opened. This  will  be
                      considered at the hearing on 14th August 2018.


                      I  have  considered  that  letter  and   the   matter
                      generally. I note Article  14.5  of  the  Council  of
                      Europe Convention against Trafficking in Human Beings
                      states that:


                           "Having regard to the obligations of Parties  to
                           which Article 40 of the Convention  refers,  each
                           Party shall ensure  that  granting  of  a  permit
                           according to  this  provision  shall  be  without
                           prejudice to the right to seek and enjoy asylum".


                       Article 40 states that:


                           "...
                           (4)  Nothing in this Convention shall affect the
                           rights,  obligations  and   responsibilities   of
                           States and individuals under  international  law,
                           including  international  humanitarian  law   and
                           international   human   rights   law   and,    in
                           particular, where applicable, the 1951 Convention
                           and the 1967 Protocol relating to the  Status  of
                           Refugees and the principle of  non-refoulment  as
                           contained therein".


                      Paragraph  (10)  of   the   preamble   to   Directive
                      2011/36/EU on preventing and combating trafficking in
                      human  beings  and  protecting   its   victims,   and
                      replacing  Council  Framework  Decision  2002/629/JHA
                      states that:


                           "This Directive  is  without  prejudice  to  the
                           principle of non-refoulement in  accordance  with
                           the 1951 Convention relating  to  the  Status  of
                           Refugees   (Geneva   Convention),   and   is   in
                           accordance with Article 4 and  Article  19(2)  of
                           the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
                           Union".




                      I direct


                      1.   The parties do provide the Upper  Tribunal  with
                      further  written  submissions  in  relation  to   the
                      extracts  from  the  Council  of  Europe   Convention
                      against Trafficking in Human Beings and the EU  Anti-
                      trafficking  Directive  referred  to  above  and  its
                      potential impact on the decision in MS (Pakistan).


                      2.   The parties  do  also  provide  further  written
                      submissions on the manner in which the Upper Tribunal
                      is bound by MS (Pakistan).


                      3.   These written submissions are to  be  filed  and
                      served no later than 4pm  on  10th  August  2018  and
                      marked for the  attention  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
                      Coker.


                      4.   The parties are granted  permission  to  up-date
                      the  Upper  Tribunal  in  relation  to  any  relevant
                      factual developments  up  until  the  date  of  their
                      written submissions.




         4. Both parties complied with both sets of directions.


            Appeal rights


         5. An issue that arose at the hearing before  me  on  14th  August
            2018 concerned the  transitional  provisions  relating  to  the
            implementation of the new appeal procedures in the  Immigration
            Act 2014. On 22nd January 2014, the appellant had  been  served
            with form IS151A informing her that she was an illegal  entrant
            and liable to detention. On 10th July 2014, the respondent took
            a decision to remove the appellant, stating in  the  notice  of
            decision that she had refused the appellant's asylum and  human
            rights claim for the  reasons  in  the  attached  letter.  That
            Notice of Decision also notified the appellant  of  her  appeal
            rights under s82(1) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
            2002 and the grounds upon which she could appeal. That decision
            was not served until 17th January 2015. The letter referred  to
            in the Notice of Decision is  dated  15th  January  2015.  That
            letter states that she must appeal by the date on the  enclosed
            Notice (29th January 2015). It also states that if  she  wished
            to appeal she should do so within 28 days of her departure from
            the UK. Plainly, both those statements cannot be  correct;  the
            latter statement seems to refer to the rights  of  appeal  that
            apply where a protection claim has been certified under  s94(1)
            Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - which  this  has
            not.


         6. The Immigration Act 2014 significantly amended appeal rights  -
            in particular an appeal does not lie against a removal decision
            but against a refusal of a claim for international  protection.
            The  decision  which  has   been   treated   throughout   these
            proceedings  as  the  appealable  decision  is  the  Notice  of
            Decision to remove. Since October 2014, removal  decisions  are
            not appealable decisions. The combination of  the  reasons  for
            refusal of the  claim  for  international  protection  and  the
            decision to remove do not comply with the Notices  Regulations.
            Neither party at any stage has raised a jurisdictional query. I
            am satisfied that although no specific waiver of the failure to
            serve a valid Notice of decision has been given, the  appellant
            has in fact waived that  requirement  by  her  pursuit  of  the
            appeal; her appeal is an appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her
            international protection claim and human rights claim.

            Re-opening of the Error of Law decision.

         7. The submission that the Error of Law  decision  should  be  re-
            opened is predicated upon the findings by the  judge  that  the
            appellant had been trafficked to the UK, such a  finding  being
            erroneous given the dicta in MS (Pakistan) that the finding  of
            the CA can only be dislodged if it is  perverse  or  irrational
            (See [69] MS (Pakistan)).

         8. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the appellant had been
            trafficked, reaching his decision  upon  consideration  of  the
            evidence before him. He did not conclude that because there had
            been a negative trafficking decision by the CA that she had not
            been trafficked; he considered the evidence that was before him
            and reached his findings on the evidence before  him,  applying
            the lower standard of proof. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
            finding that the appellant had been trafficked does not subvert
            the CA finding. It is a  finding  reached  in  the  context  of
            different proceedings for a different purpose - the purpose  of
            establishing whether the appellant is or  is  not  entitled  to
            international protection -  as  can  be  seen  from  the  other
            findings, or lack of findings, made by him and set out  in  [1]
            above. In terms of the error of law, the error is  to  fail  to
            analyse whether her vulnerability would render her at  risk  of
            being trafficked irrespective, (given MS (Pakistan)) of whether
            she had  been  previously  trafficked  or  whether,  given  her
            particular vulnerability, she is at  risk  of  Article  3  harm
            together with the contradictory findings made by him  in  terms
            of return to Nigeria.  I  do  not  re-open  the  Error  of  Law
            decision  save  to  conclude  that  the   starting   point   of
            consideration of her claim is not  that  she  is  a  victim  of
            trafficking  but  that  she   is   an   individual   with   the
            characteristics that have been  identified  by  the  First-tier
            Tribunal judge and that these must be considered,  taking  into
            account the finding of the CA that she  was  not  a  victim  of
            trafficking.


            Trafficking


         9. The  essence  of  the  respondent's  submissions  is  that  the
            Tribunal is bound by MS (Pakistan) which he submits means  that
            Tribunal judges are only entitled to reach a different view  to
            that of the Competent Authority ("CA")  where  the  trafficking
            decision can be demonstrated to be perverse  or  irrational  or
            one which was not open to the authority. This, it is  submitted
            by the respondent,  involves  a  two-stage  approach:  first  a
            decision that the decision taken by  the  CA  was  perverse  or
            irrational or one which was not open to the CA - and only if it
            is, can the  appellant  invite  the  Tribunal  to  re-determine
            relevant facts and take account of subsequent evidence.


        10. The appellant submits[1] that the decision of the CA is  simply
            a factor that is taken into account in the  overall  assessment
            of the appellant's  claim  for  international  protection;  the
            decision taken by the CA is  taken  on  the  basis  of  written
            evidence without the benefit of hearing from the appellant  and
            her oral evidence; that the decision is taken on the balance of
            probabilities and not on the lower standard as in a  protection
            claim.


        11.  MS  (Pakistan)  is  an  appeal  against  a  UT   decision   MS
            (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers - Art. 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016]
            UKUT 226 (IAC). As stated by Flaux LJ in [2]


                           The appeal raises an issue of principle as to the
                           jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal  and  the
                           Upper  Tribunal  on   a   statutory   appeal...to
                           undertake  an  indirect  judicial  review  of   a
                           negative  trafficking  decision   made   by   the
                           Secretary of State in that individual's case.  In
                           that context, the appeal concerns the  scope  and
                           effect of the previous decision of this Court  in
                           AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
                           Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1469.


        12. A trafficking decision is not an immigration decision. There is
            no statutory appeal against a decision of the CA that a  person
            has or has not been trafficked - the only remedy  for  a  party
            who disputes the decision is by way of judicial review.  It  is
            not open to the Tribunal, in a statutory appeal, to  in  effect
            conduct an appeal of the CA decision. It  is  also  clear  that
            merely because a person is a victim of trafficking,  that  does
            not enable them to remain in the UK on any long-term basis; the
            provisions for periods of residence to be granted  for  certain
            periods and for certain reasons are not  immigration  decisions
            subject to a statutory appeal if an individual does  not  agree
            with the period of leave s/he has been granted on not  granted.
            Recognition as a victim of trafficking does  not  result  in  a
            finding, without more, that an individual is to  be  recognised
            as a refugee.


        13. Flaux LJ states


              Analysis and conclusions
           1. In my judgment, it is absolutely  clear  that  the  Court  of
              Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) was limiting the circumstances in
              which, on a statutory appeal against a removal  decision,  an
              appellant can mount  an  indirect  challenge  to  a  negative
              trafficking decision by the authority (in  the  circumstances
              where the appellant has not challenged it by way of  judicial
              review),  to  where   the   trafficking   decision   can   be
              demonstrated to be perverse or irrational or  one  which  was
              not  open  to  the   authority,   those   expressions   being
              effectively synonymous for  present  purposes.  Mr  Lewis  is
              correct  that  there  is  a  two  stage  approach.  First,  a
              determination whether the trafficking decision is perverse or
              irrational or one which was not open  to  the  authority  and
              second, only if it is, can the appellant invite the  Tribunal
              to re-determine  the  relevant  facts  and  take  account  of
              subsequent evidence since the decision of the  authority  was
              made.
           1. Of  course,  a  trafficking  decision,  whether  positive  or
              negative, may well  be  relevant  to  the  issue  before  the
              Tribunal as  to  the  lawfulness  of  the  removal  decision.
              However, an appellant can only  invite  the  tribunal  to  go
              behind the trafficking decision and re-determine the  factual
              issues as to whether trafficking has in fact occurred if  the
              decision  of  the  authority  is  shown  to  be  perverse  or
              irrational or one which was not open to it. This  is  clearly
              what Longmore LJ was saying in the last two sentences of [18]
              of his judgment[2].
           1. The Upper Tribunal was  thus  wrong  and  misinterpreted  the
              decision of the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) when it
              said at [39] of its Decision that, in effect,  the  Court  of
              Appeal was contemplating that the Tribunal  could  go  behind
              the negative trafficking decision and re-make the decision as
              to  whether  there  had  been  trafficking,   whenever   that
              trafficking decision could  be  challenged  on  any  judicial
              review ground as opposed to the narrow ground of  perversity.
              Contrary to the view of the Upper Tribunal, there is  nothing
              in [12] to [18] of Longmore  LJ's  judgment  which  justifies
              that  conclusion.  Certainly  it  is  not  justified  by  his
              reference to Abdi.
           1. To begin with Abdi was decided at a time when the appellate
              process under section 19 of the Immigration Act 1971 involved
              a review by the adjudicator or tribunal of any  determination
              of fact, not a complete re-determination of issues  of  fact.
              It is equally clear that, contrary to Mr  Toal's  submission,
              the adjudicator was not engaged in a process  of  making  his
              own findings of fact. As Peter Gibson LJ noted at 154:
              "He [the adjudicator] decided that there existed  'a  certain
              circumscribed jurisdiction in the adjudicator to examine  the
              facts upon which the decision had been based and to  consider
              whether the decision is in accordance with the law or is  the
              result of an excess or misuse of  the  Secretary  of  State's
              powers.'"
           1. Furthermore and in any event, that was a case of a  statutory
              appeal against the particular decision made in  disregard  of
              the policy, not an  indirect  challenge  to  a  decision  not
              subject to a right of appeal, as in this case. It seems to me
              that Longmore LJ recognised that distinction when, in [11] of
              his judgment, he rejected  the  argument  of  the  respondent
              based on Abdi that a failure to follow the policy, here the
              competent authority guidance, gave rise to a right of appeal,
              on the basis that the argument is contrary to the decision of
              this Court in AA (Iraq) that there is no  right  of  appeal
              against a negative  trafficking  decision,  the  only  remedy
              being to apply for permission for judicial review.
           1. Accordingly, Longmore LJ was  indeed  careful  to  limit  the
              instances where there can  be  an  indirect  challenge  to  a
              negative trafficking decision to those where the decision  is
              shown to be perverse or irrational or one which was not  open
              to the authority. The analysis of AS (Afghanistan) by Collins
              J in XB that the circumstances in which  there  can  be  an
              indirect challenge are much wider is simply wrong.
              .....
           1. Huang, Hesham Ali and J1 are all concerned with what  the
              approach of a Tribunal should be to a decision which is being
              appealed, namely  that  the  Tribunal  should  determine  for
              itself by reference to all the  relevant  facts  whether  the
              decision was lawful, not simply  review  the  decision  in  a
              species of judicial review. Nothing in those cases  bears  on
              the  approach  which  should  be  adopted  to  a  trafficking
              decision which is not the decision of the Secretary of  State
              which is being appealed, but which may  be  relevant  to  the
              decision under appeal. As AA (Iraq) established, there is no
              right of appeal against  a  trafficking  decision.  The  only
              remedy is by way of judicial review. Where, as in the present
              case,   there   has   been    no    judicial    review, AS
              (Afghanistan) establishes that the trafficking  decision  is
              only susceptible to an  indirect  challenge  on  a  statutory
              appeal where it is demonstrated  to  have  been  perverse  or
              irrational or one  which  was  not  open  to  the  authority.
              Contrary to Mr Toal's submissions, nothing in the  narrowness
              of the circumstances in which such an indirect  challenge  is
              permissible in any sense subverts the appeal process  or  the
              function of the Tribunal in respect of the decision which  is
              the subject of the statutory appeal, here the decision of the
              Secretary of State to remove the respondent.
           1. I was not  impressed  by  the  suggestion  that  this  narrow
              approach which  I  consider  is  appropriate  would  be  more
              circumscribed than the approach of the criminal courts to the
              question of trafficking. The criminal  courts  are  concerned
              with wider issues, as the passages cited from Lord Judge CJ's
              judgment make clear. The judgment in  that  case  was  handed
              down some months before AS (Afghanistan) and whilst  it  is
              clear from the last sentence of [28] that the Court of Appeal
              Criminal Division did  consider  that  the  circumstances  in
              which  a  trafficking  decision  could  be  challenged   were
              circumscribed, it did not have the benefit of the  subsequent
              analysis in AS (Afghanistan).
           1. The short answer to the parallel which Mr Toal sought to draw
              between trafficking decisions and asylum decisions is, as  Mr
              Lewis pointed out, that the latter are susceptible to  appeal
              under sections 82(1)(a) and  84(1)(a)  of  the  2002  Act  as
              amended in  2014  so  that  the  parallel  is  a  false  one.
              Trafficking decisions simply do not have the same  status  as
              adverse asylum decisions.
           1. As for the reliance on Hounga v Allen I agree with Mr Lewis
              that this was misconceived, since in that  case  neither  the
              authority nor the tribunal had made a  trafficking  decision,
              so that  was  not  a  case  concerning  a  previous  negative
              trafficking decision or its status.
           1. The error which the Upper Tribunal made in assuming  that  it
              had jurisdiction to remake the decision of the authority  and
              determine, as it did, that the respondent was trafficked  was
              compounded by a further error as to  the  relevance  of  that
              conclusion. I agree  with  Mr  Lewis  that  a  decision  that
              someone has been trafficked can be relevant to  the  question
              whether he is at risk of being re-trafficked on return.  That
              was an issue which the Upper Tribunal determined against  the
              respondent on the facts.
           1. However, the Upper  Tribunal  erroneously  assumed  that  its
              conclusion that the respondent had been  trafficked  and  the
              failures of the authority which it identified had  particular
              relevance in that there were breaches of the  obligations  of
              the United  Kingdom  under  ECAT  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
              considered also  amounted  to  a  breach  of  the  procedural
              obligation under Article 4  of  the  ECHR,  which  the  Upper
              Tribunal at [45] regarded as the "crucial  question"  on  the
              appeal.
           1. Mr Toal sought to suggest that this was not really the  basis
              of the Upper Tribunal's Decision and it had limited itself to
              concluding at [64] that it would be a breach of Article 4  to
              remove the respondent on the  basis  that  it  would  not  be
              feasible for him to cooperate with any criminal investigation
              from outside the jurisdiction. I agree with Mr Lewis that the
              analysis of the Upper Tribunal was not at clear cut as  that.
              At [41] the Upper Tribunal described as "able"  the  specific
              submission by counsel for the respondent  that  the  positive
              duties under Articles 12 to 15 of ECAT  have  the  status  of
              positive  obligations  under  Article  4  of  the   ECHR,   a
              submission which cannot stand in the light of the decision of
              this Court in H.
           1. The Upper Tribunal does not expressly  or  implicitly  reject
              the submission, but I agree with Mr  Lewis  that  it  clearly
              influenced what the Tribunal decided at [59]  to  [64]  about
              the obligations under  ECAT  and  the  procedural  obligation
              under Article 4 of the ECHR. In my judgment, that analysis is
              wrong and contrary to the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal
              in H. Thus, even if the Upper Tribunal had been entitled to
              conclude that the authority was wrong in  making  a  negative
              trafficking decision, it should not have concluded that  this
              amounted to a breach of  the  procedural  obligation  of  the
              United Kingdom under Article 4.
           1. An indication of the  extent  to  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
              overreached itself is the finding at [63] that, by virtue  of
              Article 10(2) of ECAT there was a prohibition on  removal  of
              the respondent from the jurisdiction,  so  that  the  removal
              decision  was  unlawful.  As  Mr  Lewis  pointed   out,   the
              prohibition in Article 10(2) follows a  "reasonable  grounds"
              decision by the authority in favour of someone who alleges he
              or she has been a victim of trafficking. The  Upper  Tribunal
              has effectively substituted itself for  the  authority  under
              the Article, for which it does not have jurisdiction.
           1. I also agree with Mr  Lewis  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  also
              overreached itself  in  purporting  to  criticise  the  state
              agencies involved in compliance with the obligations  of  the
              United Kingdom under  ECAT,  in  particular  the  police.  It
              should have been no  part  of  the  functions  of  the  Upper
              Tribunal to go  beyond  determining  the  lawfulness  of  the
              decision to remove the respondent. Even if  it  had  had  the
              jurisdiction it assumed  it  did  have  to  re-determine  the
              trafficking decision, it should  not  have  engaged  in  such
              criticism without affording  the  police  an  opportunity  to
              provide an explanation for not having pursued enquiries.
           1. I was unimpressed by  the  plea in  terrorem in  Mr  Toal's
              submissions that the narrow approach to  indirect  challenges
              to negative trafficking decisions  which  I  consider  to  be
              appropriate in line with the previous decision of this  Court
              in AS  (Afghanistan) would  have  an  extreme  impact  on
              trafficking cases. I agree with Mr Lewis that this point  was
              vastly overstated and not substantiated. The only cases where
              there will be an impact is in cases of  negative  trafficking
              decisions in which an individual wishes to mount a  challenge
              on grounds other than perversity. As Mr Lewis says,  in  such
              cases, any challenge will have to be made by way of  judicial
              review, which is the normal and proper method of challenge.


        14. The decision the  subject  of  MS  (Pakistan)  was  a  "removal
            decision"  appeal.  The  amendments  to  the  appeal  structure
            implemented by the Immigration Act  2014  do  not  include  the
            introduction of a statutory appeal against a  decision  by  the
            CA. They do however remove a right of appeal against a  removal
            decision. The appeal since October 2014 has, in asylum  claims,
            been against the refusal of the claim, not the removal decision
            that may follow. The Court of Appeal in MS (Pakistan) was alive
            to this - see [81]. In [83] Flaux LJ agreed that  the  question
            of whether a person had been  trafficked  can  be  relevant  to
            whether a person is at risk of being re-trafficked "on return".
             Flaux LJ also made clear  ([79])  that  the  narrow  challenge
            available within the  statutory  appeal  procedure  to  the  CA
            decision did not "in any sense" subvert the appeal  process  or
            the function of the Tribunal in its statutory appeal function.


        15. The Immigration Rules set out the process by  which  an  asylum
            claim is to be determined:

                  339I. When the Secretary of  State  considers  a  person's
                  asylum claim, eligibility  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                  protection or human rights claim it is  the  duty  of  the
                  person to submit to the Secretary  of  State  as  soon  as
                  possible all material factors needed to  substantiate  the
                  asylum claim or establish that they are a person  eligible
                  for humanitarian  protection  or  substantiate  the  human
                  rights claim, which the Secretary of State shall assess in
                  cooperation with the person.

                  The material factors include:
                     (i) the person's statement on the reasons  for  making
                     an asylum claim or  on  eligibility  for  a  grant  of
                     humanitarian protection or for making a  human  rights
                     claim;
                     (ii)  all  documentation  at  the  person's   disposal
                     regarding  the  person's  age,  background  (including
                     background details of relevant  relatives),  identity,
                     nationality(ies),   country(ies)   and   place(s)   of
                     previous  residence,  previous  asylum   applications,
                     travel routes; and
                     (iii) identity and travel documents.


                  ...
                  339J. The assessment by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  an
                  asylum claim, eligibility  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                  protection or a human rights claim will be carried out  on
                  an individual, objective and impartial  basis.  This  will
                  include taking into account in particular:
                     (i) all relevant facts as they relate to  the  country
                     of origin or country of return at the time of taking a
                     decision on the grant; including laws and  regulations
                     of the country of origin or country of return and  the
                     manner in which they are applied;
                     (ii) relevant statements and  documentation  presented
                     by the person including  information  on  whether  the
                     person has been or may be subject  to  persecution  or
                     serious harm;
                     (iii)   the   individual   position    and    personal
                     circumstances of the person, including factors such as
                     background, gender and age, so as to  assess  whether,
                     on the basis of the person's  personal  circumstances,
                     the acts to which the person  has  been  or  could  be
                     exposed would amount to persecution or serious harm;
                     (iv) whether the person's activities since leaving the
                     country of origin or country of return were engaged in
                     for the sole or main purpose of creating the necessary
                     conditions for making an asylum claim or  establishing
                     that they  are  a  person  eligible  for  humanitarian
                     protection or a human rights claim, so  as  to  assess
                     whether these activities will  expose  the  person  to
                     persecution  or  serious  harm  if  returned  to  that
                     country; and
                     (v) whether the person could reasonably be expected to
                     avail themselves of the protection of another  country
                     where they could assert citizenship.
                  339JA.  Reliable  and  up-to-date  information  shall   be
                  obtained from various sources as to the general  situation
                  prevailing in the countries of origin  of  applicants  for
                  asylum and, where necessary, in  countries  through  which
                  they  have  transited.  Such  information  shall  be  made
                  available  to  the  personnel  responsible  for  examining
                  applications and taking decisions and may be  provided  to
                  them in the form of  a  consolidated  country  information
                  report.

                  This paragraph shall also apply  where  the  Secretary  of
                  State is considering revoking a person's refugee status in
                  accordance with these Rules.

                  339K. The fact that a person has already been  subject  to
                  persecution or serious harm, or to direct threats of  such
                  persecution or such harm, will be regarded  as  a  serious
                  indication  of   the   person's   well-founded   fear   of
                  persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless
                  there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution
                  or serious harm will not be repeated.
                  339L. It is the duty of the  person  to  substantiate  the
                  asylum claim or establish that they are a person  eligible
                  for humanitarian protection or  substantiate  their  human
                  rights claim. Where aspects of the person's statements are
                  not supported by  documentary  or  other  evidence,  those
                  aspects  will  not  need  confirmation  when  all  of  the
                  following conditions are met:
                     (i)  the  person  has  made  a   genuine   effort   to
                     substantiate their asylum claim or establish that they
                     are a person eligible for humanitarian  protection  or
                     substantiate their human rights claim;
                     (ii) all material factors  at  the  person's  disposal
                     have been submitted, and  a  satisfactory  explanation
                     regarding any lack of other relevant material has been
                     given;
                     (iii) the person's statements are found to be coherent
                     and plausible and do  not  run  counter  to  available
                     specific  and  general  information  relevant  to  the
                     person's case;
                     (iv) the person has made an asylum claim or sought  to
                     establish  that  they  are  a  person   eligible   for
                     humanitarian protection or made a human  rights  claim
                     at the earliest possible time, unless the  person  can
                     demonstrate good reason for not having done so; and
                     (v) the general credibility of  the  person  has  been
                     established.
                  339M. The Secretary of State may consider  that  a  person
                  has not substantiated their asylum  claim  or  established
                  that  they  are  a  person   eligible   for   humanitarian
                  protection or substantiated their human rights claim,  and
                  thereby reject their  application  for  asylum,  determine
                  that they are not eligible for humanitarian protection  or
                  reject their human rights claim,  if  they  fail,  without
                  reasonable  explanation,  to  make  a  prompt   and   full
                  disclosure of material facts, either orally or in writing,
                  or  otherwise  to  assist  the  Secretary  of   State   in
                  establishing the facts of the  case;  this  includes,  for
                  example, failure to report to a  designated  place  to  be
                  fingerprinted, failure to complete an asylum questionnaire
                  or failure to comply with a requirement to  report  to  an
                  immigration officer for examination.
                  339NA. Before a decision is taken on the  application  for
                  asylum, the applicant shall be given the opportunity of  a
                  personal interview on their application for asylum with  a
                  representative of the Secretary of State  who  is  legally
                  competent to conduct such an interview.
                  The personal interview may be omitted where:
                     (i) the Secretary of State is able to take a  positive
                     decision on the basis of evidence available;
                     (ii) the Secretary of State has already had a  meeting
                     with the applicant for the purpose of  assisting  them
                     with completing their application and  submitting  the
                     essential information regarding the application;
                     (iii) the applicant, in submitting  their  application
                     and presenting the facts, has only raised issues  that
                     are not  relevant  or  of  minimal  relevance  to  the
                     examination of whether they are a refugee, as  defined
                     in regulation 2 of the Refugee or Person  in  Need  of
                     International Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations
                     2006;
                     (iv)   the   applicant    has    made    inconsistent,
                     contradictory,     improbable     or      insufficient
                     representations  which  make   their   claim   clearly
                     unconvincing in relation to having been the object  of
                     persecution;
                     (v)  the  applicant   has   submitted   a   subsequent
                     application which does  not  raise  any  relevant  new
                     elements   with   respect    to    their    particular
                     circumstances or to the situation in their country  of
                     origin;
                     (vi) the applicant is making an application merely  in
                     order to delay or  frustrate  the  enforcement  of  an
                     earlier or imminent decision  which  would  result  in
                     their removal;
                     (vii) it is not reasonably practicable, in  particular
                     where the Secretary of State is of  the  opinion  that
                     the applicant is unfit or  unable  to  be  interviewed
                     owing to enduring circumstances beyond their  control;
                     or
                     (viii) the applicant is an EU national whose claim the
                     Secretary  of  State  has  nevertheless   decided   to
                     consider substantively in  accordance  with  paragraph
                     326F above.

                  The omission of a personal interview shall not prevent the
                  Secretary  of  State  from  taking  a  decision   on   the
                  application.


                  Where the personal interview is omitted, the applicant and
                  dependants shall be  given  a  reasonable  opportunity  to
                  submit further information.

                  Fresh Claims
                  353. When a human rights  or  protection  claim  has  been
                  refused  or  withdrawn  or  treated  as  withdrawn   under
                  paragraph 333C of these Rules and any appeal  relating  to
                  that claim is no longer pending, the decision  maker  will
                  consider any further submissions and,  if  rejected,  will
                  then determine whether they amount to a fresh  claim.  The
                  submissions will amount to  a  fresh  claim  if  they  are
                  significantly  different  from  the  material   that   has
                  previously been considered. The submissions will  only  be
                  significantly different if the content:
                     (i) had not already been considered; and
                     (ii) taken together  with  the  previously  considered
                     material, created a  realistic  prospect  of  success,
                     notwithstanding its rejection. This paragraph does not
                     apply to claims made overseas.
                  353A.  Consideration  of  further  submissions  shall   be
                  subject to the procedures  set  out  in  these  Rules.  An
                  applicant who has made further submissions  shall  not  be
                  removed before the Secretary of State has  considered  the
                  submissions under paragraph 353 or otherwise.



        16. It is of course possible that a  person  can  be  a  victim  of
            trafficking but not be entitled  to  international  protection.
            The considerations when  determining  whether  a  person  is  a
            refugee may include whether a person is a victim of trafficking
            but that is not the  only  consideration.  This  is  implicitly
            recognised by the respondent in  the  reasons  for  refusal  of
            asylum decision letter dated 15th January 2015:


                  8.   On 21st February 2014 a referral  was  made  on  your
                  behalf to the National Referral Mechanism in order  for  a
                  Competent Authority to make a decision as to  whether  you
                  fall within the definition of victim  of  trafficking,  as
                  established by the Council of Europe Convention on  Action
                  against Trafficking in Human Beings. As such  your  status
                  as a victim of  trafficking  is  assessed  in  a  separate
                  decision  under   the   NRM   process,   where   as    the
                  consideration below deals with protection issues.


        17. The reasons for refusal of asylum letter goes on to accept that
            as a victim of trafficking an individual can be a member  of  a
            Particular  Social  Group  for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
            Convention but did not accept that this appellant's parents had
            been killed as she claimed,  considered  that  her  account  of
            being raped and forced to have sex with men by T Baba was "both
            internally and externally consistent to the  available  country
            information", that her claim  of  scarring  was  plausible  and
            would  be  considered  in  line  with  paragraph  339L  of  the
            Immigration Rules, that her account of her  exit  from  Nigeria
            and use of false documents was rejected, that she had not given
            a reasonable explanation for the delay in claiming  asylum  and
            that overall her claim that her parents had been  killed,  that
            she had been forced to work for T in Nigeria and in the UK  was
            rejected. The respondent  also,  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
            letter, concluded that there was sufficiency of protection  and
            that she could relocate within Nigeria.


        18. In paragraph 57 of the reasons for the refusal of  asylum,  the
            respondent said

                  Further  consideration  has  been  given  to  victims   of
                  trafficking and the availability  of  protection  on  your
                  return...


            and concluded that there was sufficiency of protection and that
            she could internally relocate within Nigeria.


        19. The CA conclusive grounds decision is  dated  10th  July  2014.
            Although not relied upon by the respondent in her  decision  on
            the appellant's asylum  claim,  it  was  before  her  when  she
            reached her decision - there is reference to the  referral  and
            to the asylum decision being a protection claim decision.


        20. The CA decision confirms that the decision  whether  she  is  a
            victim  of  trafficking   is   taken   on   the   "balance   of
            probabilities". The decision makes  reference  to  the  initial
            decision that there were "reasonable  grounds"  for  concluding
            that she was a victim of trafficking (such decision being taken
            on the lower threshold of "I suspect but cannot prove"). The CA
            considered evidence  that  was  before  it  when  it  made  the
            reasonable  grounds  decision  (this  is  not   specified   but
            presumably includes a  copy  of  her  visit  visa  application,
            screening interview records and arrest  record)  together  with
            her Asylum Interview Record  (AIR)  dated  22nd  May  2014,  an
            asylum reasons for refusal letter dated 1st  July  2014  (which
            has not been produced and was not relied upon by the respondent
            or referred to in the decision the subject of this appeal), her
            witness statement dated 15th  April  2014  and  a  letter  from
            Sandwell Women's Aid. The appellant, through solicitors, sent a
            pre-action protocol letter challenging the CA decision but this
            was not, it seems, pursued to an application for permission  to
            seek judicial review of the CA decision.


        21. The CA decision sets out the three criteria that have to be met
            for a finding to be made that an  individual  is  a  victim  of
            trafficking. The decision refers to the inconsistencies in  the
            appellant's visit visa application and  her  witness  statement
            and AIR and rejects, on that basis, that she was subject to  an
            act of recruitment, that she had been transported etc by  means
            of threats and that there was an exploitative purpose.

        22. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was  aware  of  and  set  out,
            accurately, the basis of  the  respondent's  rejection  of  her
            asylum claim. He was aware of and reflected  in  the  decision,
            the CA decision.

        23. Consideration by the First-tier Tribunal judge of evidence that
            was before him led to his conclusions as set out in [1]  above.
            Those findings do not subvert the CA decision; they reflect the
            evidence that was before the judge at the date of  the  hearing
            before him, applying the lower standard of proof.  Nevertheless
            the judge's decision that she was a victim of  trafficking  has
            to be weighed in the overall assessment taking into account the
            fact that the CA has found that she is not such  a  victim  and
            that the CA conclusive grounds decision was  essentially  based
            on the same evidence but on a different standard  of  proof.  A
            finding by the CA that a person  is  a  victim  of  trafficking
            leads to various protective measures being implemented  by  the
            UK Government. In this case, the appellant is not a  victim  of
            trafficking as  defined  by  the  CA;  the  various  protective
            measures do not come into play but that does not mean that  the
            appellant cannot have her account factored into the  assessment
            of her refugee claim. Likewise, if an individual were found  by
            the CA to have been trafficked,  if  the  evidence  before  the
            Tribunal was such that the  Tribunal  did  not,  on  the  lower
            standard of proof reach the same conclusion, that would  factor
            into the assessment of the claim for refugee status.


        24. The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded the appellant had  been
            trafficked. I note however that he did not analyse whether  she
            had been trafficked in the terms required by  the  legislation.
            In particular he did not consider  the  three  element  process
            which the CA undertook in reaching its conclusion that she  had
            not been trafficked. Nor did  the  judge  consider  the  victim
            profiles/indicators of risk referred to in HD in  reaching  his
            conclusion that the appellant had been trafficked  to  the  UK.
            Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  used  the  term
            'trafficked'  I  am  satisfied  that  the  lack   of   analysis
            undertaken by him indicates a vernacular approach to  the  word
            rather than the correct legal interpretation. That  she  worked
            as a prostitute for T is a finding that was made by the  First-
            tier Tribunal judge on the evidence before him and open to him.
            That she worked as a prostitute in the UK is a finding made  by
            the First-tier Tribunal judge and open  to  him.  That  someone
            else arranged her travel documents was a finding open to him on
            the evidence before him. The First-tier Tribunal judge accepted
            that she obtained documents from T to travel to the UK but  the
            judge did not make a finding on the other elements of her claim
            to have been trafficked such as to amount to  a  subversion  of
            the CA decision.

            Remaking the decision.

        25. Mr Khan submitted that the decision of the CA was perverse  and
            that the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  was  such  as
            would enable the finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
            appellant had been trafficked to be maintained. I do not agree.
            In terms of the evidence that was before the CA,  the  decision
            was a decision that was  open  to  the  CA  and  could  not  be
            characterised as perverse or irrational. It may be  that  there
            is further evidence available that could be considered  by  the
            CA and might result in a different finding. That  evidence  was
            not  identified  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal;  the  three
            elements  required  for  a  finding  of  trafficking  were  not
            identified as present and even though  the  standard  of  proof
            before the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  the  lower  standard  the
            finding by the First-tier Tribunal that she was  trafficked  in
            the correct sense of the  word,  cannot  be  sustained  on  the
            evidence that was relied upon, given that the CA finding should
            have been factored in.


        26. The decision of the CA is a decision that cannot be  challenged
            in a statutory appeal against a refusal of a  protection  claim
            save on grounds of perversity or irrationality. The Tribunal is
            required to consider evidence before  it  on  the  day  of  the
            hearing and to apply the correct burden and standard of  proof.
            That evidence will  include  the  CA  decision  but  will  also
            include other evidence that impacts upon the protection  claim.
            The Tribunal in reaching a decision on the protection claim  is
            obliged to place weight upon the CA  decision  but  bearing  in
            mind that it is a non-judicial decision that was reached  prior
            to the hearing before the Tribunal.

        27. This appellant will be returning to Nigeria as a  single  woman
            with no familial support, little vocational  or  other  skills.
            She had been raped and forced into prostitution in Nigeria, had
            travelled to  the  UK  on  false  documents  and  worked  as  a
            prostitute in the UK. She  is  HIV+ve  but  there  is  adequate
            treatment available to her in Nigeria and  she  has  no  mental
            health problems  that  cannot  be  adequately  catered  for  in
            Nigeria, if there are any such problems.


        28. HD considered the risk to  a  previously  trafficked  woman  of
            being re-trafficked. As stated in HD, the fact of  having  been
            trafficked is not  generally  indicative  of  a  real  risk  of
            retribution or being re-trafficked by her original  traffickers
            although it may be an indicator of vulnerability at  that  time
            which may impact upon future vulnerability. In this  case,  the
            CA found that  the  appellant  had  not  been  trafficked  and,
            although the First-tier Tribunal Judge described her as  having
            been trafficked, that finding  did  not  amount  to  a  legally
            sustainable finding, rather it was a finding that she had  been
            previously working as a prostitute  in  Nigeria  and  had  done
            likewise here in the UK, having arrived in the  UK  unlawfully,
            utilising the vernacular of  trafficking.  She  does  not  fall
            within a particular  social  group  for  the  purposes  of  the
            Refugee Convention.

        29. Even though HD considers the risks to  a  woman  who  has  been
            trafficked, the consideration to be given to the claim  by  the
            appellant that she  is  in  need  of  international  protection
            should be considered in the context of the identification in HD
            of factors that may place her at real risk, even though she has
            not been trafficked. There was no evidence before me  that  the
            appellant is suffering  or  has  suffered  from  mental  health
            problems such as would impact upon her  ability  to  reside  in
            Nigeria.

        30. Trafficking can of course take place within a person's  country
            of origin; it is not limited to trafficking across borders.  It
            may be that the appellant was a victim of trafficking whilst in
            Nigeria although the evidence before me could not have  led  to
            that conclusion. The finding of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
            that she had been forced into prostitution by T;  that  is  not
            the same as being trafficked within Nigeria. Paragraph 62 of HD
            lists a number of  characteristics  that  could  indicate  that
            someone was at risk of being trafficked. As HD makes clear,  it
            is not necessary for a potential victim to  exhibit  all  these
            characteristics, but the  existence  of  a  selection  of  such
            characteristics should be  seen  as  strong  identifiers.  This
            appellant exhibits very few of such characteristics.  That  the
            appellant, who was born in either 1978 or 1986, had worked as a
            prostitute in Nigeria and has few skills or  vocational  skills
            is not, absent evidence to show she would be unable  to  obtain
            unskilled work or would otherwise be destitute,  sufficient  to
            support her claim that she would be at risk of  treatment  that
            would breach her Article 3 rights.

        31. In so far as paragraph 276ADE is concerned, the  appellant  has
            been in the UK unlawfully since 4th  March  2011.  She  claimed
            asylum  in  February   2014.   Her   claim   that   there   are
            insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  returning  to  Nigeria  are
            predicated upon her claim to have been trafficked to the UK and
            the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal judge as  set  out
            above. The applicant is unskilled with no qualifications. There
            was a dearth of evidence that  absence from Nigeria for some  7
            years, working as a prostitute for a period of time in  the  UK
            as well as Nigeria and lack of family  in  Nigeria  amounts  to
            insurmountable obstacles to  her  return  to  Nigeria.  She  is
            either 40 years old (as the Home Office believe)  or  32  years
            old (as she claims). In either case she lived  in  Nigeria  for
            her childhood and much of her adult life. She has worked  as  a
            cleaner in the UK. There was no medical  evidence  relied  upon
            that any mental health problems she may or may  not  have  were
            such as to cause obstacles to her reintegration. She  does  not
            meet the criteria in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

        32. In so far as Article 8 is concerned,  the  appellant  has  been
            living in the UK for the past  7  years.  She  entered  the  UK
            unlawfully and has been working  unlawfully.  Although  she  is
            likely to have established  a  private  life  in  the  UK  that
            engages Article 8, very little detail of  this  was  evidenced.
            She does not have a partner or qualifying child;  although  she
            speaks English and although, if allowed to  work,  she  may  be
            able to support herself through cleaning jobs, there is nothing
            in the evidence before me that indicates that her removal would
            be a disproportionate interference in  her  private  life.  Her
            appeal against the decision to refuse her human  rights/Article
            8 claim is dismissed.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

                                    Date 4th September 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] She also submits that in this case the decision of the CA is perverse -
as to which see later in my decision.
[2] AS (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 1469 "No doubt if a conclusive
decision has been reached by the Competent Authority, First Tier Tribunals
will be astute not (save perhaps in rare circumstances) to allow an
appellant to re-run a case already decided against him on the facts. But
where, as here, it is arguable that, on the facts found or accepted, the
Competent Authority has reached a decision which was not open to it, that
argument should be heard and taken into account"

