
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01406/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on  10  May  1985.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 January 2014  and  claimed  asylum.
    On 19 February 2014, the Secretary  of  State  refused  his  claim  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection and under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the
    ECHR.  The Secretary of State rejected the Appellant's  claim  that  he
    was at risk on return to Iran as a Christian convert.   In  particular,
    the Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was, in  fact,
    a Christian.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 13 June 2014, Judge Britton  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  He made an adverse credibility finding but accepted  that  the
    appellant was "born a Christian".  In the  light  of  that,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish that he would be at risk on return to Iran.

 4. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal on  4  July
    2014 but on 1 October 2014, a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal
    was granted by UTJ Peter Lane.

 5. The appeal initially came before me on 11 March 2015.   In  a  decision
    dated 31 March 2015, I  set  aside  Judge  Britton's  determination  in
    respect of the appellant's asylum claim - which alone was pursued - but
    preserved his finding that the appellant was a Christian.   My  reasons
    for doing so are fully set out in that decision and it  is  unnecessary
    to repeat them here.

 6. The appeal was subsequently re-listed for the decision to be re-made in
    the Upper Tribunal in particular, on the principal  issues  of  whether
    the appellant had established that he was a Christian convert and what,
    if any risk, there would be to him on return to Iran.

 7. At the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Richards,  who  represented  the
    Secretary of State accepted that he was in  difficulties  in  resisting
    the appeal.  He indicated that he could not dispute that the  appellant
    was a Christian convert.  That concession is, in my judgment,  entirely
    justified in the light of the  evidence.   The  evidence  before  Judge
    Britton from a number of ministers of religion  clearly,  in  my  view,
    supported  Mr  Richards'  acknowledgement  that  the  appellant  was  a
    Christian convert, rather than a born Christian,  taken  together  with
    the documentary evidence in particular a marriage and birth certificate
    supporting the view that the  appellant's  parents  were  Muslims.   Mr
    Richards also accepted that the evidence was that the appellant was  an
    "active" Christian convert.  Mr Richards accepted,  as  a  consequence,
    that the appellant had established that there was a real risk  that  he
    would be persecuted because of his religion if returned to Iran.   That
    was supported both by the  case  law  and  also  the  respondent's  own
    guidance.  Mr Richards accepted that the appellant's appeal  should  be
    allowed on asylum grounds.  That concession is, in my  judgment,  amply
    supported by the material  and  submissions  contained  in  Mr  Hoshi's
    skeleton argument at para 35(a)-(e).

 8. I have considered all the material and, in my  judgment,  Mr  Richards'
    position on behalf of the Secretary of State is entirely justified both
    as to the factual  matrix  and  also  the  consequential  risk  to  the
    appellant on return to Iran.

Decision

 9. For the  reasons  set  out  in  my  earlier  decision,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds
    involved the making of an error of law.  That decision was set aside.

10. I re-make the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

