
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01078/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th October 2014                          |On 31st October 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                            DANIEL BISONE MENGOT
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Anthony, Solicitor, of French & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background


 1. On 7th July 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Deans sitting as a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal gave permission to the appellant to appeal  against
    the determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Birrell in  which
    she dismissed the appeal on all grounds against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse asylum, humanitarian and human  rights  protection
    to the appellant an adult citizen of Cameroon.

 2. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Deans thought  it  arguable
    that the judge had not had regard to the appellant's evidence about why
    he believed an attack in 2010 was politically motivated.  Further,  the
    judge arguably had not taken account of past persecution  in  terms  of
    paragraph 339K of  the  Immigration  Rules  when  concluding  that  the
    appellant would not be persecuted in the future.

 3. In the grounds it is also argued that the judge had given weight to  an
    immaterial matter by noting that the appellant had left Cameroon  using
    his own passport and encountered no difficulties.  At paragraphs 47 and
    48 of the UNHCR Handbook possession of a valid national passport should
    not be regarded as a bar  to  refugee  status.   Further,  the  grounds
    contend that the judge had failed to take into consideration  that  the
    appellant was unable to carry out his political activities  after  2008
    because of the trauma he had earlier  suffered  and  so  was  wrong  to
    conclude that he was of no interest to the authorities after that date.

 4. At the hearing before me Ms Anthony confirmed that the appellant relied
    upon all of the grounds which she did not seek to repeat in any detail.



 5. Mr McVeety submitted that the UNHCR  Handbook  had  been  misquoted  in
    relation to the appellant's possession of a passport.   The  judge  had
    also  given  copious  reasons,  despite  the  trauma  suffered  by  the
    appellant, for the conclusion that the attack upon him in 2010  at  his
    home was not politically motivated.  Other reasons were also  given  in
    paragraph 57 for her conclusion that the  appellant  would  not  be  at
    future risk of persecution and in  assessing  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claims.

 6. After hearing the submissions and having studied the  determination,  I
    announced that I was not satisfied that the decision showed an error on
    a point of law such that it should be re-made and my reasons  for  that
    conclusion now follow.

 7. The ground criticising the judge's  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    ability to leave  Cameroon  with  his  own  passport  is  misconceived.
    Paragraphs 47 and 48 of the UNHCR  Handbook  deal  with  the  issue  of
    whether or not possession of a passport can be considered  as  evidence
    of loyalty to a regime.  In this appeal the  judge  was  not  wrong  to
    comment (paragraph 56) on the appellant's  ability  to  leave  Cameroon
    using  his  own  passport  without  encountering  difficulties  at  the
    airport.  The appellant had claimed that he  was  of  interest  to  the
    authorities because of his political activity  and  so  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion that if he  could  leave  the  country
    without difficulty through public channels,  the  authorities  had  not
    marked him out as a person in whom they had  any  interest.   I  should
    emphasise that this was also only one of several reasons given  by  the
    judge for the conclusion that the appellant was not  a  person  of  any
    interest to the authorities and could be returned without the real risk
    of suffering serious harm.

 8. The argument that the judge was wrong to conclude  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant was of interest to  the  authorities  after
    2008 when he had been unable to  carry  out  his  political  activities
    after that time because of the trauma he had suffered does not reveal a
    material error.  If the appellant claimed that the attack upon  him  at
    his home in 2010 was politically motivated  this  suggests  that  there
    was, in any event, a long-term interest on the part of the  authorities
    in him  whether  or  not  he  was  able  to  carry  out  his  political
    activities.  The judge was entitled to refer to the lack of interest in
    the appellant from 2008 to 2010 as a  relevant  reason  for  concluding
    that the authorities were of no interest to  him  and  that  she  could
    conclude, for that and other reasons, that the incident in 2010 was not
    politically motivated.

 9. Although the judge does not specifically refer to the appellant's  view
    that the 2010 attack was  politically  motivated  because  nothing  was
    stolen, she gives several  reasons  which  are,  alone,  sufficient  to
    entitle her to conclude that the attack  was  not  political.   I  have
    already mentioned the absence of any interest by the  authorities  from
    2008.  Additionally, the judge refers to the fact that the  appellant's
    daughter identified the men or man who attacked the house  as  a  thief
    and that the attackers did not identify themselves or say  anything  to
    the appellant or his  wife  which  might  serve  to  identify  them  as
    associated with the CPDM.  The judge also refers to the fact  that  the
    appellant did not seek to bring his  family  with  him  to  the  United
    Kingdom despite the fact that his home containing his wife and daughter
    had  been  targeted.  Additionally   she   appropriately   takes   into
    consideration that the appellant did not claim asylum  in  France,  nor
    did he claim asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom coming as a short-
    term visitor instead and then trying to work using a false passport.

10. As to the contention that the judge erred by failing to recognise  past
    persecution as a serious indicator  of  future  persecution,  paragraph
    339K of the Immigration Rules  contains  the  proviso  that  such  past
    persecution may  not  be  an  indication  of  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in the future where there are good reasons to consider that
    such persecution or serious harm  will  not  be  repeated.   The  judge
    evidently gave significant reasons for concluding that there  would  be
    no serious harm to the appellant if returned now because of an  absence
    of interest in him by the authorities.   No  error  is  shown  in  this
    respect.

11. Thus, the determination does not show an error on a  point  of  law  as
    alleged and can stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not show  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested in the Upper  Tribunal  nor  do  I  consider  it
appropriate.





Signed                                  Date: 31st October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
