

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01621/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th November 2013 and 14th January 2014    |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     N X
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Tettey instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



Procedural history


     1. NX is a national of Albania who was born in 1998. It  is  said  she
        left her home country at the end of March  2012  and  travelled  to
        Italy where she remained for some time before leaving that  country
        on 15th October and entering the United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on
        18th October 2012.


     2. NX claims she escaped from the place she was  brought  to  on  28th
        October 2012  and  managed  to  travel  from  London  to  Barnsley,
        attending the police  station  there  on  29th  October  2012.   NX
        claimed asylum and in her screening interview stated she  had  been
        under the control of an ex boyfriend who she  states  could  easily
        locate her if she was to be returned to her  own  country.  In  her
        detailed asylum interview dated 16th January 2013 she expanded upon
        her claims adding, in addition to the above, a claim to be in  fear
        of her father and of her own community.  On 21st January  2013  her
        solicitors wrote to the Secretary  of  State  confirming  that  the
        appellants claim is that she was a victim of trafficking,  claiming
        that internal relocation was not an option, and also alleging there
        was no sufficiency of protection available to her if she was be  to
        be returned to Albania.


     3. The asylum claim was rejected and an appeal  against  the  decision
        dismissed on all grounds by a  judge  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
        April 2013.  Permission to appeal was sought  and  granted  on  6th
        June 2013, on the basis of it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had failed to take into account expert evidence.   In  her
        Rule 24 Reply dated 17th June 2013 the Secretary of State  accepted
        that the First-tier Tribunal's determination  was  flawed  for  the
        reasons set out in the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  and
        grant of permission. At an initial hearing conducted at Bradford on
        the 5th August 2013 the determination was set aside.  The  findings
        made regarding the appellants immigration history, which is not  in
        dispute, were ordered to be preserved.


     4. The appeal was listed for a resumed hearing on Friday 11th  October
        2013, at Bradford, with a time estimate of three hours.  Directions
        were given to the parties to  file  a  bundle  containing  all  the
        evidence upon which they intended to rely yet, despite such a clear
        instruction, the appellant  failed  to  include  in  her  bundle  a
        statement prepared by Ms Lara Bundock a case worker at City  Hearts
        Sheffield which was said by Mr Tettey to be  vital  to  enable  the
        Tribunal  to  properly  assess  whether  the  appellant  had   been
        trafficked for prostitution or not.  A report  by  Ms  Bundock  had
        been included in the bundle before the First-  tier  Tribunal.   Mr
        Tettey also stated he wished to call Ms Bundock who  had  not  been
        asked to attend and who enquiries revealed  was  not  available  to
        attend later  in  the  day  to  give  oral  evidence  either.   Mrs
        Pettersen confirmed she had expected  the  witness  to  attend  and
        wished to cross examine her.  In the interests of fairness  and  to
        avoid prejudice to the appellant, who was not responsible for  what
        had occurred, the  hearing  was  adjourned  and  relisted  for  5th
        November 2013 with a time estimate of three hours. Directions  were
        given for  the  member  of  staff  at  the  appellant's  solicitors
        responsible for the case to file a statement setting  out  why  the
        report had been omitted from the bundle and  why  arrangements  had
        not been made for the witness to attend the hearing.


     5. In accordance with the above direction  a  statement  was  received
        from the appellant's solicitors and the author  of  that  statement
        attended court on 5th November. Further  discussions  ensued  as  a
        result of which it appears that responsibility for the events  that
        occurred in relation to the failure to ensure Ms Bundock was not at
        the original hearing lies at the feet of Mr Tettey or his clerk  in
        Chambers as it appears that his opinion was sought upon whether  it
        was necessary to arrange for the witness to attend to  which  there
        was no response.


     6. The day before the hearing the appellant's solicitors also  sent  a
        fax to the Upper Tribunal stating that Ms  Bundock  was  unable  to
        attend the hearing on the 5th November as she was ill and  did  not
        expect to be back at work until the  following  week.   No  medical
        evidence has been provided to support this fact which was  accepted
        by all parties at face value.  To prevent further court time  being
        lost the evidence of the appellant was taken and she was  subjected
        to cross examination.  The  case  was  then  adjourned  until  14th
        January 2014 to allow Ms Bundock to attend, to  be  cross-examined,
        and for  the  advocates  to  make  their  detailed  submissions  in
        relation to the issues in this appeal.


     7. On the 6th November 2013 a letter was received from the  appellant'
        solicitors who had been in contact with  Ms  Bundock  who  informed
        them that she was returning from a friend's wedding in  the  United
        States of America on the 12th January 2014 and  expressing  concern
        that she may be feeling unwell due to  jetlag  on  that  day.  They
        sought an adjournment  of  the  hearing  listed  for  14th  January
        (incorrectly stated to be the 13th January in the letter)  and  for
        the matter to be relisted on either the 15th or 16th  January  2014
        which were alternative  dates  canvassed  at  the  hearing  on  5th
        November.


     8. A further letter dated 18th December 2013  was  received  from  the
        appellant's  solicitors  seeking  a   response   to   the   earlier
        correspondence, again addressed to Bradford, and  on  13th  January
        2014 another letter confirming that Ms Bundock  was  aware  of  the
        hearing but that they had been unable to contact her  in  order  to
        confirm her attendance on the day.


     9. No indication was ever given that the hearing on 14th  January  was
        vacated and  the  alternative  dates  canvassed  in  November  were
        immediately thereafter taken for other tribunal business  and  were
        therefore no longer available.


    10. Ms Bundock failed to attend the hearing on 14th January  for  which
        an explanation was sought from Mr Tettey. He advised  the  Tribunal
        that he had only  discovered  that  morning  that  Ms  Bundock  had
        informed those instructing him that she was not  coming  to  court,
        even though she was back in the United Kingdom.  Time was  provided
        for Mr Tettey to make detailed enquiries as a result  of  which  he
        indicated that she had arrived at Manchester airport that  morning,
        although he was not sure of the time of arrival, and that  although
        the solicitors were aware of a strong possibility she would not  be
        able to attend it was not until the morning of the hearing that she
        confirmed she was not coming.


    11. Having considered  the  overriding  objectives,  the  interests  of
        justice, and the principles of fairness,  and  having  admitted  Ms
        Bundock's written report  at  the  first  hearing  to  counter  its
        exclusion from the bundle, it was indicated  to  the  parties  that
        there will be no further adjournment and the Tribunal will  proceed
        in the absence of this witness. A suggestion by Mr Tettey that  the
        Tribunal could  proceed  and  invite  a  written  response  to  any
        questions that could be put to the witness in writing was  rejected
        as if this was a practical  solution  one  questions  why  was  not
        canvassed at an earlier date, it could lead to further  delay,  and
        ample opportunity had been given to the  witness  to  attend.   Mrs
        Pettersen was preventing from cross-examining the witness  but  did
        not raise any objection and indicated she was content to  make  the
        submissions that she  wished  to  make  based  upon  the  available
        evidence.




Was NX trafficked to the United Kingdom



    12. In considering this issue, which was the main focus of the  dispute
        between the parties as the Secretary of State does not accept  that
        the appellant was trafficked,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  her
        immigration history as set out by the First-tier Tribunal which can
        be summarised as follows:


          i.  The appellant is an Albanian national who  lived  in  Verdove,
   Pogradec            with her family.  She is a graduate  who  obtained  a
   teaching degree.


          ii. She formed a relationship with EC who she met in a coffee  bar
   in March or             April 2011.  He claimed to have a  job  in  Italy
   but, in August 2011, said             he had to return  to  Italy  or  he
   would lose his job.


          iii.    The appellant's parents discovered the relationship at the
   end of July 2011             and her father met the boyfriend but made it
   clear to the appellant that he            did not like him. Following the
   boyfriend's  return  to  Italy  they  maintained             contact   by
   telephone  before  he   returned   to   Albania   in   March   2012.   He
   suggested the appellant the joined him in Italy and so she  left  Albania
   at             the end of March.  She stated she did not have a  passport
   but her                 boyfriend said he would take care of  everything.
   She left her details at the           town hall and the boyfriend  picked
   up the passport.


          iv. The appellant travelled to Italy by ferry where she was met by
   a friend.           When she telephoned her father he put  the  telephone
   down and would               not  speak  to  her.  Whilst  in  Italy  her
   boyfriend  told  her  that  he  wanted  her               to  work  as  a
   prostitute  and  when  she  objected  he  hit  her.   She   states   that
   she tried to  escape  but  was  beaten  and  lost  consciousness.   After
   recovery            she found herself in a different room  that  she  was
   always locked in and             then  "clients"  would  be  brought  in,
   sometimes ten a night and sometimes           more.  The appellant stated
   that there were other girls in the house too.


          vi. The appellant was taken with two other girls from the house on
   15th                October, accompanied by the boyfriend,  by  lorry  to
   the United Kingdom.              She has had no  communication  with  him
   since arrival. She states that the            day after arrival  she  was
   introduced to her first  "client"  after  which  there               were
   nightly visits of approximately ten to fifteen "clients" until,  on  28th
     October 2013 she was able to escape with the assistance of  a  "client"
   who            tied two bed sheets to the bed which  she  used  to  climb
   down from the           window of the bedroom.


          vii.    The appellant claims she was able to communicate with  the
   person who              helped her escape by sign language.  He  returned
   with a car in which she          indicated she wished to be  taken  to  a
   bus. He gave her some money.                  As a     result  she  ended
   up at Barnsley police station where she was seen by             a  female
   officer  from  London.  The  appellant  claims  she  cannot   return   to
   Albania as she could be easily located  by  ex-boyfriend,  that  she  was
          fearful of her father and what he would  do  as  she  had  brought
   shame on            him and the family which in the people's opinion  was
   such that it would           follow her all her life.


    13. The claim to have been  trafficked  into  the  United  Kingdom  was
        examined by the Competent Authority but rejected in a letter  dated
        the 13th February 2013.  It  was  accepted  there  were  reasonable
        grounds to believe the appellant  could  potentially  have  been  a
        victim of human trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation
        as a result of which the Competent  Authority  Officer  responsible
        for considering her case examined the evidence  to  decide  whether
        she had "conclusive grounds" for  being  treated  as  a  victim  of
        trafficking for the purposes of the Council of Europe Convention on
        Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.


    14. The conclusion of the Officer was that subsequent evidence had been
        produced to confirm that she was not trafficked on the basis of the
        information available and so, on the balance of  probabilities,  it
        was concluded that the appellant did not meet the definition  of  a
        victim trafficking for the purposes of the Convention.


    15. Attached to the letter  is  the  Conclusive  Grounds  Consideration
        Minute  containing  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  an
        examination of her asylum  interview.  The  author  of  the  Minute
        concludes that the appellants account to have  been  trafficked  is
        not internally consistent.  What are said to be  contradictions  in
        her account are set out in the asylum  decision  letter  dated  5th
        February  2013  including  what  is  said  to  be   an   internally
        inconsistent account of how the documents  the  appellant  used  to
        leave Albania had been obtained, what is said to be  an  internally
        inconsistent account of her place  of  departure  from  Albania,  a
        conclusion that the responses regarding her  journey  from  Albania
        were not consistent with her high level  of  university  education,
        the level of her literacy, the fact she spoke the  language  within
        the country she was travelling from and that at that point she  was
        not travelling under duress.  It is also claimed there is  internal
        inconsistency between her claim to have been kept  in  a  house  in
        Italy until 15th October 2012 a date she alleges she saw on her ex-
        boyfriends phone and the statement in the  police  interviews  that
        the date on the phone was in fact 18th October 2012.  The claim  to
        have been held against her will at a house in London working  as  a
        prostitute and her method of escape was said to be contradicted  by
        a later claim that two men and then a third agreed to assist her.


    16. It is said further internal  inconsistencies  arose  regarding  the
        circumstances of the escape and that the appellant's account of the
        journey from the house in London to the police station in  Barnsley
        is also said to be internally inconsistent.


    17. The appellant was interviewed by the South Yorkshire  Police  after
        which details were passed to the Metropolitan  Police  but  neither
        force decided to pursue an investigation based on  the  information
        the appellant provided.  The summary  notes  that  South  Yorkshire
        Police records giving details regarding the appellant's  appearance
        when she presented herself at Barnsley Police station note that her
        clothes were 'very  clean  and  tidy'  even  though  the  appellant
        claimed during the asylum interview that these were the clothes she
        had travelled in by lorry from Italy, a journey of three days,  she
        had worn to climb through the window having lowered a sheet of  the
        ground floor, ran across a park, hidden under  a  bridge  and  then
        taken a coach journey for several hours before  walking  all  night
        before entering the police station.  The police considered that her
        appearance at the police station was inconsistent with the  account
        she had given of her experiences in the United Kingdom.


    18. The Competent Authority Officer found  that  due  to  the  internal
        inconsistencies it was not accepted that  the  appellant  had  been
        recruited by means of threat or use of  force  or  other  forms  of
        coercion as defined in the accepted definition  of  trafficking  or
        that her claim to have been trafficked for the purposes  of  sexual
        exploitation   were   substantiated    due    to    the    internal
        inconsistencies.


    19. The appellant was, however,  referred  to  City  Hearts,  based  in
        Sheffield, where she came into contact with Ms Bundock who has been
        employed as a case worker for victims of  human  trafficking  since
        September   2011.   This   organisation   provides   support    and
        accommodation to anyone who is believed to be a potential victim of
        human trafficking.


    20. The appellant arrived into the care of City Hearts on 29th  October
        2012 where she was received by the house manager. In paragraph 9 of
        Ms Bundock's report it is noted that  the  house  manager  reported
        that the appellant "seemed scared and apprehensive"  and  that  her
        appearance was "grubby and messy" and that "her clothes  looked  as
        if she had been in them for a while". It is noted one of the  first
        directions from the house manager was to help her  obtain  clothing
        from a stock kept by the organisation.


    21. On 5th November 2012 the appellant was granted  reasonable  grounds
        to believe she was a victim of human trafficking status as a result
        of which Ms Bundock  was  assigned  to  be  her  case  worker.   Ms
        Bundock's report contains a summary of the discussions  which  took
        place  regarding  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and   the
        investigative process which I do not need  to  set  out  in  detail
        within the determination. Ms Bundock concludes:


              28. For [NX], returning to Albania is associated in  her  mind
   with the loss                 of  support,  rejection  from  society  and
   family, inability to obtain work                   and the strong fear of
   being found and abused.  Whether these fears                are perceived
   or   actualised,   they   are   extremely   real   to   [NX]   and    the
   thought  of  return  would  greatly  increase  the  chances  of   harming
     herself and if she did not take her life, her mental health would still
                  deteriorate.  My opinion is based upon the decline of  her
   mental                  health since the negative decision  and  her  own
   disclosure that she                   would be 'scared what she would  do
   to herself  if  she  were  told  to                 return  to  Albania'.
   Furthermore, a sense of hopelessness and low self               esteem as
   a  result  of  violence  and  abuse  at  the   hands   of   someone   you
   have trusted and been in a relationship with can increase  your  risk  of
          suicide (Dutton, 1992).  There is evidence stated previously  that
                  [NX's] self esteem is very low as are  her  current  hopes
   for the future.


              29. In summary, I believe that [NX] is a victim of trafficking
   and has                 experienced exploitation and abuse at  the  hands
   of those she trusted                  including many symptoms related  to
   trauma.  I do not believe a               person can exaggerate or  feign
   such responses for a long time such as                 six  months  being
   the   length   of   time   I   have   supported   [NX].    I   have    no
   doubt that she has experienced the abuse  and  control  that  she  speaks
          of.


    22. Ms Bundock, in paragraph 30 of  the  report,  states  that  in  her
        opinion most of the adverse credibility issues can be explained  in
        terms of the effect of trauma  on  a  person's  ability  to  recall
        specific details of events.


    23. The report is dated 16th April 2013 and has not been updated since.
        It does however deal with two main issues which appear to have been
        considered of some importance by the  Competent  Authority  Officer
        namely the internally inconsistent elements relating to the journey
        to the United Kingdom and events  thereafter  and  the  appellant's
        appearance as reported by an officer at Barnsley police station.  I
        have not seen a copy of the  contemporaneous  notes  taken  by  the
        police but a summary of  what  was  said  by  her  to  the  police,
        contained in an e-mail dated 16th January 2013, has been  disclosed
        [Respondents bundle, section E].  No witnesses were called  to  the
        Secretary of State dealing with what has  clearly  been  known  for
        some time as a point of contention. If the appellant  attended  the
        police station looking clean and well can it is understandable that
        doubt was placed on her account for the  reasons  set  out  in  the
        Competent Authority Officer's explanation for rejecting  the  claim
        to have been trafficked. It was the police however who referred the
        appellant to City Hearts who have recorded  an  assessment  of  the
        appellant on arrival which one would assume is in  accordance  with
        the normal practices of such an institution. The impression created
        by the record of the house  manager  corroborates  the  appellant's
        account regarding her previous experiences.


    24. It is  also  important  to  consider  the  country  conditions  and
        information  regarding  how  the  appellant  claims  to  have  been
        recruited and befriended by the named individual who  arranged  for
        the travel documents she claimed she used to leave Albania and who,
        through befriending her, persuaded her to  leave  the  country  and
        travel to Italy.  Such a practice of targeting young girls or young
        women who are perceived to be vulnerable is noted  in  the  country
        information and the fact the appellant admits  to  sexual  activity
        with this individual, contrary to normal practice  within  Albanian
        society may be indicative of a person who had strong  feelings  for
        the   person   concerned,   increasing   the   risk   of   personal
        vulnerability.  The country material notice  the  tactics  used  by
        traffickers to prevent escape and  the  movement  of  girls  within
        Western Europe for the purposes of prostitution.  Even  though  her
        account of  escape  by  tying  bed-sheets  was  challenged  by  the
        Secretary of State this does not necessarily mean that her  account
        of events within Albanian,  Italy,  and  eventual  arrival  in  the
        United Kingdom is not true.


    25. The reason for the delay between the hearing on  14th  January  and
        the  promulgation  of  this  determination  has  been   to   enable
        sufficient time to be allocated to give very careful  consideration
        to this element  of  the  case.  If  the  appellant  has  not  been
        trafficked but has entered the United Kingdom for other reasons she
        can have no basis for remaining and can be returned to  Albania  as
        no more than a failed asylum seeker.  If she  has  been  trafficked
        and is a victim of trafficking the assessment of the risk on return
        has to be conducted with this very important element in mind.


    26. Notwithstanding that the Competent Authority Officer  assessed  the
        question by  reference  to  the  civil  standard,  the  balance  of
        probabilities, this is a claim for international  protection.   The
        appellant claims to be entitled to be recognised as  a  refugee  on
        the basis of being a member of a particular social group, namely an
        Albanian woman trafficked to Italy and United Kingdom the  purposes
        of prostitution/sexual exploitation.  It is established  that  when
        considering such claims it is the lower standard that is applicable
        and not the higher civil standard. Having considered  the  evidence
        and submissions made by the advocates I find the appellant has,  to
        the lower standard, substantiated her  claim  to  be  a  victim  of
        trafficking from Albania for the purposes of sexual exploitation. I
        do find however there is no evidence of ongoing interest in her  or
        ongoing exploitation since she arrived at  the  Police  Station  in
        Barnsley in 2012.


Discussion



    27. It is necessary to assess any risk the appellant may face on return
        in light of  the  circumstances  prevailing  at  the  date  of  the
        hearing.   The  appellant  has  provided  a  supplementary  witness
        statement dated 3rd October 2013 in which she confirms that she has
        maintained some contact with her mother  in  Albania  to  whom  she
        speaks to on the telephone on a weekly or  fortnightly  basis.  Her
        father has passed away and it is her father's  older  brother,  her
        paternal uncle, who is now head of the family.


    28. The appellant claims that as far as she is aware  her  uncle  knows
        she left Albania with a boyfriend but claims she is  frightened  of
        him for if he discovers what has  happened  he  will  kill  her  to
        "cleanse" the family.  The appellant claims that contact  with  her
        mother is kept secret from him and that her  mother  has  expressed
        concern at losing both her husband and her daughter.


    29. The appellant claims she cannot relocate with Albania  to  an  area
        such as Tirana as her cousin drives  a  van  which  is  used  as  a
        minibus in the city and he knows many people. It is only people  in
        the village who have the same  surname  as  her.  She  claims  that
        although they are a big family the surname is unusual.


    30. The appellant also confirms that she has given birth to a daughter,
        BX, in September 2013.  The  father  is  not  named  on  the  birth
        certificate and she has no contact with him. They met  in  a  park,
        there was one sexual act whilst she was living  in  a  safe  house,
        which she now realises was a mistake  as  she  fell  pregnant.  She
        claims that although a part of her wishes to return to  Albania  to
        be with her mother and brothers she claims she cannot go because of
        her daughter.


    31. The current country guidance case relating to trafficked women  and
        the issue of risk on return to Albania is  AM  and  BM  (Trafficked
        women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) in which the Upper  Tribunal
        held that (i) It is not possible to set out a  typical  profile  of
        trafficked women from Albania: trafficked women come from all areas
        of the country and from varied  social  backgrounds;  (ii)  At  its
        worst the psychological damage inflicted on a victim of trafficking
        can lead to difficulties in reintegrating into Albanian society and
        has implications on whether or not it is possible for the victim of
        trafficking, should she  fear  persecution  in  her  own  area,  to
        relocate; (iii) Much of Albanian society is governed  by  a  strict
        code of honour which not only means  that  trafficked  women  would
        have very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
        areas on return but also will  affect  their  ability  to  relocate
        internally.  Those  who  have   children   outside   marriage   are
        particularly vulnerable. In extreme cases the  close  relatives  of
        the trafficked woman may refuse  to  have  the  trafficked  woman's
        child return with her and could force her  to  abandon  the  child;
        (iv) Those  that  see  themselves  outside  society,  for  example,
        divorced or abandoned women, or others who wish to live abroad, may
        seek out traffickers in order to facilitate  their  departure  from
        Albania and their establishment in  prostitution  abroad.  Although
        such women are not "trafficked women" in the sense that  they  have
        not been abducted  against  their  will,  there  is  likely  to  be
        considerable   violence   within   the   relationships   and    the
        psychological affect of that violence may lead to a situation where
        the pressures which they are under and the lack of freedom they are
        under means that such women should be treated as trafficked  women;
        (v) The Albanian Government and authorities  are  taking  steps  to
        protect trafficked women who return but such steps are  not  always
        effective. When considering whether or not there is  a  sufficiency
        of protection for a trafficked woman who  is  to  be  returned  her
        particular circumstances must be  considered.  Not  all  trafficked
        women  returning  to  Albania  will  be  unable   to   access   the
        arrangements and facilities  available  to  enable  successful  re-
        integration; (vi) Trafficked women from Albania may well be members
        of a particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether  they
        are at risk of  persecution  on  account  of  such  membership  and
        whether they will be able to access sufficiency of protection  from
        the authorities will depend  upon  their  individual  circumstances
        including but not limited to the following: (a) The  social  status
        and economic standing of the trafficked  woman's  family;  (b)  The
        level of education of the trafficked woman or her family;  (c)  The
        trafficked woman's state of health, particularly her mental health;
        (d) The presence of an illegitimate child; (e) The area  of  origin
        of the trafficked woman's family; and (f)  The  trafficked  woman's
        age.


    32. Mr Tettey submitted on  the  appellant's  behalf  that  if  she  is
        returned she will be unable to seek  assistance  although  this  is
        challenged by Mrs Pettersen who relies upon the latest  Operational
        Guidance Notes in relation to Albania, dated  12th  December  2013,
        and  specifically  paragraph  3.19  which  reflects  the  fact  the
        government is Albania  does  not  fully  comply  with  the  minimum
        standards for the elimination of trafficking although it is  making
        significant efforts to do so.  It is also  stated  that  there  are
        modestly funded NGO shelters that provide services  to  victims  of
        trafficking and courts are taking a more  victim  centred  approach
        during trials.


    33. Paragraph 3.19.5 records the fact the government maintained efforts
        to refer victims of trafficking to appropriate services during 2012
        but that a lack of  coordination  amongst  ministries  resulted  in
        punishment of the victims of trafficking.  It is recorded  that  in
        2013 forty-two new victims were identified by  the  government,  in
        2012 fifty new victims by NGO's.  138  victims  are  cared  for  in
        state run and NGO shelters and that although there is some training
        of the police  many  police  in  the  regional  authorities  remain
        untrained.


    34. The report refers to the lack of government funding for victims  of
        trafficking although  it  also  records  the  fact  the  government
        encourages   victims   to   participate   in   investigations   and
        prosecutions of trafficking offenders by providing  witness  access
        to social workers and  psychologists  during  trials.  There  is  a
        victim coordinator in Tirana although services outside the  capital
        city are set to be somewhat lacking.


    35. The European Union have noted that strengthening of the  office  of
        anti-trafficking coordinator is required, that internal trafficking
        remains  a  concern,  that  a  multidisciplinary  victim   oriented
        approach to trafficking in human beings needs to be developed,  the
        identification of victims and  their  needs  to  be  improved,  and
        referral  mechanisms  strengthened  to  ensure  that  victims  have
        unhindered access to assistance, support and protection,  including
        reintegration on return.


    36. It is possibly as a result of the recognition that more needs to be
        done in Albania  by  the  government  that  with  effect  from  1st
        November 2013 the International Organisation for  Migration  (IOM),
        on  behalf  of  the  Home  Office,  has  established  a   dedicated
        assistance package for victims of trafficking returning from the UK
        to Albania, including those with children.  It  has  been  designed
        explicitly to help to resettle and  reintegrate  in  a  humane  and
        sustainable way and to mitigate the  effect  of  re-trafficking  or
        related ill treatment [OGN 3.19.11].


    37. Mr Tettey  submitted  that  there  was  an  ongoing  risk  for  the
        appellant if returned  as  a  result  of  the  fact  she  had  been
        trafficked and from her family but I do not find the appellant  has
        substantiated her claim that there is a  real  risk  of  being  re-
        trafficked by the individual concerned with whom  she  has  had  no
        contact since the journey to the United Kingdom.


    38. Although facilities offered by  the  authorities  are  not  to  the
        required standard the appellant has  not  substantiated  her  claim
        that she will not be able to access the support services available,
        particularly in Tirana.  I mentioned this city as I accept that  it
        is unlikely the appellant will be able to relocate to her home area
        especially, if she may face difficulties  with  her  uncle  if  the
        truth of what has occurred emerges.


    39. Whether it is reasonable in all the circumstances for the appellant
        to internally  relocate  requires  consideration  of  a  number  of
        factors.  The appellant claimed that she  cannot  relocate  to  the
        capital city has a cousin drives a minibus and knows  a  number  of
        people and the risk of being discovered is increased as a result of
        her surname, which she claims is unusual in Albania and  associated
        with her family.  I  find  this  claim  not  substantiated  on  the
        evidence.  If the appellant is concerned about her name there is no
        reason why it cannot be changed or  an  alternative  name  used  if
        required, although I do not find it established that such steps are
        needed on the facts of this appeal.   Tirana  is  a  city  of  some
        400,000  inhabitants  and  the  available  services  appear  to  be
        specifically tailored to ensure the safety  and  re-integration  of
        victims of trafficking. It has not been substantiated such services
        are not available or will not provide a sufficiency  of  protection
        if required.


    40. I do not find it substantiated that the presence of the appellant's
        cousin, even if he does work in Tirana, means there is a real  risk
        of discovery or that the consequences of discovery are as alleged.


    41. It is important to consider  the  submissions  of  Mr  Tettey,  the
        written evidence of Ms Bundock, and  the  brief  statement  by  the
        counsellor who has assisted the  appellant,  when  considering  the
        reasonableness of return.   There  is  evidence  of  the  traumatic
        effect upon the appellant of what  has  occurred  to  her  and  the
        subjective fear of what may occur on return, although I do not find
        that such a fear has been objectively  substantiated.   Ms  Bundock
        states the appellant should never be returned to Albania.  I accept
        that it is  arguable  that  it  is  not  in  the  appellant's  best
        interests or those of her child for her to be returned  to  Albania
        without appropriate support, and so the question the Tribunal needs
        to consider is whether the full extent of the support  required  by
        the appellant has been identified and whether she has substantiated
        her claim that such support will not be available to her return  to
        Albania, always remembering that the onus is upon the appellant  to
        demonstrate that what she claims is true.


    42. As stated  above,  the  respondent's  own  OGN  highlights  ongoing
        concerns in relation  to  the  actions  taken  by  the  government,
        especially outside the capital city, as a result of which no  doubt
        the IOM package has been devised. This is a  development  that  has
        occurred after the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
        fact is only relevant to this appeal is a result of the delays that
        occurred, which I have recorded above, which prevented the  hearing
        before the Upper Tribunal occurring prior to  December  2013.   IOM
        are an internationally  recognised  organisation  who  maintain  an
        office in Albania and it is clear that work has been undertaken  to
        ensure that adequate facilities are available  to  the  victims  of
        trafficking returning from the UK.  No  detailed  submissions  were
        made on behalf of the appellant or evidence adduced  to  show  that
        the  services  available  through  such  a  reintegration  package,
        especially as those responsible for applying the same will no doubt
        have made available the reports this Tribunal has seen,  would  not
        be sufficient to meet the appellant's needs.


    43. I do not find it substantiated that the resources available to  the
        appellant in Albania through such a package of help and  assistance
        are not sufficient to meet her reasonable needs, or  those  of  her
        child, and as such I do not find it has been substantiated that  it
        is unreasonable in all the circumstances to expect the appellant to
        relocate to Tirana.


    44. In relation to  the  appellant's  daughter,  who  is  a  baby,  the
        appellant wants to remain in the United  Kingdom  with  her  child.
        This is clear from her evidence and general demeanor, but there  is
        no ongoing contact with the child's father and  the  needs  of  the
        child are clearly being well met by her mother.  Ms Bundock records
        psychological  concerns  arising   from   her   mother's   previous
        experiences but there is no evidence that adequate support services
        are not available such that the standard of parenting  will  suffer
        and the needs of the child no longer met.  BX  is  a  young  infant
        whose  best  interests  are  met  by  her  mother  and   there   is
        insufficient evidence to show that such will not be the  case  even
        if they are returned to Albania.  Although there  is  reference  in
        the case law to some having to return to families and being  forced
        to make a choice as to whether they keep or abandon their child for
        family support, the material  available  does  not  substantiate  a
        claim that this appellant faces a real risk of being separated from
        the child, especially as there is no need for to return to her home
        village.


    45. The package  provided  by  the  IOM  clearly  makes  provision  for
        individuals being returned with children and with  the  benefit  of
        such a package it has not been  shown  that  the  appellant  cannot
        reintegrate and be able to provide appropriately  for  herself  and
        her child. The appellant has also expressed a wish to  be  able  to
        have a career as  a  teacher  and  she  has  obtained  an  academic
        qualification to degree level in relation  to  this  profession  in
        Albania.  It has not been shown that with appropriate  support  the
        appellant will not be able to reintegrate and should eventually  be
        able to engage with the employment market, if required. There is no
        evidence that the reintegration package is limited  to  the  extent
        that she may be effectively abandoned.  It has not been established
        on the evidence that any degree of vulnerability will arise in  the
        future as it did in the past.  The appellant has  suffered  in  the
        past as a result  of  what  she  now  accepts  was  a  mistake  and
        misguided loyalties towards the man concerned. As recognised by the
        Competent Authority Officer she was under no duress when  she  left
        Albania and travelled to Italy and it was  only  when  she  was  in
        Italy that the truth of her boyfriend's intentions was  discovered.
        She is far wiser now than she was then and  there  is  no  evidence
        that she is susceptible to a degree that there is a  real  risk  of
        repetition of such events in relation to which she shall  no  doubt
        receive appropriate support on return in any event.


    46. As there is an internal flight alternative that  it  is  reasonable
        for the appellant to make use of in all the circumstances, I do not
        find  she  has  substantiated  her  claim  to  be  entitled  to  be
        recognised as a refugee and I dismiss this element of the appeal.


    47. I do not find the appellant  has  substantiated  her  claim  to  be
        entitled to a grant of humanitarian  protection  or  that  she  has
        established the high threshold of  Articles  2  and/or  3  will  be
        engaged on the facts.


    48. I have considered Article 8 but find the  appellant  is  unable  to
        succeed under the Immigration Rules.  The claim is  only  be  based
        upon private life under Article 8 ECHR as any family  life  between
        her and  her  daughter  will  continue  as  they  will  be  removed
        together.   It  has  not  been  shown  that  there  are  additional
        circumstances to be considered outside the Rules  that  would  make
        the decision to return disproportionate.


    49. I accept from the evidence that a negative decision has in the past
        had a traumatic  effect  upon  the  appellant  and  no  doubt  this
        decision will not assist in that regard. It is clear  however  that
        she is receiving appropriate support from the medical services  and
        support services in the United Kingdom and there is  no  indication
        that this will not continue during the time in which she remains in
        this country and during the removal process.  Although  Ms  Bundock
        raised the issue of suicide if the appellant faces the prospect  of
        return, it has not been shown that appropriate services will not be
        available in Albania, through the support and reintegration package
        if needed, to meet any ongoing physical or mental health needs.   I
        do not find  it  has  been  established  that  the  high  threshold
        recognised in case law when  considering  suicide  cases  has  been
        shown to be met in this case.


    50. I have also considered the medical elements as part of the  Article
        8 (2) assessment and although  the  appellant  may  have  developed
        bonds of trust with those who have assisted her in  the  UK,  which
        will form part of her private life, it has not been shown that such
        support is not  available  on  return  or  that  the  appellant  is
        incapable of forming such bonds of trust in the future.  I  do  not
        find  that  it  has  been  established   that   the   decision   is
        disproportionate in relation to  this  element  of  the  case.  The
        appellant is a young woman in good physical health according to the
        available evidence.


Decision

    51. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    52. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7th February 2014









