
[pic]
IAC-CH-AP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01414/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport                |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd October 2014                             |On 27th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    T R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Rhys James Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. It has previously been found appropriate, given  this  appeal  involves
    asylum issues, that the Claimant be granted anonymity unless and  until
    the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise.   As  such,  no  report   of   these
    proceedings shall directly, or indirectly, identify the Claimant or any
    members of his family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  be
    a contempt of court.

 2. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State,  who  was
    the Respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  For ease of  reference,
    we refer to the parties as the Secretary of State and the Claimant.

 3. The Secretary of State appeals with permission of the Upper Tribunal  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Harries promulgated on 24th April
    2014 in which she allowed the Claimant's appeal against the decision of
    the Secretary of State, made on 13th February 2014, to refuse him leave
    to enter.

 4. This Sri Lankan Claimant's history, so far as it is relevant,  is  that
    he claimed to have arrived here illegally in August 2004.  Of  his  own
    volition he left the UK on 25 October 2006, travelling to Italy,  where
    he went to join a friend, on a  forged  Home  Office  Travel  Document.
    After only two or three hours in Italy, he tried to leave  on  a  false
    passport. He was discovered and arrested. He admitted the use of  false
    documents. The Italian authorities put him on a flight to  the  UK.  On
    arrival, and so at the port of entry, he claimed Asylum airside. He was
    granted temporary admission.

 5. In November 2006 the  Asylum  claim  was  rejected;  it  was  initially
    certified as wholly  unfounded  but,  following  representations,  that
    decision was withdrawn in May 2013. The Secretary of State made a fresh
    decision in February 2014.  The Secretary of State refused the Claimant
    leave to enter on the grounds that the Claimant was  seeking  to  enter
    the United Kingdom for a purpose other than  one  for  which  entry  is
    permitted  by  Immigration   Rules   (Section   88(2)(d)   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002),  and  when  giving  notice  of  that
    decision explained in a reasons for refusal letter why she found he had
    failed to make out his claim for  international  protection,  and  also
    gave notice of her intention to give directions for his removal to  Sri
    Lanka. The  claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  raising
    international protection and human  rights  grounds.  The  appeal  came
    before Judge Harries who, following a hearing on 07 April 2014, allowed
    his appeal on the grounds that  the  decision  was  "otherwise  not  in
    accordance with the law".

 6. The pertinent parts of the judge's decision appear  at  paragraphs  26,
    27, 28, 40 and 41.

         "26. Having considered all  the  submissions  in  relation  to  the
             removal decision appealed against I find that it was not  made
             by the respondent in accordance with the law.  I am  satisfied
             that there is an immigration decision but I find that  it  was
             made on the wrong grounds as submitted by Miss Physsas for the
             Appellant.  I find that at the relevant time the Appellant was
             not seeking to enter the United Kingdom for  a  purpose  other
             than one for which entry is permitted by the Immigration Rules
             with  reference  to  section  88(2)(d)  of  the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
         27.  The circumstances are that the Appellant has not sought  leave
             to enter the United Kingdom at any time; he entered  illegally
             in 2004 and was  returned  involuntarily  in  2006  after  his
             arrest in Italy and removal back to the  United  Kingdom.   On
             one view of it his status on return  to  the  United  Kingdom,
             albeit he was granted temporary admission, must have  been  as
             it was when he departed, namely that he  continued  to  be  an
             illegal entrant.  In these circumstances the removal  decision
             should have been made on these grounds when his  asylum  claim
             was rejected.
         28.  If I am wrong in that regard and  the  Appellant  was  seeking
             leave to enter the United Kingdom I accept the submission from
             Miss Physsas that seeking asylum is a purpose permitted by the
             Immigration Rules so that in either event the  respondent  has
             made the removal decision on the wrong grounds  and  therefore
             not in accordance  with  the  law.   The  Appellant  therefore
             awaits a  lawful  decision  from  the  respondent.   In  these
             circumstances I have not determined the appeal  on  any  other
             grounds but have made the following findings  in  relation  to
             the asylum claim for future reference.
              ...
         40.  In the light of my findings set out above and my rejection  of
             the core aspects of the Appellant's claim I do not accept that
             he is an individual who is, or is perceived to be, a threat to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because he is  or
             would be perceived to have a significant role in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.  Nor do I accept that
             the Appellant is a person whose name appears on a computerised
             'stop' list accessible at the airport, comprising  a  list  of
             those against whom there is an extant court  order  or  arrest
             warrant.  I accordingly find that  the  Appellant  is  not  an
             individual whose name appears on a 'stop' list or that he will
             be stopped at the airport and handed over to  the  appropriate
             Sri Lankan authorities in pursuance of such order or warrant.
         41.  In the light of my finding that the decision of the respondent
             is not in accordance with the  law  I  do  not  determine  the
             appeal to a conclusion in relation to the remaining grounds of
             appeal.  If I were to do so I would not find under  the  terms
             of the United Nations Convention relating  to  the  status  of
             refugees that the Appellant has shown a well-founded  fear  of
             persecution  for  reasons  of  race,  religion,   nationality,
             membership of a particular social group or political  opinion.
             I would not be satisfied that the Appellant has established  a
             well-founded fear of persecution if returned to Sri Lanka  for
             a reason within the 1951 Convention.  I would  find  that  the
             Appellant's removal would not cause the United Kingdom  to  be
             in breach of its obligations under the 1951 Convention."

 7. The Secretary of State's grounds are that the judge's finding that  the
    decision was "otherwise not in accordance with the  law"  is  erroneous
    because, on his return to the UK, the Claimant sought to enter  the  UK
    by virtue of being a refugee. In those circumstances, in the face of  a
    refusal of refugee status, the only decision available to the Secretary
    of State is a refusal of leave to enter.  In a  subsidiary  point,  the
    grounds argue that the judge's  finding  the  Claimant  is  an  illegal
    entrant is also erroneous in law because he  left  the  United  Kingdom
    voluntarily to travel to Italy. He had not been "forcibly  removed"  as
    the judge had found.

 8. The Claimant attended the hearing  before  us.  As  no  application  to
    adduce additional evidence was made it was not necessary for us to hear
    from him, and the representatives proceeded on the basis of submissions
    only.

 9. At the commencement of the hearing we indicated that we saw  the  merit
    in the grounds, and asked Mr James if there were arguments he could put
    forward to countermand the arguments.  As the discussion  unfolded,  Mr
    James conceded that  the  judge's  finding  that  the  Claimant  is  an
    "illegal entrant" was  unsustainable.  Mr  James  recognised  that  the
    Claimant's  earlier status as an illegal entrant was made irrelevant in
    the context of current appeal rights because of his having  exited  the
    country, and could not  be determinative of his status  when,  on  25th
    October 2006, he was airside at the port, and seeking leave to enter as
    a refugee.  He did not become an illegal  entrant  for  a  second  time
    because he was permitted to pass through immigration control  with  the
    benefit of temporary admission.  Whilst temporary  admission  does  not
    operate as "leave to enter", his presence cannot  be  characterised  as
    being illegal in the context of the 1971 Immigration Act.

10. Mr James sought to sustain the judge's decision on an alternative novel
    basis.  In terms Mr James did not accept  that  the  Immigration  Rules
    made no provision for entry  clearance  for  the  purpose  of  claiming
    asylum. He argued that because the Claimant was making  his  claim  for
    refugee status airside he was obviously seeking leave to enter to  make
    or pursue an asylum claim.  Asylum came within The Immigration Rules of
    HC 395, and so the Claimant was making an  application  for  a  purpose
    covered by them. Had the Claimant's claim  been  successful,  he  would
    have been granted leave to enter, so it followed that  he  was  seeking
    entry for a purpose which was accommodated in the Rules.

11. Mr James took us to paragraph 331 of the Immigration Rules which states
    as follows:

         "331.    If a person seeking leave to enter is  refused  asylum  or
             their application  for  asylum  is  withdrawn  or  treated  as
             withdrawn under paragraph 333C of these Rules, the Immigration
             Officer will consider whether or not he is in  a  position  to
             decide to give or refuse leave to enter  without  interviewing
             the person further. If the Immigration Officer decides that  a
             further interview is not required  he  may  serve  the  notice
             giving or refusing leave to enter by post. If the  Immigration
             Officer decides that a further interview is required, he  will
             then resume his examination to determine  whether  or  not  to
             grant the person leave to enter under any other  provision  of
             these Rules. If the person fails at any time to comply with  a
             requirement  to  report  to   an   Immigration   Officer   for
             examination, the  Immigration  Officer  may  direct  that  the
             person's examination shall be treated  as  concluded  at  that
             time.  The  Immigration  Officer  will   then   consider   any
             outstanding  applications  for  entry  on  the  basis  of  any
             evidence before him."

12. Mr James submitted that the Secretary of  State's  decision:  that  the
    Claimant was making an application for a purpose outwith the rules, was
    not simply a "wrong" decision in the context of  the  applicable  rules
    and amenable to an appeal on the ground that it was "not in  accordance
    with the immigration rules", but an unlawful one, so as to be correctly
    identified by the judge as a  decision  which  was  "otherwise  not  in
    accordance with the  law".   Further,  the  decision  gave  rise  to  a
    defective notice which, as a result of being defective,  was  incapable
    of giving rise to a valid right of appeal. It followed  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction and the Claimant awaited a correct  lawful
    decision notice.

13. Mr Richards in response relied on the grounds of the  application.   He
    asserted that no disadvantage had been caused to the  Claimant  by  the
    use of the particular form of decision.  The Claimant  had  been  given
    the opportunity to make out his claim for international  protection  to
    the Secretary of State and to the Tribunal.  There  was  no  suggestion
    that the judge's  decision  rejecting  the  Claimant's  entitlement  to
    refugee status contained any  error.  The  judge  had  not  dealt  with
    Article 8 but there is no cross appeal on that basis.

14. Mr James clarified that the Claimant raised no issue in respect of  the
    Judge's findings rejecting  the  Claimant's  claims  for  international
    protection in respect of the Refugee Convention and Articles 2 and 3 of
    the ECHR.  Mr James further clarified that in terms of  Article  8  any
    disturbance was to Private rather than Family Life, and limited to that
    resulting from return to Sri Lanka in the context of his residence here
    on temporary admission from 24th October 2006 until the date of return.
    The evidence to the First Tier  was  limited  to  confirmation  of  the
    Claimant's having been  provided  with  accommodation,  and  there  was
    nothing going to the character and quality of Private Life enjoyed,  or
    the severity of interference consequent upon removal.

Discussion

15. The crux of the appeal as it was before us was  the  challenge  to  the
    judge's  finding  at  paragraph  28  that  the  Secretary  of   State's
    immigration decision refusing leave to enter was made unlawful  by  her
    finding that the Claimant had not made an application for a purpose for
    which entry is permitted by the Immigration Rules.

16. We reject Mr James's bold contention that the Rules  permit  entry  for
    the purposes of either claiming or pursuing an asylum claim.  Mr James'
    reference to paragraph 331 is misconceived.  The Rules  make  provision
    for the grant of leave where a claim for asylum is established: they do
    not make any provision for leave to enter for that  purpose.   However,
    even if the Claimant had been seeking to enter the United Kingdom for a
    purpose for which entry is permitted by the Immigration Rules, so  that
    the Secretary of State's decision was wrong in that regard,  then  that
    is a matter subject to resolution on appeal available to  the  Claimant
    out  of  country  on  the  ground  available  under  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Section 84 (1) (a) that the decision is
    "not in accordance with the Immigration Rules" rather than  at  Section
    84 (1) (e) i.e. "otherwise not in accordance  with  the  law".   As  it
    happens, in this case the Claimant failed  to  put  forward  any  basis
    within the Rules for seeking entry, and  so  there  is  no  substantive
    point to avail him in that regard in any event.

17. The relevant statutory provisions of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 : Section  82,  Section  84,  and  Section  88  are  as
    follows:
         "82  Right of appeal: general
         (1)  Where an immigration decision is made in respect of  a  person
             he may appeal to the Tribunal] .
         (2)  In this Part 'immigration decision' means-
             (a)  refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,
             (b)  refusal of entry clearance,
             (c)  refusal of a certificate of entitlement under section  10
                  of this Act,
             (d)  refusal to vary a person's leave to enter  or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom if the result of the  refusal  is  that
                  the person has no leave to enter or remain,
             (e)  variation of a person's leave to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom if when  the  variation  takes  effect  the
                  person has no leave to enter or remain,
             (f)  revocation under section 76 of  this  Act  of  indefinite
                  leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,
             (g)  a decision that a person is to be removed from the United
                  Kingdom by way of directions under section 10(1)(a),  (b),
                  (ba) or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c. 33)
                  (removal of person unlawfully in United Kingdom),
             (h)  a decision that an illegal entrant is to be removed  from
                  the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8
                  to 10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971  (c.  77)
                  (control of entry: removal),
                  (i)  a decision that a person is to be  removed  from  the
                      United Kingdom by way of directions given  by  virtue
                      of paragraph 10A of that Schedule (family),
                  (ia) a decision that a person is to be  removed  from  the
                      United Kingdom by way of directions  under  paragraph
                      12(2) of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971  (c.
                      77) (seamen and aircrews),
                  (ib) a decision to make an order under section 2A of  that
                      Act (deprivation of right of abode),
             (j)  a decision to make a deportation order under section 5(1)
                  of that Act, and
             (k)  refusal to revoke a deportation order under section  5(2)
                  of that Act.
         (3)  N/A
         (4)  The right of appeal under subsection (1)  is  subject  to  the
             exceptions and limitations specified in this Part."
         84   Grounds of appeal
         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration  decision
             must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
             (a)  that the decision is not in accordance  with  immigration
                  rules;
             (b)  that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 19B of
                  the Race Relations Act 1976  (c.  74)  (discrimination  by
                  public authorities) or Article 20A of the  Race  Relations
                  (Northern Ireland) Order 1997;
             (c)  that the decision is unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to act
                  contrary to Human Rights Convention) as being incompatible
                  with the Claimant's Convention rights;
             (d)  that the Claimant is an EEA national or a member  of  the
                  family of an EEA national and the  decision  breaches  the
                  Claimant's rights under the Community Treaties in  respect
                  of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;
             (e)  that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the
                  law;
             (f)  that the person taking the decision should have exercised
                  differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;
             (g)  that removal of the Claimant from the United  Kingdom  in
                  consequence of the immigration decision would  breach  the
                  United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention
                  or would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights
                  Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the   Claimant's
                  Convention rights.


         88   Ineligibility
         (1)  This section applies to an  immigration  decision  of  a  kind
             referred to in section 82(2)(a), (b), (d) or (e).
         (2)  A person  may  not  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an
             immigration decision which is taken on the grounds that he  or
             a person of whom he is a dependant-
             (a)  does not satisfy a requirement as to age, nationality  or
                  citizenship specified in immigration rules,
             (b)  does not have an immigration  document  of  a  particular
                  kind (or any immigration document),
             (ba) has failed to  supply  a  medical  report  or  a  medical
                  certificate  in   accordance   with   a   requirement   of
                  immigration rules,
             (c)  is seeking to be in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  period
                  greater than that permitted in  his  case  by  immigration
                  rules, or
             (d)  is seeking to enter or remain in the United Kingdom for a
                  purpose other than one for which  entry  or  remaining  is
                  permitted in accordance with immigration rules.
         (3)  N/A
         (4)  Subsection (2) does not prevent the bringing of an  appeal  on
             any or all of the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b), (c)
             and (g)."

18. Now to apply those provisions to the position of the Claimant. We  find
    the Claimant was seeking leave to enter. We are certain of that because
    he asked to be recognised by the UK as a refugee.  He was then entitled
    to, and the Respondent was duty bound to make, an Immigration Decision,
    as to whether or not he would be granted entry.  The  decision  is  one
    that falls within Section 82 (2) (a) of the 2002 Act.  The Claimant was
    given a right of appeal because the Statute,  in  the  same  provision,
    provides that it is it is an appealable decision. We pause to note that
    in the face  of  the  Statutory  provisions  the  submission  that  the
    decision gave rise to a defective notice  and  so  no  valid  right  of
    appeal lacks coherence.

19. The Claimant appealed.

20. An immigration decision within Section 82 (2) (a), which,  as  we  have
    reasoned, this is, carries only limited grounds of  appeal  because  of
    the provision of Section 82  (4),  which  refers  to  the  restrictions
    contained in the same part of the Act, restrictions which,  at  Section
    88 (2)(d) of the eligibility provisions, limit the grounds available to
    those at Section 84 (1) (b), (c) and  (g).  In  short,  discrimination,
    refugee and ECHR grounds.  Saving provisions are  set  out  at  Section
    88(4), but none applies to the Ground of Appeal at Section 84(e),  i.e.
    "that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law".

21. The Claimant raised asylum and human rights grounds and  so  he  raised
    two grounds of appeal which require determination in country.  That  is
    how he came to have the benefit of an in-country  right  of  appeal  by
    virtue of Section 92(3C).

22. However it appears that neither representative drew the judge's mind to
    the relevant statutory provisions. Nevertheless whatever the merits  of
    the reasons given by the Immigration Officer, there can be no  argument
    that the decision was made on the grounds specified in s  88  (2)  (d).
    The grounds of appeal are therefore limited to those in paragraphs (b),
    (c) and (g) of s 84(1).

23. To conclude: although the Refugee Convention and ECHR grounds raised in
    the notice of appeal were before the judge, the ground in the 2002  Act
    at s 84 (e) "otherwise not in accordance with the law",  relied  on  by
    counsel at the First-tier  Tribunal, and on which the judge allowed the
    appeal, was not available.

24. It follows that we find that the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Harries, to the extent that it purported to find that the decision  was
    "otherwise not in accordance with the law", is in error,  and  must  be
    set aside.

25. The judge's findings dismissing the merits of the grounds in respect of
    the Refugee Convention, Articles 2 and  3  ECHR,  all  of  which  stood
    together, are not challenged, and so  stand  as  determinative  of  the
    dismissal of the grounds of appeal on those issues.

26. In terms of the merits of the Article 8 ground of appeal,  no  findings
    were made by  Judge  Harries,  and  so  the  ground  is  before  us  to
    determine. The ground of appeal is formulaic.  Mr James clarified  that
    reliance is on private life, as opposed to the existence of any  family
    life. Unsurprisingly, in the context of the relevant jurisprudence  and
    the scant evidence of the character and quality  of  the  Private  Life
    currently enjoyed by the Claimant, or of interference  with  it  beyond
    the bald statement of relocation to Sri Lanka consequent to removal, Mr
    James did not seek to press upon us that this was an alternative ground
    upon which the Claimant could hope to succeed. In remaking the decision
    we also dismiss the Claimant's appeal on human rights grounds.

27. For all of the reasons set out above the Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    succeeds; we set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and  we
    remake the decision and dismiss the Claimant's appeal on all grounds.


Signed                              Date: 3rd October 2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

