

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/01417/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 22 July  2014                       |On 28 July 2014           |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                              MRS NAZILA MODIRI
                        (NO ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Nelson-Iye, Authorised Representative
      (Duncan Lewis & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
           Judge Renton (sitting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal)  on
           20 May 2014 against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Shepherd made in a determination  promulgated  on  or  about  29
           April  2014  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
           protection and human rights appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Iran, born on 14  December  1972.
           She had appealed against her removal from the United Kingdom,  a
           decision taken by the  Respondent  on  17  February  2014.   The
           Appellant had entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student  on
           2 March 2010.  She was joined by her husband as  her  dependant.
           The Appellant returned to Iran on 10  December  2011,  and  came
           back to the United Kingdom on 19 January 2012.  She finished her
           course in March 2012.  The Appellant claimed asylum on 17 August
           2012.  She claimed that she feared for her life because she  was
           a dance teacher who had continued to teach despite a  government
           ban.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton
           considered that it was arguable that Judge Shepherd had erred by
           failing to consider the corroborative evidence given by  two  of
           the Appellant's witnesses.




      Submissions


      4.    Mr Nelson-Iye for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards
           appeal earlier submitted.  He submitted that the judge had  been
           mistaken to commence her  analysis  of  the  evidence  with  the
           Appellant's  failure  to   claim   asylum   at   "her   earliest
           convenience.   The  judge  had  misapplied  section  8  of   the
           Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants)  Act  2004  and  had  not
           followed SM (Section 8: Judges process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116.
            The judge had compounded that error by failing to deal with the
           evidence of three out of the four witnesses called.   The  judge
           did not explain what weight if any she gave  to  such  evidence.
           The judge had not dealt with the second DVD.  The judge had made
           perverse or irrational findings, basing conclusions on the  fact
           that the Appellant had siblings  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
           decision should be set aside.  The appeal should be  reheard  de
           novo.


      5.    Mr Wilding for the Respondent submitted that  the  determination
           disclosed no error of law.  The judge had to start her  analysis
           at some point and it was not wrong to start with the delay which
           was substantial.  It was plain that the judge had   covered  all
           of the evidence in the round.  SM was  of  no  relevance.    The
           second DVD contained nothing new.  There was no failure  in  the
           risk  assessment  as  the  appeal   had   been   determined   on
           credibility.  None of the witnesses apart from the Appellant had
           claimed to have been present at any material event.


      6.    In reply  Mr  Nelson-Iye  reiterated  that  the  judge  had  not
           considered the video evidence properly,  the  Appellant's  fears
           and the risk on return to Iran.  The determination should be set
           aside.


      7.    The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
           found no error of law and reserved its determination, which  now
           follows.




      The no material error of law finding


      8.    The tribunal accepts  Mr  Wilding's  submissions.   Indeed,  the
           tribunal  considers  that  the  grounds  of  onwards  appeal  as
           submitted and urged in argument were no more than a disagreement
           with the judge's findings of fact.  The grounds failed  to  show
           an arguable error of law and the grant of permission  to  appeal
           must be considered generous.


      9.    The background and country evidence concerning Iran were not  in
           dispute.  The judge plainly had them in mind and  that  was  the
           context in which the appeal  was  considered.   The  Appellant's
           credibility was central to that assessment.


      10.   The Appellant had advanced an involved claim with a large volume
           of evidence. A whole day was set  aside  for  the  hearing.  The
           experienced  judge  prepared  a  comprehensive  and   structured
           determination which necessarily ran to over 50 paragraphs.   The
           determination was not simply a recitation of the evidence (which
           was itemised) but was rather a comprehensive reflection  on  the
           issues raised in the  appeal.   The  judge  did  not  treat  the
           Appellant's long delay in claiming asylum as a reason in  itself
           for disbelieving  the  Appellant  but  rather  as  one  of  many
           indicators of the likelihood  of  the  Appellant's  claims:  see
           [40(a)].


      11.   The judge applied her self direction as to the burden and  lower
           standard of proof.  There is no basis for suggesting  otherwise.
           Her approach was measured and restrained.  She factored  in  the
           witness evidence as part of her "in the round" assessment and it
           is untrue  to  suggest  otherwise.   The  judge  identified  the
           witnesses by name at [9], summarised their evidence at [27]  and
           gave  detailed  and  sustainable   reasons   for   her   adverse
           credibility findings which  included  ample  discussion  of  the
           witness evidence at [40]. The DVD evidence was also sufficiently
           treated: see, for example, [25], [27(d)] and [31].   It is trite
           law that a judge does not have to treat each item of evidence on
           an individual basis. There is no irrationality or perversity  in
           the determination, but rather a  careful  and  logical  analysis
           which justified the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's
           claim was a fabrication.   There is no error of law and no basis
           for  interfering  with  the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
           Appellant's appeal, which must stand.



      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands undisturbed


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell






