
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01729/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11th December 2014                         |On 30th January 2015           |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                DAVID SARFRAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mahmoud, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal, permission was  granted
    on 14th October 2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen to the appellant  to
    appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mathews
    in which he dismissed the appeal on all grounds against the decision of
    the  respondent  to  refuse  asylum,  humanitarian  and  human   rights
    protection to the appellant, a citizen of Pakistan.

 2. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Allen thought that, in  the
    light of an expert's conclusion that a First Information  Report  (FIR)
    and an arrest warrant were genuine, the judge had not given  sufficient
    reason for his conclusion that he did not accept the credibility of the
    appellant's claims.

 3. When making their application, the recently  appointed  representatives
    argued that their fresh application to the  Upper  Tribunal  should  be
    regarded as incorporating new grounds and not a renewal of the original
    application.  Their grounds argue that the judge  fell  into  error  by
    failing to take into consideration the significance of  any  "lies"  in
    the appellant's claims which  could  be  saved  by  "extremely  strong"
    general evidence. In support of this argument they quote  MA  (Somalia)
    [2010] UKSC 49. Additionally, the  respondent  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a Christian  and  so  the  only  remaining  question  was
    whether or not he was subject to a blasphemy allegation when the expert
    report concluded that the  FIR  and  arrest  warrant  produced  by  the
    appellant were genuine.  It is also contended that it was wrong for the
    judge  to  take  into  consideration  an  alleged  deception   in   the
    appellant's student visa application.

 4. In submissions before me Mr Mahmoud confirmed that he relied  upon  the
    grounds I have summarised above.  He emphasised that the appellant  was
    accepted to have been a Christian from birth.  Apart  from  the  expert
    evidence and FIR he pointed out that there was also information from  a
    High Court advocate in Pakistan to support the appellant's  claim.   He
    also argued that  the  appellant  had  outlined  his  asylum  claim  in
    screening interview which suggested that the judge was  wrong  to  take
    issue with the appellant's entry into the United Kingdom as  a  student
    before claiming asylum (although  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  this
    contention can be right when the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom
    with a valid student visa on 14th January 2014 and, after requesting an
    appointment at the Asylum Screening Unit at  Croydon  on  29th  January
    2014, did not make his asylum claim until 15th February 2014, the  date
    of the screening interview).

 5. Mr Mahmoud also contended that the  judge  had  wrongly  made  his  own
    assessment of the position  in  Pakistan  in  paragraph  27  about  the
    appellant's claim to have been advised to abscond by  the  advocate  of
    the High Court in the face of judicial documents and an arrest warrant.
     The judge had wrongly concluded  that  such  advice  would  involve  a
    breach of the law in Pakistan which required the appellant to submit to
    a warrant for his arrest.

 6. Ms Johnstone confirmed that the respondent  relied  upon  the  response
    dated 5th November 2014 in which it  is  emphasised  that  the  judge's
    findings showed that, for reasons given,  he  had  found  the  FIR  and
    arrest warrants to be unreliable because he did not  accept  that  they
    had been obtained in the way claimed.  Additionally, the judge had made
    several  other  adverse  credibility  findings   and   these   remained
    unchallenged by the application for permission to appeal.

 7.  In  conclusion  Mr  Mahmoud  submitted  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered the objective material put before him  before  reaching  his
    conclusions and before finding irregularity  in  the  appellant's  visa
    application which might have led to the application of Section 8 of the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.   He
    also contended that the response, sent on 5th November  2014,  appeared
    to be significantly out of time  when  the  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal had been made on 1st August 2014.

Conclusions

 8. Even if the respondent's application can be considered  to  be  out  of
    time the points which it makes have been repeated and  relied  upon  by
    the respondent in the hearing  before  me  and  so  I  take  them  into
    consideration.

 9. The determination is comprehensive  and  cogently  argued.   The  judge
    acknowledged that the respondent had accepted that the appellant was  a
    Christian but found  significant  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence which led him to conclude that his claim to have been  accused
    of blasphemy for dropping a leaflet handed to him by  Imams  coming  to
    his church was not to be believable. I summarise these  other  findings
    as follows.

10. The judge  pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had  been  significantly
    inconsistent when giving information about the  numbers  attending  the
    Christian gathering at which Muslim  leaflets  were  distributed.   The
    judge was also entitled to conclude that the mode of  escape  described
    by the appellant and the fact that he returned to his home  address  on
    the following day, was unlikely and at odds with the appellant's  claim
    to have been targeted by extremists.  Attention is also  drawn  to  the
    inconsistency in the appellant's claim about disclosure of his  uncle's
    address (to where he had fled) by the pastor at a Christian church when
    there was there no way of that pastor knowing where the  appellant  had
    fled to.  Other inconsistencies pointed out by the  judge  include  the
    appellant's willingness to return to Lahore when he and his father were
    too frightened to tell the police about his assailants.  The judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the  purpose  of  the  visit  to  Lahore  was
    actually to enable the  appellant  to  obtain  his  student  visa  when
    studying was not the real intention of his visit.  Further, it was open
    to the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  appointment  of  a
    solicitor in Lahore was inconsistent with his  statement  in  interview
    that he thought that nothing would come of events and his problem would
    be solved.  The judge was also entitled to find the appellant's failure
    to claim asylum on arrival at odds with the  action  he  had  taken  in
    Pakistan to ensure that he could leave the country for his own  safety.



11. It is clear that the  judge  did  not  reach  his  conclusions  without
    consideration of the documentary evidence and  expert  report  provided
    which, as paragraph 25 of the decision notes, were considered alongside
    the other evidence.  The judge was prepared to accept that the form  of
    the FIR and arrest  warrant  were  as  would  be  expected  of  genuine
    documents, but was entitled to comment on the absence of an explanation
    of how the appellant's lawyer could obtain a copy of the  FIR  when  it
    was not a routinely available document.  It is  plain  that  the  judge
    gave careful consideration to the  documents  against  the  information
    contained in the expert  report  which,  he  acknowledged,  might  have
    suggested that the  appellant  would  have  been  in  a  very  perilous
    position if accused of blasphemy.  The judge was, however, able to rely
    upon the other inconsistencies which I have  summarised  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the documentary evidence produced was not reliable  and
    the appellant could not be regarded as a  credible  witness.   Although
    the judge does not specifically  refer  to  the  guidance  set  out  in
    Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439  it  is  evident  that   he   gave
    consideration to the reliability of the documents produced against  the
    background of all of the evidence.   His  approach  to  the  matter  is
    explained in paragraph 29.

12. For all the above reasons the decision does not show that  the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings were not open to him.  On this  basis  the
    decision does not show an error on  a  point  of  law  particularly  as
    specified in the grounds of application before the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  nor  do  I
consider it appropriate to make one in the Upper Tribunal.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


