
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01763/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 July 2016                               |On 21 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     SP
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on  9  May  2016  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana.  The decision refused the asylum claim
    of the appellant.

 2. I make an anonymity  direction  in  this  case.   Unless  and  until  a
    Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant   is   granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify him or any member of their  family.   This  direction  applies
    both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
    this decision on the basis of the risk of serious harm arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of his asylum claim.

 3. The first ground argued before me was that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chana erred in law in refusing an  adjournment  request.   The  judge's
    decision on the adjournment is at [22]-[29] of  the  determination  and
    was as follows:

         "22.  At  the  hearing  Miss  Tobin  made  an  application  for  an
             adjournment on two bases.  The first was  that  the  appellant
             has informed her that he is not able  to  give  oral  evidence
             today as he has been vomiting since last  night.   He  had  to
             take a taxi to the hearing centre because he  could  not  risk
             taking public transport in case he vomited.  On the way to the
             hearing centre, he had to vomit.  The second  reason  is  that
             the appellant wishes to call his aunt who is able to give  key
             evidence because she was the person who was contacted  in  the
             United Kingdom when the appellant was arrested and detained in
             Sri Lanka.  No witness statement has been taken from  her  and
             she was not able to attend the hearing because of her work.

         23.  I asked the appellant what was wrong  with  him  and  he  said
             "Last evening I was  shivering  and  cold.   I  live  with  my
             girlfriend who did not go to work as she usually does at  4PM.
             He took his depression pills but did  not  take  his  sleeping
             pill.  He did not sleep last night.  He came by taxi.  He  did
             not eat last night.  I vomited in the morning and had to  stop
             the taxi to vomit'.  He said that he did not go to  a  doctor.
             He did not provide a receipt that he came by taxi.

         24.  Mr MacRae said he would like to  cross-examine  the  appellant
             and does not strongly oppose the application.

         25.  I decided to hear my other appeal of the day so as to give the
             appellant time to settle  down.   At  noon  and  after  I  had
             completed my other appeal, Miss Tobin renewed her  application
             for an adjournment and said that although the appellant is  no
             longer vomiting, he is not able to give evidence and it is her
             professional duty is to communicate that to me.  The appellant
             was in court.

         26.  I refuse to  grant  the  adjournment  request  and  took  into
             account that 'The overriding objective  of  the  Rules  is  to
             secure that proceedings before the  Tribunal  are  handled  as
             fairly,  quickly  and  efficiently  as  possible;  and,  where
             appropriate, that members of the Tribunal have  responsibility
             for ensuring this, in the interests  of  the  parties  to  the
             proceedings and in the wider public interest'.   I  also  took
             into account that the Tribunal must not adjourn a  hearing  of
             an appeal on the application of a party, unless satisfied that
             the appeal cannot otherwise be justly determined.

         27.   I  took  into  account  the  case  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
             fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) where it was stated that 'If
             a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment  request,  such
             decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law  in  several
             respects: these include a failure to  take  into  account  all
             material considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations
             to intrude;  denying  the  party  concerned  a  fair  hearing;
             failing to apply the correct test;  and  acting  irrationally.
             In practice, in most cases the question will  be  whether  the
             refusal deprived the affected party of his  right  to  a  fair
             hearing.   Where  an  adjournment  refusal  is  challenged  on
             fairness grounds,  it  is  important  to  recognise  that  the
             question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  FtT  acted
             reasonably.  Rather,  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
             fairness; was there any deprivation of  the  affected  party's
             right to a fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2011] Civ 1284.'

         28.  I was of the view that if the appellant was feeling so sick he
             would not have come to court this morning.  I also  took  into
             account that he did not go to a  doctor.   I  also  took  into
             account that no receipt had been produced that  the  appellant
             came to the hearing centre by taxi.   When  I  questioned  the
             appellant about it (sic) not being  unwell,  he  answered  the
             question without any difficulty whatsoever.  In any event that
             (sic) took into account that the appeal is primarily about the
             appellant's credibility.  I took into account that this appeal
             has already been adjourned once and it would be  fair  to  the
             appellant to continue with it today.  I also took into account
             that the appellant has given a very detailed witness statement
             which he could adopt as he was sitting in court.  I was of the
             view that it would not be unfair to deprive the respondent  of
             the right of cross-examination as I would  take  into  account
             the detailed Reasons for Refusal  Letter,  the  screening  and
             asylum interview and could come to a fair decision.

         29.  I was of the view that it would not be unjust to determine the
             appeal without permitting the appellant a further  opportunity
             to produce the evidence of his  claimed  aunt.   I  took  into
             account that there was no witness statement from  the  witness
             and this was the first time that the appellant  mentioned  her
             existence even though his appeal has remained  pending  for  a
             very long time.  I also took into account that  the  appellant
             was inconsistent as to whether he had an aunt in this  country
             at his asylum and screening interview.  I was of the view that
             his aunt was an afterthought by the appellant and she does not
             exist because if she had such  'key  evidence'  to  give,  she
             would have been referred to earlier and  a  witness  statement
             taken from her.  No credible reason  was  given  for  why  she
             could not attend court and why there was no  letter  from  her
             saying so".

 4. The appellant brings his challenge to the refusal of the adjournment on
    two heads, firstly on the basis that he was unwell and was deprived  of
    the fundamental right of presenting his evidence orally at the hearing,
    and the second head being that the adjournment decision  regarding  the
    aunt was erroneous.

 5. Turning to  the  first  challenge  to  the  adjournment  request  I  am
    satisfied that an error of law occurred where the appellant's  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal as to his illness was  such  that  Judge
    Chana's reasoning at [28] cannot stand.

 6. At [60] of the determination the judge records the  following  evidence
    from the appellant's partner:

         "60. His witness [AS] gave evidence through  a  Polish  interpreter
             and adopted her statement dated 28 April 2016.  She  gave  the
             following evidence in examination-in-chief, which I summarise.
              She is  a  Polish  national.   The  appellant  was  not  well
             yesterday evening.  She was supposed to go to work at  3  p.m.
             and the appellant was lying in bed and  not  talking  to  her.
             She did not go to work and informed her boss.   The  appellant
             was being sick and  she  gave  him  antidepressants.   In  the
             morning he was sick as well.   He  was  vomiting.   They  were
             meant to take a train to the hearing centre but  took  a  taxi
             instead".

 7. This evidence from the partner directly  contradict  the  statement  of
    Judge Chana at [28] that there was nothing before  her  supporting  the
    appellant's claim to be unwell or that he had  had  to  travel  to  the
    hearing by taxi. The partner's evidence supports his claim to be unwell
    the day before the hearing and on the day, to have vomited and to  have
    had to travel by taxi.

 8. It is therefore my view that Judge Chana failed to  take  into  account
    evidence that was highly material to the adjournment request and, in my
    view, manifestly capable of making good the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    unwell and to require an adjournment in order to exercise his right  to
    give evidence. I find error of law as a result such that  the  decision
    must be set aside and the appeal re-heard in order that  the  appellant
    has an opportunity to give evidence.

 9. For what it is worth, I point out that I was provided on the day of the
    hearing before me with a medical note from the Luton NHS Walk-In Centre
    dated 29 April 2016, the day of the hearing before Judge Chana.  It was
    issued after the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and refers  to  the
    appellant having taken a "staggered OD  of  five  x  7.5  mg  Zopiclone
    tablets three tabs taken last night two tabs taken at 7 a.m.   Says  he
    could not sleep as had court attendance today so took the  pills".   It
    will be obvious  that  this  evidence  further  supports  that  of  the
    appellant and his partner as to his health on the day of the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.

10. On the second plank of the application regarding oral evidence from the
    appellant's aunt, it would appear from discussions with Counsel that  a
    witness statement from the aunt was  submitted  in  this  matter  at  a
    previous hearing in 2015 so it may be that Judge Chana was misled as to
    how the aunt featured in previous litigation.  It remains the case that
    nothing before me explained why the aunt was not present at the hearing
    on 29 April 2016. This ground did not have any merit as a result.

11. The parties were in agreement that given my error of law finding above,
    the determination had to be set aside  entirely  and  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo  with  no  findings  preserved.
    That appeared to me to be the  correct  approach  where  there  are  no
    extant findings of fact and the applicant must be given the opportunity
    to give oral evidence.

12. For these reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside
    for error of law and will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    re-made.


Signed [pic]                        Date 20 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


