
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01148/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th December 2015                |On 28 September 2016                 |
|Prepared 23rd December 2015          |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                  Aftab [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G. Capel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 13th March 1990.   He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Geraint
    Jones QC sitting at Hatton Cross on 6th  May  2015  who  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a two decisions of the Respondent. The first
    dated 5th December 2014 was to refuse to  grant  the  Appellant  asylum
    under paragraph 336 of the Immigration Rules HC 395.  The second  dated
    9th January 2015 was to remove the Appellant as an illegal entrant.


2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2008 (when  he  was
    18 years of age).  He claimed asylum on  19th  February  2012  and  was
    granted permission to work on 30th May 2014.   On  4th  June  2014  the
    Appellant sought judicial  review  which  resulted  in  the  Respondent
    issuing the two appealed decisions  in  this  case.  By  the  time  the
    Appellant claimed asylum in this  country  he  had  married  a  British
    citizen ("the Sponsor").  The couple have a daughter 2 years of age.


3.   Prior to coming to the United Kingdom the Appellant had applied  for  a
    visit visa for the United Kingdom using a  false  or  forged  Pakistani
    passport in 2007 in a different name. When asked his reason for  coming
    to the United Kingdom the Appellant told the  Respondent  that  he  had
    wanted to work at Bagram Airport as a  translator  for  the  Americans.
    The Taliban found this out through their information networks  and  the
    Appellant was warned by people in his village  that  the  Taliban  were
    coming to kill him.  He was assured by everyone he knew that the United
    Kingdom was the best option for him.  He travelled via Italy  where  he
    was arrested but chose not to claim asylum in  that  country.   He  had
    delayed his claim for asylum by some three years because he was  really
    scared.


4.   Judge Jones wrote at paragraph 14:


         "He did not elaborate upon what caused him to be scared  about  the
         prospect of seeking asylum with a view to remaining permanently  in
         this country.  Indeed for somebody who  had  undertaken  a  journey
         through Iran, travelled by lorry to Italy over a period of 90 days,
         travelled to a channel port on the continent  and  then  eventually
         successfully entered  this  country  by  clandestinely  boarding  a
         lorry, it seems strange that such a person should be talking  about
         being scared to go to a civilian office to claim asylum."


The Explanation for Refusal


5.   The Respondent noted that the Appellant's family  still  lived  at  the
    Appellant's  home  address   in   Afghanistan.    It   was   considered
    inconsistent that the Appellant's family would come  face-to-face  with
    the Taliban and that his mother would be  beaten  and  yet  they  still
    remained at the same address whilst the Appellant who had never had any
    personal  threats  from  the  Taliban  felt  it  necessary   to   leave
    Afghanistan.   The  Taliban  had  only  visited  once  which  did   not
    demonstrate much interest in the Appellant.  The Respondent also  noted
    the Appellant's immigration history and considered that  Section  8  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004
    applied to claim due to the delay.  The Respondent considered that  the
    Appellant would be able to return to his home area of Laghman  Province
    in Afghanistan and live there as he had done in the past.


The Determination at First Instance


6.   At paragraph 37 the Judge set out his findings of fact.  In  particular
    he found that the Appellant had  deliberately  and  cynically  desisted
    from applying for asylum when he first arrived in this country  because
    he wanted to position himself to maximise his  prospect  of  remaining.
    The Appellant knew that his prospect of being  granted  asylum  had  he
    applied upon arrival would  have  been  remote.  The  Judge  took  into
    account  Section  8  of  the  2004  Act,  rejecting   the   Appellant's
    explanation for the delay particularly given  the  Appellant's  lengthy
    journey to come to this country.  The Appellant's account  of  how  the
    Taliban might know of the Appellant's possible intention  to  apply  to
    become a translator was found to be "utterly unconvincing  and  vague".
    The Appellant was not a genuine asylum seeker but a would  be  economic
    migrant who would go to  considerable  lengths  including  obtaining  a
    false  or  forged  Pakistani  passport  and  making  a  deceptive  visa
    application in his bid to remain permanently in this country which  was
    his European country of choice.  He had chosen not to  make  an  asylum
    claim in Italy, France or  Belgium  or  any  other  European  countries
    through which he had travelled.   As  the  Judge  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's core account the Appellant's appeal insofar as it was based
    on asylum and Articles 2 and 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights  failed.   The  Judge  did  not  proceed  to  consider  internal
    relocation although he was addressed on that point  because  the  claim
    did not get that far.


7.   The Judge also  rejected  the  Appellant's  alternative  argument  that
    country conditions in Afghanistan was such that they met the  threshold
    in Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC).   The
    Judge rejected that argument at paragraph 48 stating that on the  basis
    of the evidence adduced and the available background material including
    the Country of Origin Information Report and other documents set out at
    paragraph 46 of the  determination  the  Appellant  came  nowhere  near
    satisfying the requirements of Article 15(c).


8.   The Judge heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  wife  regarding  the
    relationship with the Appellant and at paragraph 40 the Judge turned to
    consider family and private life under the Immigration Rules (paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Appendix FM) and outside the  Rules
    under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


9.   The Appellant could not meet paragraph 276ADE in  relation  to  private
    life because of the long residence requirements.   The  Judge  rejected
    the Appellant's claim to come within the provisions of Appendix  FM  on
    suitability grounds.  The Appellant could not meet the requirements  of
    Section S-LTR.1.6 which provides that an  applicant  would  be  refused
    limited leave to remain on grounds of suitability where the presence of
    the applicant in the United Kingdom is not conducive to the public good
    because of the applicant's conduct. This can include convictions  which
    do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3 to 1.5, character, associations
    or other reasons make it undesirable to allow them  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.


10.  As the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules the  Judge  wrote
    at paragraph 49 "that leaves Article 8 ECHR, woven in with  Section  55
    of the 2009 Act and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act".  The Judge  found
    there was family life  between  the  Appellant,  his  wife  and  child.
    Little weight was given to any private life built up by the  Appellant.
    The Appellant  could  make  an  out-of-country  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules for settlement as a spouse and/or it would be open to
    the Appellant's wife to accompany the  Appellant  to  Afghanistan.   It
    would not be disproportionate to require the Appellant to depart.   The
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.


The Onward Appeal


11.  The Appellant appealed against the decision,  out-of-time,  making  two
    main points.  The first was that the Judge  had  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration  Rules  on  Section  S  suitability  requirements
    without giving the Appellant an  opportunity  to  address  that  point.
    This issue had not been raised by the Respondent in the refusal  letter
    or by the Judge during the course of the hearing.  The second point was
    that the Judge had failed to discharge the duty under Section 55 of the
    2009 Act to safeguard and promote the Appellant's daughter as a primary
    consideration.  It was not reasonable to expect the Appellant's wife to
    accompany the Appellant to Afghanistan.  It was argued that  the  Judge
    had found the relationship between the Appellant and his wife was not a
    genuine one and that the Appellant  had  entered  into  it  purely  for
    immigration advantage.


12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford on 27th July 2015.  He  found  it
    arguable that the Judge may have  made  a  material  error  of  law  in
    refusing to accept further submissions on  the  Section  S  Suitability
    issues and treating them as out-of-time given what the Judge had stated
    at paragraph 44 of the decision [I deal with this point in more  detail
    below see paragraph ].  It was not however arguable that  there  was  a
    difference in the Appellant's favour  in  treating  the  child's  bests
    interests  as  a  very  important  factor  to   be   weighed   in   the
    proportionality balance [on the one hand]  and  considering  it  was  a
    primary consideration [on the other].  Nor was  it  arguable  that  the
    Judge had failed to adequately consider the risks  to  the  Appellant's
    wife and daughter in relocating to Afghanistan as it was never proposed
    that they should relocate.


13.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission on  5th  August  2015
    stating that the Judge had given both parties a further  fourteen  days
    to provide written submissions on Section S suitability but as  nothing
    was received by the Judge it was  open  to  him  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing.  The Judge had directed himself appropriately.


The Preliminary Issue


14.  At the outset of the hearing  Counsel  for  the  Appellant,  Ms  Capel,
    raised a preliminary issue.  The grounds of appeal against Judge Jones'
    decision settled by Ms Capel herself had not engaged with  the  Judge's
    dismissal of the asylum appeal.  Counsel said that she  had  only  been
    given a copy of the decision granting permission to appeal a  few  days
    ago.  She did not know why her instructing solicitors had not  appealed
    the dismissal of the asylum claim.  She sought leave to submit  amended
    grounds of appeal out-of-time  so  as  to  argue  against  the  Judge's
    findings under asylum.  I indicated that I was not prepared  to  extend
    time for the service of a cross appeal against the Judge's dismissal of
    the asylum appeal.


15.  The Appellant and his representatives had had ample time to prepare  an
    appeal against the asylum decision  if  they  so  wished.  Counsel  had
    prepared the grounds of onward appeal (dated  17th  June  2015)  having
    represented the Appellant in front of Judge Jones and was aware of  the
    arguments put on the Appellant's behalf. It  was  open  to  counsel  to
    advise the Appellant to appeal to appeal the asylum decision  when  she
    received instructions to advise on appeal and/or settle  grounds.  Even
    taking the Appellant's claim at its highest the asylum  appeal  was  on
    its face a weak one and the Judge had had no difficulty  in  dismissing
    it.  The Upper Tribunal have stressed that late applications to  appeal
    should not be entertained unless there were very good  reasons  for  so
    doing. In EG and NG [2014] UKUT 143 it was held that The Upper Tribunal
    cannot entertain an application purporting to be made under Rule 24 for
    permission to appeal until the First-tier Tribunal has  been  asked  in
    writing for permission to appeal and has either refused or declined  to
    admit the application. In this case there were no good reasons for such
    a late application since no explanation had been given  to  me  why  an
    appeal had not been lodged earlier and the claim itself was a weak one.
     I indicated therefore that the matter would proceed on  the  basis  of
    what the Appellant had appealed, that is to say the claim to a  private
    and family life.


The Article 8 Submissions


16.  At paragraph 44 of the determination the Judge had written:


         "I  am  very  mindful  of  the  fact  that  neither  representative
         addressed me on the suitability requirements for leave  to  remain.
         I did not raise that issue during the hearing.  Accordingly that is
         why in the  foregoing  paragraph  I  have  referred  to  forming  a
         "preliminary" view on this matter so  as  to  give  each  party  an
         opportunity to make  representations  on  this  issue.   Thus  this
         decision is provisional and will only become  final  in  accordance
         with the following provisions:


         (a)  The Appellant and  the  Respondent  may  each  submit  written
             submissions to me dealing with any issue relevant to Section S-
             LTR within fourteen days of receipt of this  decision,  copied
             to one another.


         (b)  After considering any such written submissions I will issue  a
             final decision which may or  may  not  follow  my  preliminary
             decision.


         (c)  In the event that  neither  party  files  written  submissions
             within fourteen days of receipt of this decision this decision
             will stand as the final decision in this appeal."


17.   The  case  was  heard  at  Hatton  Cross  on  6th  May  2015  and  the
    determination was date stamped as promulgated on  14th  May  2015  some
    eight days later.  The determination was received  by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors on 18th May 2015 according to a date stamp affixed in  their
    office and they sent written submissions on the Section  S  Suitability
    point to the Tribunal on  29th  May  2015.   The  submissions  did  not
    dispute that the suitability requirements must be met for the Appellant
    to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi).  However the  fact
    that an individual had failed  to  establish  the  credibility  of  his
    account so as to qualify for international protection  was  not  in  of
    itself grounds for refusal on the basis that their conduct or character
    was called into question because they had made a "bogus" asylum  claim.
    The Judge's findings as to the  Appellant's  state  of  mind  were  not
    proved to  the  standard  of  balance  of  probabilities.   Whilst  the
    Appellant had made a false application for a passport he had done so in
    order to avoid being harmed by the Pakistani police.  This met a  basic
    minimum level of plausibility.  There was  no  elucidation  of  Section
    STLR.1.6.  Not all forms of bad conduct  were  sufficient  to  make  it
    undesirable that a person remained in  the  United  Kingdom.   A  Judge
    should be slow to open the issue of an Appellant's inability to satisfy
    the suitability requirements in circumstances where this was not raised
    by the Respondent.


18.  In oral submissions it was argued that  the  Judge's  failure  to  take
    into account submissions on Section S made a difference to the  Judge's
    treatment of whether the Appellant could satisfy Appendix FM by way  of
    having leave as a parent.  The appeal should be allowed and the  matter
    should be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  to  be  heard  de  novo.
    Furthermore the issue of asylum and Article 8 were interlinked  on  the
    issue of credibility.  The Judge had stated that both the Appellant and
    his wife were aware of what was described  as  a  bogus  asylum  claim.
    This caused a cross over from the asylum case to the family life claim.




19.  In response the Presenting Officer accepted that the Judge had made  an
    ambiguous direction at paragraph  44  of  his  determination.   It  was
    reasonable that the case should go back to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be re-heard but not de novo as much of  what  the  Judge  said  in  the
    determination could be saved.  This would be with the exception of  the
    Judge's remarks at paragraph 37(vi) which were to do with  the  Judge's
    finding that the Appellant had deliberately and cynically desisted from
    applying for asylum when he arrived in the country because he wanted to
    position himself to maximise his  prospect  of  remaining  the  Judge's
    findings could be preserved.


20.  Counsel contended that the Judge  should  not  have  raised  Section  S
    Suitability at all and there should be a re-hearing.   What  the  Judge
    should have done if he wished to raise Section S was to have  adjourned
    the case.  The Appellant also took issue with the refusal of  grant  of
    permission in relation to the possibility of  the  wife  travelling  to
    Afghanistan with the Appellant and the treatment of  the  child's  best
    interests.  The  Judge  had  made  a  finding  of  deception  which  if
    unchallenged would lead to a refusal of a visa for the Appellant for  a
    period of ten years.  The Judge had not had regard to  the  dangers  to
    the wife in going to Afghanistan.  The Judge had not taken into account
    letters from the Appellant's friends.


Findings


21.  The issue in this case is one of procedural fairness.   Did  the  Judge
    deal fairly with the Appellant's claim to remain in this country  under
    the Immigration Rules Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and outside  the
    Rules under Article 8?  If he did and his conclusions on  those  points
    are sustainable then the appeal fails.   If  he  did  not  treat  those
    matters fairly then regardless of any view which I might  take  of  the
    merits of the Article 8 claim, it is plain that the Appellant  has  not
    had a fair hearing at first instance  on  this  issue  and  the  matter
    should be remitted back to the First-tier to be heard de  novo  on  the
    issue of the Immigration Rules and Article 8.


22.  I do not accept the argument that the appeal  in  relation  to  asylum,
    Articles 2 and 3 and  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    should be remitted back to the First-tier.  In my view  the  Judge  has
    dealt adequately with those issues and they are a discrete  matter  not
    infected by any challenge to the Judge's treatment of  the  Appellant's
    claim to private and family life.  As I have indicated the asylum claim
    was a weak one. Whether the Appellant's wife knew that the  Appellant's
    claim for asylum was weak is beside the  point.  The  weakness  of  the
    claim was demonstrated by the Judge in relation to issues (such as  the
    unexplained  delay  in  claiming)  which  arose  independently  of  the
    relationship with the wife. I was not prepared to allow  the  Appellant
    to appeal out-of-time against the dismissal of the  asylum  appeal  for
    the reasons which I have given above and that decision stands.


23.  However when one comes to look at the issue in relation to private  and
    family life the position is very different.  In my  view  it  is  plain
    (and indeed was conceded  as  such  by  the  Presenting  Officer)  that
    matters did go wrong at first instance.  There was nothing  wrong  with
    the Judge raising a  new  matter  that  had  not  been  raised  by  the
    Respondent.  Nor was there  anything  wrong  with  the  Judge  inviting
    written submissions on the point.  The difficulty was that if the Judge
    was going to do that he had to ensure  that  both  directions  for  the
    service of further evidence/submissions were properly made available to
    the parties to enable them to respond.


24.  It does not appear that the Judge raised the new  issue  of  Section  S
    Suitability requirements during the course of the hearing.  I  have  to
    say at this point that it is not entirely clear why the  Judge  did  in
    fact raise that issue at all.  I would agree with the  submission  made
    in the Appellant's responses (which unfortunately did not  get  to  the
    Judge) that just because the Appellant's claim to asylum had failed  it
    did not mean that the Appellant's character was of  such  unsuitability
    as to disqualify him from consideration under Appendix FM.


25.  The main difficulty is that the parties would not  have  known  at  the
    end of the hearing on 6th May 2015 that there was anything further  for
    them to do in this appeal.  It would have been a far better course  for
    the Judge to have made a clear direction at that point  before  sending
    out his determination.  The parties should have been  invited  to  make
    submissions under Section S by 4pm on a certain  date  with  the  Judge
    giving the reason why he was requesting those submissions and he  could
    have put down his  preliminary  views  at  that  point  to  direct  the
    submissions.  The Judge would then be able to wait until  the  relevant
    date and time  had  passed  and  then  promulgated  the  determination.
    Unfortunately the Judge chose not to do that but instead  to  send  out
    his determination with the direction that further submissions  were  to
    be sent within fourteen days of receipt.  Somehow or rather  the  wires
    got entangled and instead of a provisional determination being sent out
    to the parties with time given to them to reply, the determination  was
    sent out as a promulgated document.   It  was  promulgated  eight  days
    after the case was heard which was within the fourteen  day  period  in
    any event.  It was thus impossible for the Appellant to  have  complied
    with the direction of the Judge.


26.  I would add some observations. There is no  doubt  that  the  Appellant
    and his wife have a family life together with their daughter. The Judge
    accepted that at paragraph 52 of his determination. He also found  that
    it was not reasonable to expect  the  couple's  child  to  relocate  to
    Afghanistan (see paragraph 42).  The issue in the case is  whether  the
    Appellant can meet the Immigration Rules  and  if  he  cannot  and  the
    appeal falls to be considered  outside  the  Rules  whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant returning to  Afghanistan  to
    make an application  for  entry  clearance  from  there.   It  will  be
    necessary to consider the best interests of the  couple's  child  as  a
    primary consideration. Section S Suitability  was  not  raised  by  the
    Respondent at first instance and for the reasons  which  I  have  given
    above the issue is in any event of limited value.  The  fact  that  the
    Appellant has chosen to  make  a  false  claim  for  asylum  (after  an
    unexplained delay) is not in my view sufficient of itself to  meet  the
    requirement of Section S in any event.


27.  I accept the argument  that  the  failure  to  give  the  Appellant  an
    opportunity to address Section S Suitability (despite its  questionable
    relevance) infected the Judge's findings under  both  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE and in consequence the test of compelling  reasons  to
    allow an appeal outside the Rules.  There is no  alternative  therefore
    to set that part of the Judge's decision aside.  The issue  of  private
    and family life under the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  will  be
    remitted back to the First-tier to be heard by a different Judge.  That
    aspect of the case will be heard de novo.





Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law in dismissing the Appellant's asylum  claim  and  claims  under
Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention and  Article  15(c)  of  the
Qualification Directive.  I uphold the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
to dismiss those appeals.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  an  error  of  law  in
dismissing the Appellant's appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules  paragraph
276ADE and Appendix FM and Article 8  and  I  have  set  that  part  of  the
decision aside.  I re-make the decision by allowing that part of the  appeal
and remitting it back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.


I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 12th day of January 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable there can be no fee award in this case.


Signed this 12th day of January 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
