
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01294/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination sent         |
|On 10th March 2014                         |On 25th March 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                  MR L M L
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr D Chirico of
           Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria who  was  born  on  23  December
      1994. He has been given permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell  ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the respondent's decision  of  27  June  2010  to  give
      directions for his removal to Algeria following the refusal of asylum.


   2. The appellant claimed to have suffered physical  and  emotional  abuse
      and neglect and abandonment by his father and  stepmother  in  Algeria
      where he lived on the streets for a time before escaping to  Italy  in
      about October 2009 where he also lived  on  the  streets  for  several
      months until about May 2010. He then  travelled  to  the  UK.  He  was
      discovered on board a ferry and handed  over  to  the  UK  police.  He
      claimed asylum on 20 May 2012.


   3. The  respondent  took  a  long  time  to  deal  with  the  appellant's
      application and the decision was not  issued  until  he  was  aged  17
      years, six months and two days. By that stage he was just too  old  to
      benefit from the respondent's policy on unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
      children.


   4. The appellant claimed  that  past  ill-treatment  in  Algeria  was  an
      indication of the real risk of ill-treatment if he was to  return.  He
      was vulnerable and had been diagnosed as suffering  from  anxiety  and
      depression, separation anxiety,  panic  stress  and  PTSD.  He  needed
      counselling which was being provided in this country.


   5. The respondent has not attempted to trace the appellant's  family.  In
      any event  the  appellant  does  not  wish  to  return  to  them.  The
      respondent did not accept that the appellant was a citizen of  Algeria
      although removal directions had been given to that  country.  Although
      the appellant  claimed  to  have  suffered  sexual  abuse  no  further
      information about this had been provided.  No  Convention  reason  had
      been established. The respondent was of the  view  that  there  was  a
      sufficiency of protection for the appellant in  Algeria  and  that  he
      could seek help from the authorities. There were facilities to  assist
      children up to 21 years of age who lacked family support  so  that  he
      would not be homeless or destitute. He had not  established  that  his
      human  rights  would  be  infringed  and  he  was  not   entitled   to
      humanitarian protection.


   6. The appellant appealed and there was an appeal hearing before a First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge on 19 March  and  29  May  2013.  The  appellant's
      appeal was dismissed  on  all  grounds.  The  appellant  appealed  and
      permission to appeal was  granted.  Subsequently,  an  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge found that there  were  errors  of  law  such  that  the  appeal
      decision should be set aside. It was set aside  and  directions  given
      that the appeal should be reheard before another  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge. It was in these circumstances that the FTTJ heard the appeal on
      5 December 2013. Both parties were represented, the  appellant  by  Mr
      Chirico who appears before me. Whilst the appellant was  15  years  of
      age when he arrived in the UK by the time of the hearing he was nearly
      19. The appellant gave evidence. The FTTJ found that on  the  evidence
      the appellant had not suffered persecution for a Convention reason. He
      rejected Mr Chirico's argument that  there  was  a  particular  social
      group comprising "people under the age of 21" and dismissed the appeal
      against the refusal of asylum.


   7. The FTTJ accepted the appellant's evidence that he had been abused  by
      his  family.  The  respondent  had  delayed   consideration   of   the
      appellant's claim for a disproportionate time and had not provided any
      reasonable explanation.  The  facts  of  the  appellant's  claim  were
      largely  undisputed  and  the  appellant  had  co-operated  with   the
      respondent. There could be  considerable  delay  in  obtaining  travel
      documents from the Algerian authorities.


   8. The FTTJ found that the appellant was suffering from  PTSD  and  self-
      harming. He should be regarded as a vulnerable adult. He could  access
      mental health treatment in Algeria.  The  abuse  he  had  suffered  in
      Algeria had not crossed the Article 3 threshold. The FTTJ  found  that
      the appellant had not shown that he could  meet  the  requirements  to
      succeed on Article 8 human rights grounds under the Immigration Rules.
      He went on to consider the Article 8 grounds outside  the  Immigration
      Rules. The appellant had established a private life  in  this  country
      but not a family life. He was  suffering  from  PTSD  and  depression.
      However, his removal would not be a disproportionate interference with
      his right to respect for his private life.


   9. The FTTJ dismissed the  appeal  on  Refugee  Convention,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds.


  10. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal. There are three grounds of appeal all of  which  argue
      that the FTTJ erred in law. The first submits that the FTTJ failed  to
      distinguish between sections 84(1)(c) and 84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act and
      the differences of principle between them. The second ground  is  that
      the FTTJ misdirected himself as to the relevance of  the  respondent's
      previous conduct in assessing  proportionality  under  the  Article  8
      human  rights  grounds  and  failed  to  have   regard   to   relevant
      considerations. Thirdly, the FTTJ  failed  to  take  into  account  or
      rationally  assess  considerations  relevant  to  the  proportionality
      exercise or the lawfulness of the appellant's removal. The grounds are
      lengthy and detailed. During the course of his submissions Mr  Chirico
      withdrew paragraph 19(i) of the grounds.


  11. There is a Rule 24 response from the respondent dated 28 January  2014
      which submits that  the  FTTJ  directed  himself  appropriately,  made
      findings open to him on the evidence and there is no error of law.


  12. Mr Chirico relied on his grounds of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
      appellant was a vulnerable adult. He needed and was getting a  lot  of
      support in this country. The  education  he  was  receiving  would  be
      stopped if and when his asylum  appeal  failed.  However,  Mr  Chirico
      accepted that he might not be thrown out of a  continuing  course  and
      that Social Services would do their best to  prevent  this  happening.
      They might also try and find him access to further education. However,
      he would be left with a very restrictive form of existence during  the
      time which it would take to obtain the  documents  to  return  him  to
      Algeria. He would get some continuing care at a lower level  until  he
      was 21 and then, potentially, until he was 26 if he remained in  full-
      time education. He would not be given any vocational training  or  job
      centre support. He would not be entitled to work or have access to non-
      urgent medical care. In paragraph 136 the FTTJ should  not  have  said
      that the issue of any delay in obtaining a travel  document  from  the
      Algerian authorities might well be a matter  for  a  future  court  to
      decide. He should have decided it.


  13. In relation  to  the  second  ground  Mr  Chirico  accepted  that  the
      principle set out by the FTTJ in paragraph 70 was correct but  it  had
      not been properly applied. In the light of the delay by the respondent
      the FTTJ should have reduced the weight given to the public interest.


  14. In relation to the third ground Mr Chirico did no more  than  rely  on
      what is said in the grounds of appeal. I was asked to  find  that  the
      FTTJ erred in law, set aside the decision  and  consider  whether  the
      appeal should be re-decided in the First-Tier or the  Upper  Tribunal.
      He indicated that the appellant wished to obtain a psychiatric report.


  15. Mr Whitwell relied on the Rule 24 response. In relation to ground  one
      he submitted that it was clear from paragraphs 48, 50 and 137 that the
      FTTJ had in mind the provisions of  paragraph  84(1)(c).  The  correct
      test had been applied as appeared from  paragraphs  76  and  136.  The
      position might be different if the appellant  was  in  custody  whilst
      travel documents were obtained from the Algerian authorities but  this
      was not likely. The appellant could minimise the  delay  in  obtaining
      the travel documents by cooperating or going to the  Algerian  Embassy
      to apply for them. There was no reason to suppose that he would not co-
      operate.


  16. As to ground two it was irrelevant  whether  the  FTTJ  misquoted  the
      source of the authority he was relying on because  the  principle  was
      correct. What was said in paragraphs  70  to  74  indicated  that  the
      question of delay  was  in  the  forefront  of  the  FTTJ's  mind.  In
      paragraph 133, the FTTJ was clearly referring back  to  what  he  said
      earlier. There was no error of law.


  17. Grounds 2 and 3 were  no  more  than  disagreements  with  conclusions
      properly reached by the FTTJ on  all  the  evidence.  In  relation  to
      paragraph 21 of ground three, paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules
      relating to past persecution being a strong indicator of  future  risk
      was irrelevant where the FTTJ had found that the asylum grounds failed
      for lack of a Convention reason.


  18. Mr Whitwell submitted that the  law  relating  to  the  importance  of
      private life had evolved since the grounds were prepared. Furthermore,
      the FTTJ was in effect saying no more  than  that  the  appellant  was
      streetwise. There were no errors of law and I was asked to uphold  the
      determination.


  19. In his reply Mr Chirico argued that if the appellant failed on  ground
      one then this would not impact on grounds two and three. Paragraph 133
      of the determination did not show that proper weight had been given to
      delay in reducing the effect of the public interest.


  20. I reserved my determination.


  21. In relation to the first ground of appeal I find that the FTTJ had  in
      mind the differences between sections 84(1)(c)  and  84(1)(g)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. These  are  set  out  in
      paragraphs 48 and 50 and there is nothing in  the  grounds  of  appeal
      which persuades me that  they  were  not  applied.  What  is  said  in
      paragraph 10  of  the  grounds  is  a  selective  quotation  from  the
      determination.  Whilst  in  paragraph  86  the  FTTJ  said  that  "the
      timescale of the appellant's  removal  may  be  up  to  2  years"  (my
      emphasis) Mr Chirico fails to  mention  the  FTTJ's  final  conclusion
      about this in paragraph 136 where he said; "the event in question, the
      obtaining of a travel document, has been historically so  variable  in
      time because of peculiar factors for  each  application  makes  it  an
      impossible task". This was a  conclusion  open  to  the  FTTJ  on  the
      evidence and he did consider all the factors  set  out  in  the  first
      ground of appeal. In paragraph 135 the FTTJ gave proper  consideration
      to the immediate effect  on  the  appellant's  mental  health  of  the
      prospects of delay and in paragraph 136 he  said  that  he  could  not
      consider the effect of any future  delay,  not  because  it  would  be
      inappropriate to do so, but because the evidence was insufficient  for
      him to make a finding as to what that delay might be. I  can  find  no
      fault with the FTTJ's observation in relation to  obtaining  a  travel
      document from the Algerian authorities in paragraph 136;  "that  issue
      may well be a matter for a future Court to decide when the  facts  are
      clear." The FTTJ was not abdicating responsibility for making  such  a
      decision, only observing that the question might need to be  revisited
      at some future time when the evidence was clear. I find that the  FTTJ
      did not inappropriately limit his jurisdiction or, in paragraph 137 or
      elsewhere, conflate the provisions  of  the  two  sections.  What  the
      grounds neglect to mention is that the appellant,  who  was  found  to
      have co-operated with the respondent in the past, could make  his  own
      application to the Algerian Embassy in  this  country,  or  co-operate
      with the respondent in her efforts to obtain  a  travel  document  for
      him.


  22. Mr Chirico has withdrawn paragraph 19(i)  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
      which alleged that the FTTJ incorrectly referred to the  judgement  of
      the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Akaeke [2005] EWCA Civ 947. I find  that
      in paragraph  70  the  FTTJ  correctly  directed  himself  as  to  the
      principal  that  "delay  may  be  relevant,  in  reducing  the  weight
      otherwise to  be  accorded  to  the  requirements  of  full  and  fair
      immigration control". Whilst there are subsequent  references  to  two
      other factors relevant to consideration of the Article 8 grounds I can
      find no indication that the FTTJ did not continue to have in  mind  or
      failed to apply this principle. In paragraph  133  the  FTTJ  reminded
      himself of the submission made on the  appellant's  behalf  that  "the
      interference would not be proportionate in all the  circumstances.  It
      was suggested that there is very little public interest in denying the
      appellant's application." The FTTJ then went on to say; "the issue  of
      deterrence and (sic) is not necessarily aimed at this appellant but at
      other people who seek  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  breach
      immigration control." In circumstances where the FTTJ  concluded  that
      the appellant came to this country for his own betterment rather  than
      to seek international protection or escape serious harm and failed  to
      claim asylum en route (paragraph 147) as well  as  the  other  factors
      assessed between paragraphs  143  and  148  there  remained  a  strong
      continuing public interest in maintaining immigration control. I  find
      that in this regard the FTTJ did not err in law. Even if I had reached
      the  opposite  conclusion  I  would  have  found  that  in   all   the
      circumstances of the appellant's case any failure to take into account
      the reduction in the weight to be  attached  to  the  public  interest
      could not have made a material difference to the outcome  in  relation
      to the Article 8 grounds.


  23. In relation to the third ground  of  appeal  there  are,  regrettably,
      further misleading quotations from the determination  which  undermine
      Mr Chirico's arguments. In paragraph 68 the FTTJ did not  accept  that
      the appellant was subjected to treatment in Algeria in breach  of  his
      Article 3 human rights. He accepted that the appellant had been abused
      by his family and said that; "such ill-treatment could reach the  high
      and demanding level required to substantiate the claim under Article 3
      of the ECHR" (my emphasis). In paragraph 126 the FTTJ did not  accept;
      "that this showed that the  protective  system  which  the  respondent
      claimed was in place in Algeria had been ineffective to present  (sic)
      the appellant". What the FTTJ said in this paragraph  was  that  there
      were indications that there were  flaws  and  inconsistencies  in  the
      support provided by the authorities. In paragraphs  130  and  131  the
      FTTJ found that there was no real risk that  the  appellant  would  be
      abused in the future and that the respondent's  assertion  that  there
      was a sufficiency of protection available to the  appellant  from  the
      authorities in Algeria had not been challenged. The FTTJ  went  on  to
      reach his own conclusion about this  in  paragraph  132  and  to  give
      reasons for doing so.


  24. In relation to paragraph 22 of  the  grounds  the  FTTJ  records  that
      whilst the appellant claimed to have been sexually abused there was no
      evidence about this beyond the bare allegation that it had taken place
      in Italy, not Algeria. It was a  relevant  factor  and  the  FTTJ  was
      entitled to take into  account  that  the  appellant  had  managed  to
      survive on the streets of Italy and obtain the substantial sum to  pay
      the agent to bring him to the UK. The finding  is  not  perverse.  The
      FTTJ did take into account the appellant's studies in this country and
      the support and medical treatment he had received (paragraphs  119  to
      121 which refer to earlier passages in the determination  for  greater
      detail). The grounds are unclear as to  how  it  is  argued  that  the
      appellant might have succeeded in relation to the Article 8 grounds as
      they now appear in the Immigration Rules as opposed to the  Article  8
      grounds under the Strasbourg  jurisprudence  outside  the  Immigration
      Rules. I find that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  paragraph  143.  The
      reference is not to exceptional and  compassionate  circumstances  but
      exceptional or  compassionate  circumstances.  This  could  have  been
      better expressed but  the  position  is  clarified  in  the  following
      paragraph where the FTTJ stated; "the compassionate  circumstances  of
      the   appellant   do   not   make   the   decision   to   remove   him
      disproportionate".


  25. The FTTJ granted the appellant anonymity. I  consider  it  appropriate
      and necessary to continue his direction.


  26. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to the  appellant
      and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
      lead to contempt of court proceedings.


  27.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
      determination.














      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 17
      March 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

