
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/01869/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the  5th  May  2016                                                    On
17th May 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                    [A S]
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr Sills (Counsel)
For the  Secretary  of  State:  Mr  Kotas  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Shamash promulgated on the  11th  March  2016,  in
      which he allowed the Claimant's asylum appeal.

   2. The Claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on the [ ] 1989.
       Within the decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shamash  accepted  the
      Claimant's account that he had been handed over to the Taliban when he
      had been returned to Kabul  following  the  refusal  of  his  previous
      asylum  claim  in  2005  and  found  that  the  medical  evidence  had
      substantiated the Claimant's account that he had been tortured over  a
      long  period.   The  Judge  accepted  that  the  Claimant   had   been
      interrogated as to why he  ran  away  from  the  Taliban  and  further
      accepted the Claimant's account that he was considered  a  traitor  by
      the Taliban.  The Judge went on to consider future risk and found that
      the Claimant  having  suffered  past  persecution  and  that  although
      considerable time has passed he did  not  find  that  this  meant  the
      Claimant was no longer at risk  and  that  insurgent  groups  remained
      active and the Claimant was still at  risk  upon  return.   The  Judge
      accepted the Claimant's account as to how he was tortured  because  of
      his connection to his father and  that  having  spent  a  considerable
      period of time in the UK the Judge found specifically that "there is a
      realistic likelihood that he would be at risk in the future, from both
      sides."

   3. The Judge went on to consider the question of internal relocation both
      in terms of whether it was available and as an option  and  reasonable
      in all the circumstances and the Judge relied upon  paragraphs  130  -
      132 of  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  case  of  AA
      (Afghanistan).  He then considered the case of Januzi and  found  that
      the Claimant does suffer from mental health difficulties and  that  he
      had been easily identified in 2005 and the Judge found that there  was
      no evidence before him to show that  the  situation  had  improved  in
      Afghanistan since 2005 and the Taliban were still active and there was
      no reason to suspect they would no longer wish to  harm  the  Claimant
      and that in many ways the situation had deteriorated by the withdrawal
      of troops.  The Judge found that his escape and decision to return  to
      the UK would both place him at an even more  vulnerable  position  and
      that the Claimant had suffered both past persecution and faced  future
      risk of persecution having fled Afghanistan and refused  to  join  the
      Taliban.  The Judge therefore allowed the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
      Convention on asylum grounds.

   4. The Secretary of State has sought to appeal against that decision  and
      within the Grounds of Appeal argues  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to
      resolve a conflict amounting to a material error of law and  that  the
      Judge has now answered the question as to whether or not the  Claimant
      could internally relocate within Afghanistan  both  in  terms  of  the
      ability to relocate and whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him
      to do so and that no reasons are given as to why it  would  be  unduly
      harsh for him to internally relocate if that was an option.




   5. It was further argued that the Judge in referring to the  case  of  AA
      (Afghanistan) has not taken account of the fact  that  that  case  was
      superseded by the case of AK (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
      UKUT 163 and that whilst in assessing the claim under the  context  of
      Article 15(c) in which the Secretary of State asserts that Kabul  City
      would be a viable internal relocation alternative, it is necessary  to
      take account (both in assessing  "safety"  and  "reasonableness")  not
      only the level of violence in that  city  but  also  the  difficulties
      experienced by that city's poor and also the many internally displaced
      persons living there, these considerations will not  in  general  make
      returning to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fisher
      on the 29th March 2016 on the grounds that it was both  arguable  that
      the Judge had failed to explain why it was unreasonable to expect  the
      Claimant to  internally  relocate  and  that  her  reliance  upon  the
      decision in AA was  arguably  in  error  in  view  of  the  subsequent
      decision in AK.

   7. It was on that basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   8. In reaching my decision I have fully  taken  account  of  all  of  the
      submissions  made  by  the  legal  representatives,  which  are  fully
      recorded within the record of proceedings.

   9. Mr Kotas on behalf of the Secretary of State argued that  the  Judge's
      decision in respect of internal relocation had not specifically  found
      whether or not the Claimant could not relocate  to  Kabul  because  he
      would be at risk there, or whether or not it was being argued that  it
      would be unduly harsh for him to internally  relocate  to  Kabul.   He
      conceded that it was the Secretary of State's case that the only  area
      where it was being suggested that the Claimant could  relocate  within
      the original refusal notice was to Kabul itself, not to any other area
      within Afghanistan.  He argued that it was incumbent upon the Judge to
      refer to the case of AK, but conceded that this Claimant's appeal  had
      not been decided on Article 15(c) grounds.  He argued that  the  Judge
      had misquoted the case of AA and referred me to paragraph 130 of  that
      decision.  He argued that the Tribunal had  not  stated  that  it  was
      relatively simple for the Taliban to track down individuals  in  Kabul
      and that the Judge had not made proper findings in respect of  whether
      or not it would be unduly harsh and internal relocation.  He  took  me
      to paragraphs 51, 81 and 82 and 217 of the  decision  in  AK  (Article
      15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163, and sought  to  argue  that  in
      light of those paragraphs the Claimant would not be at risk in  Kabul.
      He sought to argue that the Taliban would not be interested  in  going
      after him and will not have the means to do so.

  10. In his submissions Mr Sills on behalf of the Claimant sought to  argue
      that the Judge's decision was sound and  well-reasoned  and  that  the
      case of AK dealt with the generalised violence under Article 15(c) and
      the risk of indiscriminate violence in a case where the Appellant  was
      from Ghazni and had an uncle in Kabul.  However  he  relied  upon  the
      fact that Judge Shamash had found that the Claimant was at  risk  from
      both the Taliban and the authorities.  He argued that  the  paragraphs
      from AK quoted by Mr Kotas did not  assist  as  they  related  to  the
      average  civilian  and  the  situation  in  Ghazni,  rather  than  the
      circumstances faced by this Claimant who had already  been  persecuted
      by the Taliban.  He argued that any error in the Judge's reasoning  or
      findings were immaterial given that the Judge found that the  Claimant
      was at risk from both sides, but he argued that the  Judge  had  given
      clear reasons as to why the Claimant would be at risk.

  11. Mr Kotas conceded that the Secretary of State  had  not  been  granted
      permission to argue that the finding of the Judge  at  [62]  that  the
      Claimant would be at risk from both sides was unsustainable  and  that
      that had not formed part of either the original Grounds of  Appeal  or
      the grant of permission, and he did not specifically  seek  permission
      to amend the Grounds of Appeal to argue that point.  I  therefore  did
      not allow that argument to be run.

   My findings on error of law and materiality

  12. Although  the  decision  in  the  case  of  AA  (unattended  children)
      Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  16  was  dealing  with  the  situation  of
      unattended children being returned to Afghanistan, and  therefore  was
      not directly relevant to the situation of the Claimant who was born on
      the [ ] 1989 and was therefore clearly an adult as at the date of  the
      appeal hearing, Judge Shamash only relied upon that case to the extent
      that he referred to paragraphs 130 through to  paragraph  132  of  the
      decision, which paragraphs deal with Dr Giustozzi's evidence regarding
      in that case whether there was a chance  encounter  with  the  Taliban
      which the Appellant in that case feared, which Dr  Giustozzi  regarded
      as a real risk.

  13.  In those paragraphs it was also stated that Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence
      that tracking  someone  down  from  the  provinces  in  Kabul  is  not
      difficult; and although the Taliban would not be  proactively  seeking
      that Claimant, it would not be easy for him to not  settle  away  from
      the southern and south eastern parts of the city  which  are  Pashtuns
      dominated.  It was stated that the north was dominated by Tajiks,  the
      west by Hazaras (heavily hostile to Pashtuns) and the central area was
      found to be very expensive so that  the  Claimant  in  that  case  was
      highly unlikely to be able to afford to live  there.  The  Judge  when
      quoting these paragraphs, was simply referring as is clear  from  [63]
      that he was simply referring to the fact that it would  be  relatively
      simply for the Taliban to track down an individual in Kabul.

  14. Although I do accept the submission from Mr Kotas that the  Judge  has
      somewhat misquoted the paragraphs in that regard, in that in that case
      at paragraph 130 it had  been  accepted  by  the  Appellant  that  the
      Taliban would not be actively seeking to track him down  within  Kabul
      City but rather it was a chance encounter with the Taliban  that  that
      Appellant feared and which Dr Giustozzi regarded as a  real  risk  and
      that at paragraph 131 it was stated that "We  take  into  account  his
      evidence that tracking down someone from the provinces in Kabul is not
      difficult".  This was not an indication that everyone could be tracked
      down within Kabul.  However, given that  there  was  reference  within
      paragraph 130 of that decision to there being a real risk of a  chance
      encounter with the Taliban, in circumstances where Judge  Shamash  had
      found that the Claimant had previously  suffered  persecution  at  the
      hands of the Taliban  for  having  run  away  and  that  he  would  be
      considered a traitor, if there was even a chance  encounter  with  the
      Taliban upon return, rather than it being easy for them to be "tracked
      down", that in itself would be sufficient to  place  the  Claimant  at
      risk in Kabul, such that any error of the Judge in  misquoting  AA,  I
      consider not to be material.

  15. In respect of the argument the Judge should have taken account of  the
      subsequent decision in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT
      163 (IAC), that case was dealing specifically with  the  question  the
      legal principles governing Article 15(c) and was Country  Guidance  on
      the applicable Article 15(c) risk of indiscriminate  violence  to  the
      ongoing armed conflict in Afghanistan.  It was stated specifically the
      Country Guidance given in  AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
      [2012] UKUT 00016, in so far as it  related  to  unattended  children,
      remains unaffected by the decision.  However, I do bear in  mind  that
      that decision in AK was relating  specifically  to  the  risk  to  the
      general population and the paragraphs to  which  Mr  Kotas  sought  to
      refer me, in particular paragraph  51  related  to  the  targeting  of
      civilians, paragraph 52 related to how the  insurgents  have  targeted
      two main types of civilians, those associated  with  coalition  forces
      and  other  international  bodies  and  those  associated   with   the
      government at central and provincial levels.   Paragraphs  81  and  82
      refer to the situation in Ghazni and paragraph 217 referred to  by  Mr
      Kotas again refers to the general risk under Article 15(c) as a result
      of indiscriminate violence to civilians.

  16. However, that is not the situation faced by the Claimant in this  case
      in light of the unchallenged findings of Judge Shamash.  Judge Shamash
      found that the Claimant had already escaped from the Taliban  and  had
      suffered  persecution  at  their  hands  and  was  at  real  risk   of
      persecution from them in the future.  In such circumstances, I do  not
      consider that the Judge erred  in  not  referring  to  the  subsequent
      Country Guidance of AK, given that the Judge was not  considering  the
      general risk to the civilian population, but was considering the  risk
      to someone who had run  away  from  the  Taliban  and  refused  to  be
      recruited by them, and had been previously tortured  by  them  on  his
      unchallenged findings.

  17. Further, the Judge specifically found at [65] that the  Claimant  does
      suffer  from  mental  health  difficulties  and  that  he  was  easily
      identified in 2005 and that there was no evidence before him  to  show
      that the  situation  had  improved  in  Afghanistan  since  2005.   He
      concluded that the Taliban are still active and there is no reason  to
      suspect they would no longer wish to harm the  Claimant  and  that  in
      many ways the situation had deteriorated  by  the  withdrawal  of  the
      troops and that his escape and his decision to return  to  the  United
      Kingdom would both place him in an even more vulnerable position.  The
      Judge further referred to the UNHCR guidelines at [63] and that "It is
      particularly  important  to  note  the  operational  capacity  of  the
      Taliban, the Haqqani  network,  Hisbe-e-Islami,  Hekmatyar  and  other
      armed groups that carry out attacks  in  all  parts  of  the  country,
      including areas that are not under the effective control  of  AGEs  as
      evidenced by example by reports on high  profile  complex  attacks  in
      urban areas under the effective control of pro-government forces.".

  18. Although the Judge may not have specifically stated that the  Claimant
      could not safely internally relocate to Kabul, it is clear  given  his
      analysis of the risk faced by the Claimant from the  Taliban  and  the
      fact that they were active throughout the country and how in his  view
      they could relatively simply track him down in Kabul, which although I
      agree is a misstatement of AA, for the reasons set  out  above,  given
      that in AA it was stated that there  would  be  a  risk  of  a  chance
      encounter, which in itself will be enough  to  put  the  appellant  at
      risk, I do not accept that any error on the part of the Judge in  this
      regard was material, given that even though the Judge has  not  turned
      his mind to specifically stating whether or not there was  an  ability
      of the Claimant to internally relocate to Kabul, it is clear given his
      analysis and findings, that the Judge would  have  specifically  found
      that the Claimant was not able to internally relocate to Kabul.

  19. In any event, given the unchallenged findings at paragraph 62 that the
      Claimant given his period in the UK that there  was  now  a  realistic
      likelihood that he would be at risk in the future from both sides, and
      thereby would be at risk from both the Taliban and the  State,  it  is
      perfectly clear that internal relocation would not be a viable  option
      for him.  Any error in the way that  the  Judge  then  considered  the
      question of internal relocation would not be material, as the Claimant
      clearly would not be able to internally relocate anywhere  within  the
      country.  This finding was not challenged within the Grounds of Appeal
      and the Secretary of State had not been given permission to argue that
      that finding was untenable.

  20. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash therefore  does  not
      reveal a material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shamash  does  not  reveal  a
material error of law and is maintained.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  grant  an  anonymity  order,   and   no
application for such an order was made before me.  No  anonymity  order  was
therefore made.

Signed

R McGinty

Deputy      Judge      of       the       Upper       Tribunal       McGinty
Dated 5th May 2016

