
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01818/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 August 2016                          |On 25 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                 Ragulan [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis of Counsel, instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 3  December  1985.   He
    came to this country on a student visa on 28 September 2009.  This visa
    was extended until 24 January 2014.  He  travelled  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    November 2012 returning the following month.  He then visited Sri Lanka
    on 11 September 2013 returning on 2 October 2013.  It was his case that
    on 23 September 2013 he had been stopped and detained on  suspicion  of
    LTTE involvement.  He was beaten and released on payment of a bribe.

2.   The appellant claimed asylum on 17 January 2014.  The  application  was
    refused on 19 January 2015.  The matter came before a First-tier Judge
    on 15 February 2016.

3.   At the  hearing  the  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  Lewis.   The
    appellant did not appear.  There had been a previous hearing on 28  May
    2015 where the appellant had again been represented by Mr  Lewis.   The
    appellant had not appeared.  On that occasion  it  was  said  that  the
    appellant was  suffering  from  gastroenteritis  and  the  hearing  was
    adjourned.

4.   At the hearing on 15 February 2016 it was said that the  appellant  was
    suffering from food poisoning.  The matter was put back  in  order  for
    any medical evidence that might be obtained to be considered.   Counsel
    told the judge that the appellant had been given a  prescription  by  a
    doctor at a walk-in  centre  but  he  did  not  have  a  copy  of  that
    prescription which had been sent to his  instructing  solicitors.   The
    judge found that in the absence of any medical evidence relating to the
    two scheduled hearing dates, she refused the application in  the  light
    of the overriding objective.

5.   In  paragraph  35  of  her  decision  she  stated  that  she  found  it
    astonishing  that  if  the  appellant  was   genuinely   in   need   of
    international protection and had been told  that  the  authorities  had
    recently visited his family home looking for him that  he  had  delayed
    claiming asylum for over a year.  The appellant had failed to give  any
    credible explanation for the very significant delay in claiming asylum.
     She repeated this point in paragraph 42 of her decision.  She referred
    to the appellant's witness statement where  he  had  said  that  having
    heard that his father had been arrested "given the mental state  I  was
    in at the time it was clear to me I would not be able to concentrate on
    studies.  So I decided to claim asylum."  The judge again says that the
    appellant did not in fact claim asylum until over a year later.

6.   The judge  had  before  her  a  report  by  Dr  Martin  concerning  the
    appellant's scars and a psychiatric report by  Dr  Zapata.   The  judge
    stated she had considered all of the evidence relating to scarring  but
    did not find the appellant credible as to the circumstances in which he
    claimed to have been detained and tortured in 2013 or  to  his  claimed
    fear of return to Sri Lanka.  She adds


         "In the  light  of  my  findings  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
         appellant's account of the claimed detention and  torture  in  July
         2013, I am not satisfied that the scars which are  the  subject  of
         the medical report were caused in the way in  which  the  appellant
         claims."

7.   She referred to the country guidance  case  of  GJ  and  Others  [2013]
    UKAIT 00319 (IAC) and found that the appellant would be of no  interest
    to the authorities on return.

8.   Among the points taken by the judge was that  following  his  detention
    and release on 28 September 2013 he was able  to  travel  back  to  the
    United Kingdom on 2 October 2013.  She adds:


         "In doing so he used  his  own  passport  to  travel  from  Colombo
         International Airport.   It  beggars  belief  that,  the  appellant
         having been so recently released  from  detention  as  claimed,  he
         would have been able to evade the sophisticated intelligence system
         in use by the Sri Lankan government."

9.   The judge  having  dismissed  the  appeal  the  appellant  applied  for
    permission to the First-tier Tribunal.  This application  was  refused.
    However the application was renewed.  It was pointed out  that  medical
    evidence establishing the fact that the appellant was unwell  had  been
    obtained and faxed to the Tribunal.  It was wrong that the  appeal  had
    not been adjourned.  Counsel points out that it had  been  accepted  by
    the Secretary of State in the country guidance case of GJ  that  "given
    the prevalence of bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka, having left  Sri
    Lanka without difficulty  was  not  probative  of  a  lack  of  adverse
    interest in an individual."  The concession made in GJ  undermined  the
    First-tier Judge's reasoning.

10.  There had been a significant material error  of  fact  in  the  judge's
    approach to the issue of delay.  The  delay  had  been  at  most  three
    months and in paragraph 42 the  delay  following  notification  of  his
    father's arrest had been only a matter of weeks.  The judge  had  erred
    in failing to consider the issue of the  delay  in  the  light  of  the
    psychiatric evidence showing the appellant was suffering from PTSD.

11.  The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal on the question of  the
    errors in the calculation of the period of delay and the other  matters
    raised in  relation  to  the  country  guidance  case.   Permission  in
    relation to the adjournment point was however refused.

12.  Mr Lewis sought to renew the application in respect of the  adjournment
    issue.  He lodged the GP's notes confirming attendance at  the  surgery
    on 16 February 2016 and referring  to  the  appellant  having  possible
    gastroenteritis.  The appellant was described as not fit for work  from
    15 February 2016 to 22 February 2016.  He had abdominal  cramps,  loose
    stools  and  sickness.    Counsel   also   provided   the   appellant's
    prescription and a full statement of fitness for work  which  confirmed
    that the appellant was not fit to attend court from 15-22 February.

13.  Mr Tarlow did not oppose Counsel's  application  to  renew  the  ground
    relating to the adjournment.  He acknowledged that  he  had  difficulty
    with the Rule 24 response from the respondent.  Counsel submitted  that
    there was a need for a heightened duty to consider the  evidence  where
    an appeal proceeded in the absence of an appellant.

14.  In the light of the fact that both representatives  were  not  able  to
    support the decision it was agreed that the appeal should  be  remitted
    for a fresh hearing.

15.  In the circumstances I will not  give  lengthy  reasons  for  being  in
    agreement with this approach.  It does appear to me that the judge made
    a significant error in her calculation of the period of  delay  on  two
    occasions during the course of  the  determination.   The  question  of
    delay clearly featured as a prominent matter.  As  Counsel  points  out
    the delay following notification about his  father's  arrest  had  only
    been a matter of weeks, rather than  over  a  year  as  the  judge  had
    thought.  The reference to the delay following the appellant's learning
    of the visit to his family home had  only  been  a  matter  of  months.
    There was, it is true, a delay but nowhere like the delay on which  the
    judge had based her decision.

16.  I am not unsympathetic to the submission that where  a  judge  proceeds
    in the absence of an appellant in  circumstances  such  as  this,  very
    great care is needed in making findings.  They need to  be  made  on  a
    proper basis.

17.  An argument was also advanced in the grounds in reliance  on  the  case
    of Mibanga v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ 367  and  the  need  to
    deal with medical reports as  an  integral  part  of  the  findings  on
    credibility, rather than just an add on.  There is perhaps something in
    this point although I do not need to come to a conclusion  upon  it  in
    the light of the other failings in the decision.

18.  I should mention that the appellant did appear before me  and  has  now
    put forward medical evidence to  explain  his  failure  to  attend  the
    previous hearings.

19.  Both the representatives have, as I have said, requested  me  to  remit
    the matter for a fresh hearing.  I agree that that is  the  appropriate
    course in this case.

20.  For the reasons I have given the determination  was  materially  flawed
    in law.  The matter must be heard afresh before a different  First-tier
    Judge.  None of the findings of fact are to stand.

21.  Appeal allowed as indicated.

Anonymity Direction

22.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity award and I make none.

Fee Award

23.  The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 9 August 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
