
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01897/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th November 2015                |On 28th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR OLEG KRUK
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Claimant: Ms Murshed of Counsel instructed by Cale Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellant,  hereinafter  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (SSHD), is seeking to appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eban  promulgated  on  11th  August  2015.   The
    Claimant, Mr Oleg Kruk, date of birth 21st March 1984, is a national of
    the Ukraine.  Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider
    it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. By Decision and Reasons of 11th August  2015  Judge  Eban  allowed  the
    Claimant's appeal on humanitarian protection and Articles 2  and  3  of
    the ECHR grounds.  The appeal on the basis of asylum was dismissed.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal by the SSHD in brief assert:-

      i) The judge has failed to give reasons or any  adequate  reasons  for
         findings of fact on material matters.  It  is  submitted  that  the
         judge has failed to provide any or any  adequate  reasons  for  the
         finding in paragraph 26.3 of the decision.  Paragraph 26.3 reads as
         follows:-

         "The Respondent's [the SSHD] research  has  established  that  only
         members of certain religious denominations may claim the  right  to
         conscientious objection.  The Greek Catholic Church is not  one  of
         them.  In the  circumstances  I  find  that  if  the  Appellant  is
         returned there is a real likelihood that he will refuse  to  fight,
         and  that  he  will  not  be  entitled  to  claim  the   right   to
         conscientious objection."

     ii) Reliance is placed on MK (duty to  give  reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]
         UKUT 00641 (IAC)  and  on  the  case  of  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
         decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341.

Background Facts

 4. The Claimant's nationality and identity were accepted.  It was accepted
    also  that  the  Claimant  had  performed  "national  service"  in  the
    Ukrainian Army between 2007 and 2009, although the  Claimant  had  been
    granted an exemption from "weapons or military training".  The Claimant
    appears to have undertaken non-military duties. It  was  also  accepted
    that the Claimant's religion is that of Greek Catholic Church.

 5. The Claimant's case in essence was that he held deep religious views as
    a devout adherent of the Greek Catholic Church and as such he  was  not
    willing to  bear  arms.   When  re-called  to  national  service  as  a
    reservist, this was specifically  to  undertake  weapons  training  and
    because of his religious beliefs the Claimant had left the country  and
    come to the United Kingdom.

 6. The Claimant accepted that he had been called up for  military  service
    in 2007.  According  to  his  interview  the  Claimant  was  asked  the
    following questions:-

       "Page 65 Interview

       Question 84 Just to confirm because of  your  religious  beliefs  you
         were exempt from using any weapons.  Correct?

       Answer Yes they allowed me that.

       Question 85 How did you get the exemption?

       Answer I made a request to the high ranking officer of that unit  and
         they granted my request.

       Question 86 Did  you  have  to  submit  any  evidence  to  show  your
         religious belief.

       Answer I remember my priest wrote me a similar character letter."

 7. Having completed his non-military national service the Claimant's  case
    is that he was then as a reservist recalled to the army specifically to
    undertake weapons training.  He had attended a one day course but  then
    received a renewed call up to take part allegedly in weapons  training.
    Because of his religious beliefs the Claimant claims that he failed  to
    attend the training course.  He had obtained a visa  for  the  Schengen
    area.  He did not turn up to the training course but fled the  country.



 8. The SSHD's case was that the Claimant would be able as in the  past  to
    obtain an exemption from the weapons training.  The SSHD's  case  being
    that  the  Claimant  had,  when  originally  undertaking  his  national
    service, applied for an exemption and been granted  it  by  his  senior
    officer.   The  SSHD  was  suggesting  that  this  was  "an   official"
    recognition of the Claimant's objection to bear arms and that he  would
    be able again to obtain such an exemption if returned to  Ukraine.  The
    case on behalf of the Claimant was that that was a matter of the senior
    officer granting him permission not to participate in weapons  training
    and  that  was  not  an  official  exemption.   Given  the  change   in
    circumstances in the Ukraine since he  was  allowed  the  exemption  he
    would not again be allowed  to  forego  weapons  training  and  he  was
    specifically called up to do weapons training.

 9. In part the argument before me concerned a document at H1  obtained  by
    the SSHD.  A request had been made for information to  the  embassy  in
    the Ukraine.  It has to be noted that the  question,  which  was  being
    posed at the time and as set  out  in  the  document,  was  related  to
    medical conditions which would exclude an individual  from  undertaking
    military conscription and not as to the religious grounds for  refusing
    to do national service.  However the  document  does  contain  comments
    about conscientious objectors.  It seems strange that the document does
    not contain any reference to medical issues given that it was allegedly
    related to medical issues.  The document provides as follows:-

         "2.  In Ukraine only members of religious denominations who  forbid
             their  members  to  bear  arms  may   claim   the   right   to
             conscientious objection.  The right to conscientious objection
             is enshrined in Article 35.1 of the ... Constitution according
             to which: 'if performance of military service is  contrary  to
             the religious beliefs of a citizen, the  performance  of  this
             duty shall be replaced by  alternative  (non-military)  duty.'
             ...

         3.   After an extensive search CPIT  cannot  find  any  information
             regarding the time limit for exclusion to the army in Ukraine.



         4.   The respective religious organisations are listed in the  list
             of  religious  organisations  whose  doctrine  prohibit  using
             weapons (Resolution 2066/1999). ... The list includes Seventh-
             Day  Adventists,  Baptists,  Adventists-Reformists,  Jehovah's
             Witnesses and the Charismatic Christian Church."

10. The comments within the document continue by referring to the fact that
    draft evasion is widespread in the  Ukraine  and  is  punishable  under
    Article 72 of the Criminal Code.  The document continues thereafter  to
    indicate that the president has  reinstated  military  conscription  to
    deal with the deteriorating security situation  in  the  country.   The
    announcement also stated  that  partial  mobilisation  of  people  with
    military experience  was  to  be  undertaken.   There  were  additional
    documents which considered the conscription as set out in paragraphs 16
    to 19 of the decision.

11. In paragraph 16 there is reference  to  searches  for  persons  evading
    military conscription and that  the  consequence  of  evading  military
    conscription would be a term of imprisonment of five years.  There  was
    also in paragraph 17 a reference to the fact that the  authorities  had
    authorised military commanders  to  use  physical  force  against  army
    defectors.  Paragraph 18 also refers to the recall of those  reservists
    that had completed their military service.

12. As a final matter the Claimant's representative  highlighted  the  fact
    that the new wave of mobilisation of reservists indicated that  it  was
    planned to call up about 50,000 reservists and conscripts.  The  people
    that were noted as not being mobilised were citizens who had  three  or
    more  children,  graduate  students,  students  and  people  that  were
    specifically reserved for business firms.

13. The consequence of evading military service appears to  be  a  term  if
    imprisonment.  Consistent with  the  case  of  PS  (prison  conditions:
    military service) Ukraine CG [2006] UKAIT 00016  prison  conditions  in
    the Ukraine have been found to breach Article 3.  It was not challenged
    that the country guidance case was still  effective.   Accordingly  the
    issue was not what was the consequence of evading military service  but
    rather whether or not the Appellant  could  obtain  an  exemption  from
    military service, specifically weapons training.  Additionally  if  the
    appellant were returned to Ukraine would he be given the opportunity of
    undertaking the non-military option to national service or would he  be
    treated as a person that had  evaded  national  service  and  therefore
    liable to imprisonment in any event. If  the  latter  than  clearly  he
    would be at risk of being imprisoned.

14. The judge  in  assessing  the  issues  had  considered  the  background
    information provided  and  the  information  provided  with  regard  to
    specific religions which banned the bearing of  arms.   The  judge  had
    clearly come to the conclusion that the Greek Catholic Church was not a
    church that banned its members as a principle  of  faith  from  bearing
    arms.  In paragraph 26.3 the  judge  had  suggested  that  it  was  the
    Respondent's  research  that   established   that   certain   religious
    denominations may claim the right to conscientious objection.   It  was
    suggested that that research specifically found that it did  not  cover
    the Greek Catholic Church.

15. It is clear that the judge has accepted that  the  appellant  has  deep
    held religious views and he accepts that the appellant does belong  and
    attends regularly at the Greek Catholic church.

16. Consistent with the case of Sepet & Bulbul [2003] UKHL  322  and  Andre
    Lawrence Shepherd v Bundesrepublick Deutschland Case  C-472/13  CJEU  a
    nation state is entitled to expect its citizenry  to  perform  national
    service to protect the state.  However  the  case  of  Sepet  &  Bulbul
    recognises individuals holding strong religious  views  may  object  to
    performance of military service. Where such is the case the  issue  was
    whether or not there is  a  non-military  alternative  or  whether  the
    punishment   for  failure  to  perform  the  military  service   itself
    constitutes  inhumane  or  degrading   treatment   or   punishment   or
    persecutory treatment.

17. In respect of Ukraine consequence of the failure  to  perform  military
    service or evading military service is a term of imprisonment and  such
    would on the basis of PS  constitute  mistreatment  certainly  engaging
    Articles 2 and 3.

18. The Greek Catholic Church is a major religion within Ukraine. The judge
    was entitled to conclude that if as a principle  of  faith  the  church
    forbade its members from bearing arms than it would have been  referred
    to in the document at H1 from the embassy. Whilst  the  judge  has  not
    explicitly stated that, it is clear that the judge was  satisfied  that
    the Claimant would be expected to perform  weapons  training  and  that
    because of his religious beliefs he would refuse to do  so.  The  judge
    was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  consequence  in  line  with  the
    background information was that the  Claimant  would  be  subjected  to
    forcible mistreatment in an effort to make him perform such duty.

19. In any event the judge was entitled to conclude that  as  the  Claimant
    held deeply religious views because of which he would not bear arms and
    because of that and because the  Claimant  had  failed  to  report  for
    military training he would be treated as an evader and  would  in  that
    light be liable to imprisonment.

20. The judge clearly concluded that the Claimant was  a  credible  witness
    and that is  assertion  that  he  was  being  called  up  to  undertake
    specifically weapons training had  resulted  in  him  fleeing  Ukraine.
    Whilst it is suggested that he could seek to obtain an exemption as  he
    had in the past the judge was entitled to conclude that as it was not a
    principle of faith of the Greek Catholic Church and as the Claimant had
    been specifically called out to do weapons training there  was  a  real
    risk that the appellant will be forced to undertake weapons training or
    alternatively   face   imprisonment.   Accordingly   the   judge    has
    justification for the conclusions reached in the  case  on  a  material
    issues. In the light of that there is no material arguable error of law
    of the decision stands.

Notice of Decision

21. The appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  is
    dismissed

22. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
