
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01725/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th June 2013                               |On 13th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN
                     dEPUTY Upper Tribunal Judge grimes


                                   Between

                         miss meseret mengistu tekle
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Miss A Radford (instructed by Blavo & Co,
solicitors)
For the Respondent:        Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Broe promulgated on 12th April 2013.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia.  She applied unsuccessfully for
    leave to enter the UK  for  settlement  in  February  2007.   She  then
    applied for and was refused leave to enter as a family visitor in  June
    2009.  She appealed successfully in 2010 and was granted a family visit
    visa.  She arrived in the UK in February 2010 and in July sought  leave
    to remain.  That was refused.  She applied again for leave to remain in
    September 2010 but as she had no extant leave that was refused with  no
    right of appeal.  An application for Judicial  Review  was  refused  in
    January  2012.  On  10th  January  2013  she  claimed   asylum.    That
    application was refused on 8th February 2013 and that is  the  decision
    relevant to this appeal.

 3. Her appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 26th March 2013  when
    it was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The  grounds  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  assert
    essentially that the Judge failed to engage with the  evidence,  should
    have adjourned as the Appellant's representatives had requested for  an
    expert's report and that the findings are inadequately reasoned.

 5.  We  do  not  criticise  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  refusing   the
    adjournment  application.   The  representatives  wished  to  obtain  a
    medical report but as the Judge pointed out; they had  been  seized  of
    the matter for some time and ought to have  dealt  with  this  earlier.
    The other issue was the verification of documents  from  Ethiopia  only
    submitted at the hearing.  It seems to us that the representatives were
    asking the Home Office  to  verify  the  documents  which  it  was  not
    prepared to do.  The Record of Proceedings does not  suggest  that  the
    representatives were going to do this.

 6. However we do agree that the determination  is  inadequately  reasoned,
    fails to engage with the evidence and fails to engage with  the  issues
    in the case.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal set out the details of  the  Appellant's  claim
    from paragraphs 13 to 28.  The findings of fact and credibility  occupy
    a mere 4 paragraphs.

 8. The Judge finds against the Appellant  because  of  the  delay  in  her
    claiming asylum while ignoring that her case was a Sur Place claim  and
    only arose in late 2012.  He  dismisses  it  as  a  fabricated  account
    without giving reasons.

 9. The Judge refers to the Appellant's late claim to be a  member  of  OLF
    but if he had read her supplemental statement handed in at the  hearing
    he would have seen that she did not so claim.

10. The Judge criticises the late production of  the  documents  when  they
    were brought to the UK in January 2013 without saying why  he  rejected
    the Appellant's and her witness's explanation for that. That appears to
    be the Judge's only reason for placing no reliance on the documents.

11. The Judge says that he has taken into account  all  the  documents  but
    that statement is insufficient to lead to a conclusion that he  has  in
    fact done so when there is no mention of a potentially crucial document
    - a letter from the political affairs co-ordinator of EPPF in exile  in
    Germany that potentially corroborates the Appellant's claim.

12. It is open to a Judge to reject documents and make adverse  credibility
    findings but theses have to be adequately reasoned  and  in  this  case
    they were not.

13. A failure to give adequate reasons and a failure  to  engage  with  the
    evidence is a material error of law.  We set  aside  the  determination
    and we preserve none of the findings.

14. Miss Radford submitted that as there are three witnesses to  give  oral
    evidence and many facts at issue it would be a more  efficient  use  of
    the  Tribunal's  resources  to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  We agree.

15. We therefore remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de
    novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Broe.

16. As Miss Radford indicated that the Appellant's representatives would be
    obtaining an expert's report on the documents we did not  list  it  for
    hearing.  We direct that the  Appellant's  representatives  notify  the
    Resident Judge at Hatton Cross within 14 days of to-day as to how  long
    the expert requires to submit his report  so  that  it  can  be  listed
    accordingly.



Signed                              Date 12th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

