
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  AA/01521/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 3rd September  2013                          |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                   mr m m
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                             Secretary of State

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Watterson (Instructed by AB Mackenzie,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr T Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Oliver) dated 17th June 2013 by  which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  him  asylum
    and return him to Uganda.

 2. The Appellant had come to the UK as a student in September  2008.   His
    student visa was extended to January 2013 but revoked in  August  2011.
    He claimed asylum in January 2013 on the basis that he is gay and  that
    he had been persecuted in Uganda in the past.

 3. Despite a hearing that, according to the Record of Proceedings,  lasted
    some 4 hours and involved oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  two
    witnesses the determination is brief and the Judge's findings  confined
    to one paragraph.  He makes no finding whatsoever  on  the  Appellant's
    claim to have been stripped naked and attacked by  a  mob  in  February
    2008 (misquoted as 2007 in the determination). The Judge does find that
    the Appellant was dismissed on two occasions  from  his  employment  on
    account of his sexuality and  does  find  that  he  is  gay.   However,
    although making reference to HJ (Iran) [2009] EWCA Civ 172 he does  not
    address the central issue or  ask  the  crucial  question  of  why  the
    Appellant was discreet in Uganda previously.

 4. The Judge has also placed a great deal of emphasis on  the  Appellant's
    late claim for asylum without properly considering his explanation.

 5. The absence of a finding on a major part of the Appellant's claim means
    that the Judge's finding that  the  Appellant  was  not  persecuted  in
    Uganda is unsustainable.   His  finding  that  the  Appellant  will  be
    discreet upon return is also  unsustainable  when  there  has  been  no
    consideration of why that would be.

 6. These errors are  fundamental  to  the  issues  under  appeal  and  the
    determination cannot stand.  Given that the errors go to the  heart  of
    the case I set aside the determination in its entirety and direct  that
    it be reheard.

 7. Given the likely number of witnesses and the findings of fact that will
    have to be made this is a suitable case to be reheard in the First-tier
    Tribunal and accordingly I remit it to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    complete rehearing on all issues by any Judge save Judge Oliver.






Signed                              Date 3rd September 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

