

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01545/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 March 2016                      |On 28th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H H STOREY


                                   Between

                                  [MARIA M]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins of Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Angola aged 71. She came to the UK on  a
      family visit via valid from 3 July 2012 to 3 January 2013 but  on  the
      latter date made a claim for asylum.  The  basis  of  the  appellant's
      asylum claim was that prior to coming to the  UK  she  had  treated  a
      young woman for a "stone" in her stomach. This woman died soon  after.
      The appellant claimed she would be  arrested  on  return  because  the
      deceased's father was a high ranking military official with  influence
      with the police. He blamed her. She had heard there was a warrant  for
      her arrest and that the police had searched her home and her  daughter
      and sister had disappeared. She also claimed  she  had  mental  health
      problems and was a dependent on her daughter in the UK.


   2.   When the respondent decided to refuse her claim on 18 November  2014
      she appealed. In a decision dated 10 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal
      (FtT) Judge Thanki dismissed her appeal.


   3.  The written grounds contend first of all  that  the  judge  erred  by
      giving inadequate reasons for rejecting the reliability of the  arrest
      warrant and email letter from a Mr Manuel the appellant had submitted.
       Mr Collins did not pursue this ground before me but I shall deal with
      it in any event. I do not find this ground made out. It is  true  that
      the judge's treatment of the arrest warrant and email was  very  short
      but read as a whole the determination gave  a  sufficient  reason  for
      rejecting the reliability of these documents. In relation to the email
      the judge heard evidence from the appellant's sister and noted in [31]
      that this witness was unable to give clear  evidence  as  to  why  the
      email was not dated and contained no return  address;  nor  could  she
      explain who was said to have given the arrest warrant to Mr Manuel  or
      why. She was also unable to recall when she received it and  confirmed
      she had not made contact with Mr Manuel.


   4. The arrest warrant produced having been attached to  this  email,  the
      judge was entitled to find that unreliability in the email  also  cast
      doubt on the reliability of  the  arrest  warrant.   The  judge  heard
      submissions  from  both  representatives   (Mr   Collins   being   the
      representative before the FtT  judge  as  well)  regarding  these  two
      documents. At [49] the judge concluded that he could not rely  on  the
      email and it was undated and bore no email address and the appellant's
      sister who received it  had  not  made  any  contact  with  Mr  Manuel
      otherwise. The judge  also  concluded  that  the  arrest  warrant  was
      unreliable. Given its close connection with the email  the  judge  did
      not need to give  further  and  separate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
      warrant.


   5. It is right to say that the medical evidence adduced on behalf of  the
      appellant (see below) did also refer to the appellant's  "...  genuine
      fear of being arrested and killed if she was returned to Angola  ...".
      But it is apparent that the November 2014  letters  from  this  doctor
      that she did not have available the respondent's interview  record  or
      reasons for refusal in making this assessment and the June 2015 letter
      did not engage with this material.  In  short,  the  medical  evidence
      relating to the appellant's claimed past experiences in Angola was not
      such as to require the judge to attach any significant weight to it.




   6.  The only other ground on which the appellant relied, and it  was  the
      ground on which  Mr  Collins  sought  to  focus  in  his  submissions,
      concerned the judge's treatment of Article  8.  The  grounds  complain
      that the judge undertook no consideration of the effect  generally  on
      both the appellant and her daughter of the former's removal  from  the
      UK where her daughter was accepted to be the  primary  carer  for  her
      sick mother.  Having accepted that there was a family life tie between
      the appellant and her daughter,  the  judge  failed  to  carry  out  a
      structured full-blown fact-sensitive  assessment  of  the  applicant's
      Article 8 circumstances.


   7.   Whilst Mr  Collins  put  his  arguments  with  customary  force  and
      cogency, I am not persuaded that the judge's Article 8 assessment  was
      vitiated by legal error.  The  judge  clearly  applied  the  two-stage
      approach enjoined by higher court authority.  It was  entirely  within
      the range of reasonable responses for  the  judge  to  find  that  the
      appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
      Immigration  Rules.  Indeed  Mr  Collins  himself  conceded  that  the
      appellant could not succeed under the Rules at the hearing before  the
      judge ([51]). The judge properly approached the issue  as  to  whether
      the appellant could succeed outside the Immigration Rules  by  looking
      to see whether the decision could be said to be contrary to Article  8
      and  disproportionate.  The  judge  accepted  that  there  was  cogent
      evidence to show that  the  appellant  had  a  family  life  with  her
      daughter and by her presence in  the  UK  also  had  a  private  life,
      certainly until her visit visa expired. The judge also  accepted  that
      the decision interfered with the  appellant's  Article  8  rights.  In
      assessing proportionality, the judge took account of  the  appellant's
      age, her immigration history; her medical circumstances on  the  basis
      of the medical report of Dr Valdearenas, psychiatrist at  the  Barnet,
      Enfield and Haringey Mental Health NHS Trust which diagnosed  moderate
      depressive episodes and possibly post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and
      vascular dementia.


   8.   I would accept that the judge's Article 8 assessment is not (to  use
      Mr  Collin's  expression)  "full-blown"  and  that  it  devotes   most
      attention to the issue of whether the  appellant's  medical  condition
      engaged Article 3 ECHR which, applying established case law, it  could
      not.  However, first of all the judge's assessment shows that he  took
      into account and accepted from the medical evidence that the appellant
      suffered from dementia and also considered whether it could be said on
      the basis of background country  information  on  mental  health  care
      provisions in Angola that the appellant would have available care: the
      judge concluded that "there is provision  of  mental  health  care  in
      Angola". Although it is true that the judge made  this  assessment  in
      the context of Article 3 ECHR, it was also relevant to the  Article  8
      assessment as is clear from the judge's use of the word "[f]inally" in
      [62] when considering what can only have been  other  further  matters
      pertaining  to  Article  8.  Secondly,  it  is  also  clear  from  the
      unchallenged findings of fact made by the judge in the context of  the
      appellant's asylum claim,  that  there  was  no  evidential  basis  to
      consider that on return to Angola she would face any risk of harm from
      the authorities. The judge clearly did not accept, either,  her  claim
      that her two children had disappeared.  Thirdly, it was not  contended
      on behalf or by the appellant that the respondent  was  wrong  in  her
      reasons for refusal letter to conclude  that  having  spent  the  vast
      majority of her life in Angola the appellant would  know  the  customs
      and culture of the country and that she owned three  properties  there
      which she rented out to support herself, her daughter and her  sister.
      The appellant in her appeal statement of April 2015 did not  challenge
      these findings.


   9.   Fifthly, the judge went on to apply the considerations  set  out  in
      s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in  the
      course of that assessment addressed the matter  of  her  inability  to
      speak English and her lack of financial independence.


  10.  In considering whether the judge erred in-law I must  ask  what  were
      the judge's reasons in  substance  for  considering  the  the  refusal
      decision was proportionate. Although the judge's  assessment  did  not
      identify  in  express  terms  all  relevant  factors,  I  am  entirely
      satisfied that it took into account the essential matters and did  not
      fail to weigh in the balance all  matters  going  in  the  appellant's
      favour.


  11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge  did  not  materially
      err in law and his decision dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  must
      stand.


                               Signed   [pic]
                                   Date 25 April 2016




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
