
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01923/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 August 2013                              |On 13 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                         MR MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM HOSSAIN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Solomon of counsel instructed by Dean Manson
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Deller a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1 January 1971. He has
   been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier Tribunal
   Judge Lucas who dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision of
   26 February 2013 to give directions for his removal from the United
   Kingdom following the refusal of asylum.

2. The appellant claimed asylum on the basis of past persecution and the
   fear of future persecution in Bangladesh because of his Ahmadi faith. He
   was born a Sunni Muslim and converted to the Ahmadi faith when he was
   between 10 and 12 years of age. He claimed to have been attacked on three
   occasions because of his faith. The first was in 1986 when he was
   kidnapped, ordered to renounce his face and badly beaten when he refused
   to do so. He was admitted to hospital where he remained for three days.
   He was sent to prison in August 1987 because of his conversion and held
   for 56 days before being released. In August 2010 he had planned to build
   an Ahmadi mosque on land owned by his family. A mob assembled and he was
   badly beaten with an iron rod. Damage to his head required nine stitches
   and he was kept in hospital for a month. He did not leave Bangladesh
   until December 2012.


3. The respondent accepted the appellant's nationality, his date of birth
   and that he was of the Ahmadi faith. His account of events in Bangladesh
   was either doubted or disbelieved. The appellant appealed and the judge
   heard his appeal on 26 April 2013. Both parties were represented; the
   appellant attended and gave evidence.


4. In paragraph 70 of the determination the judge accepted, albeit with
   obvious reluctance, that the appellant was of the Ahmadi faith. He found
   the appellant not to be a credible witness, rejected his account of
   events and concluded that in the circumstances notwithstanding his faith
   he would not be at risk on return to Bangladesh. He dismissed the appeal
   on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.


5. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal by a
   judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. The grounds argue that the judge erred
   in law in a number of respects. He made a factual error as to the
   identity of the patient in the Police Case Injury Report, failed to give
   any objectively supported reasons for the conclusion that the appellant
   would have known how to claim asylum in the UK, erroneously criticised
   the appellant for failing to provide corroborative evidence and failed to
   take into account the medical evidence as the scarring on the appellant's
   head. The respondent served a Rule 24 letter arguing that there was no
   error of law and that the judge was entitled to reach his conclusions.


6. I informed Mr Deller that I was concerned about aspects of the
   determination relating to the adverse credibility finding in particular
   the judge's treatment of the medical evidence. In paragraph 68 the judge
   said; "There is no medical report in this case. The letter that has been
   produced from the appellant's GP does (not) make any mention or findings
   at all with regard to the injury or scar that the appellant is said to
   have suffered in 2010." The word "not" which I have placed in brackets,
   was omitted but I conclude that this was a typographical error. The
   passage does not make any sense without it. This conclusion flies in the
   face of what the judge said in paragraph 28 where he recorded a letter
   from the Figges Marsh Surgery and a named GP. The judge quoted from the
   report including the passage; "I can confirm that he has scar marks of
   approximately 10 - 14 stitches in his head. The incident took place in
   2010. Following the head injury, he developed sleep disturbance, low
   moods, flashbacks and withdrawal from his daily activities and phobias of
   public interactions".


7. Mr Deller indicated that he was concerned about the determination. It
   appeared to him that there were strong indications that the judge erred
   in law by reaching his adverse credibility finding before giving reasons
   for this. On behalf of the respondent he conceded that there were
   material errors of law in the determination and that the decision should
   be set aside. It was not a safe determination.


8. I find that the judge erred in law. His treatment of the medical
   evidence as to the appellant's scarring is flawed for the reasons I have
   set out. This is raised in paragraph 7 of the grounds of appeal. If the
   judge had properly considered the medical evidence it should have
   impinged on his consideration of the photographs and his conclusion that
   these were not of the appellant. The psychiatric report has not been
   properly considered. One of the reasons the judge gives for rejecting it,
   that there was no medical evidence to establish the cause or age of any
   head injuries sustained by the appellant, is flawed because there was
   such evidence. The other reason, in paragraph 69, is in large part
   impermissibly circular. The judge rejects the psychiatric evidence
   because he found the appellant not credible. In respect of the adverse
   credibility findings generally the judge put the cart before the horse
   concluding, in paragraph 49 and before giving any reasons, that the
   appellant "has failed to discharge the appropriate burden of proof upon
   any submitted grounds" (the judge's emphasis) and, in paragraph 53,
   before giving most of his reasons, that; "the Tribunal places no weight
   at all upon the appellant's claim to have been targeted or persecuted in
   Bangladesh". These errors are such that the findings of fact and
   credibility cannot stand. The decision should be set aside.


9.  I set aside the judge's decision. As there has not been a full and
   effective hearing in the First-Tier Tribunal I agree with the
   representatives that the redetermination of this appeal should take place
   before a judge in the First-Tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.

DIRECTIONS

a) Arrangements have already been made for the case to be listed at Hatton
   Cross on the 11th November 2013.

b) Time estimate two and a half hours.

c) Bengali speaking interpreter required.

d) To be heard by any First-Tier Tribunal judge other than Judge Lucas.







Signed:........................................
    Date: 9 August 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


