
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01587/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 July 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                               ZABIT BISMILLAH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
& Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1  January  1981.  He
    arrived in the UK  on  19  March  2009  and  claimed  asylum.   He  was
    intervened in relation to his asylum claim on 27 July 2009.  His asylum
    application was refused by  the  respondent  on  7  August  2009.   The
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision was dismissed in a
    determination dated 6 October 2009.  He made no attempt at  this  stage
    to further appeal the determination.

2.   On 11 January 2011 the appellant made further  submissions  in  support
    of his asylum claim.  By a letter dated 24 January 2011 the submissions
    were rejected by the respondent but it was accepted that they  amounted
    to a fresh claim and the appellant was  afforded  a  further  right  of
    appeal.  In  a  determination  dated  30  March  2011  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.  He  lodged  an  application  for
    permission to appeal which was granted on 2 September 2011.

3.   In a determination dated 16 November 2011 the  appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed by the Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.  The  appellant  applied
    to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    and this  was  refused  on  14  January  2013.   He  then  renewed  his
    application directly to the Court of Appeal.

4.   On 4 June 2013 Lord Justice Moses ordered that the  appellant's  appeal
    be allowed and the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  dated  16
    November 2011 be quashed; that the matter be remitted to a  differently
    constituted Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  for  a
    rehearing.  The order was on the basis of a Statement of Reasons agreed
    by the parties that the appeal should be allowed. The agreement was  as
    follows:-

         "6.  The respondent has carefully considered the findings of  Upper
             Tribunal  Judge  Perkins,  the  grounds  of  appeal  and   the
             observations of Stanley Burton LJ.  She now accepts that Upper
             Tribunal Judge Perkins did err in law. The error of law is the
             failure to fully and properly  consider  paragraph  12  of  Dr
             Giustozzi's  report  and  the  general  failure  to   properly
             consider the risk to the appellant in his home area.  For this
             reason, the parties agree that the appeal  should  be  allowed
             and remitted for rehearing."

5.   At the hearing before me Miss Isherwood sought to argue that the  order
    made by Lord Justice Moses meant that  the  whole  of  the  appellant's
    appeal needed to be reheard.  I  disagreed  with  her.  I  agreed  with
    Counsel that it is the dismissal of  the  appellant's  appeal  that  is
    quashed. The findings of fact made by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  are
    to stand.  The only issue before me was as set out in  paragraph  6  of
    the Statement of Reasons to which both parties had agreed was the error
    of law in UTJ Perkins's decision.

6.   The facts of the appellant's claim are that he was born and grew up  in
    the  Chapliyar  District  in  Nangahar  Province  of  Afghanistan.  His
    mother, wife and two sons currently reside in Pakistan.  He did not  go
    to school in Afghanistan so he is illiterate.

7.   His father used to be a member  of  the  Hizb-e-Islami  and  he  fought
    against the Communist  regime.  When  the  Taliban  came  to  power  in
    September 1996 his father joined the Taliban in early 1997.  He  was  a
    commander and had 70 to 100 men under his command.

8.   In  November  2001,  the  Taliban  regime  collapsed  after  which  the
    appellant  and his family moved from Zgho (in  Chapliyar)  to  Farmaday
    (in Jalalabad).  Farmaday is about one and a half hours away from Zgho.
     There were a lot of bombardments in the area, which was close  to  the
    Tora Bora Mountains, and the coalition forces were  searching  out  the
    Taliban and harassing their families. The authorities  kept  coming  to
    their house and asking them about his father's whereabouts.   That  was
    when they left Zgho and went to Farmaday.  The family returned to  Zgho
    in 2005 after hearing that the situation  had improved.  They stayed in
    Zgho for about a month when they returned to Farmaday  because  it  was
    not safe as the authorities  were  conducting  extensive  searches  and
    making arrests in the area.  They lived in Farmaday for two and a  half
    to three years. They moved back to Zgho in early February 2009 when the
    authorities in Farmaday began searching houses and arresting people who
    had links to the Taliban.

9.   In 2009 his father fought with the Taliban,  against  coalition  forces
    and was killed during the fighting in Kunar.

10.  His paternal uncle, Awajan, and cousins Talib and Paynda,  are  members
    of the Taliban. About 25 days after they moved back to Zgho, his mother
    was informed by his parental uncle by telephone  that  his  father  had
    died. His paternal uncle told his mother to send him to fight with  the
    Taliban against the foreign forces.  His uncle wanted him to  take  his
    late father's place in doing jihad and to avenge  his  father's  death.
    His mother passed the message on to him but he did not want to join the
    Taliban and fight as he did not support the  Taliban  ideology  in  any
    way. His mother did not want  him to fight either. He was the only son.
    His father had always asked him to stay at home to look after the  land
    and to take his place as the male protector  and  head  of  the  family
    whilst he was away fighting.

11.  His maternal uncle, Soorgul,  visited  them  the  same  day  that  they
    received the phone call from his paternal uncle. He was told  that  his
    paternal uncle wanted him to go and fight with the Taliban.  About  two
    or three days after his father's death, friends of his father's came to
    their family in Zgho and gave his mother money. They also passed on the
    message from his paternal uncle to join  the  Taliban  and  avenge  his
    father's death. He and his mother told his  father's  friends  that  he
    would be ready to go and fight in a few days  to  avoid  confrontation.
    His mother asked his maternal uncle to send  him  somewhere  safe.  The
    next day he left the family home with his maternal uncle to a place  on
    the outskirts of Jalalabad.  He stayed with his maternal uncle for  two
    to  three  days  before  crossing  the  Afghan  Pakistani  border  into
    Pakistan.  He stayed in Pakistan for  about  six  to  seven  days.  His
    maternal uncle talked to an agent and he was then taken with the  agent
    to the airport. He used a red passport  to  travel.  They  stopped  for
    about two hours in Dubai and he subsequently arrived in the  UK  on  17
    March 2009 and clamed asylum on 18 March 2009.

12.  The appellant's appeal was dismissed by  Immigration  Judge  Pullen  in
    September 2009.  The judge however accepted parts  of  the  appellant's
    account.  He accepted as true the appellant's evidence that his  father
    fought with Hizb-e-Islami and later the Taliban and  was  killed.   The
    appellant's mother, his wife and two  children  remained  in  his  home
    village.  He did not doubt  the  appellant's  general  account  of  his
    journey to the UK, despite the differing accounts he gave of  the  time
    he spent with his uncle.

13.  The judge doubted the appellant's account of being put  at  risk  after
    being told by friends of his late  father  to  join  the  Taliban.  The
    appellant had always said that these men  were  part  of  his  father's
    team.  The appellant himself had hosted them on previous visits to  his
    home with his father. He did not believe therefore that  the  appellant
    would not have known their names as he claims to be  the  case.   There
    was no objective evidence that the Taliban pursued  relatives  of  dead
    commanders who declined to join the fight.  Without such  evidence,  he
    could not find that even the Taliban, known for their brutality,  would
    target the son of one of their commanders who had died  a  martyr,  the
    son being the only protector for his  family,  including  the  martyr's
    widow.

14.  The judge was not satisfied about any risk from  the  authorities.   He
    considered the appellant's evidence that they left their  home  because
    of the authorities and two guns were found in the house. The judge said
    it could not be at all unusual in Afghanistan for guns to be  found  in
    private homes. There was no suggestion that  the  authorities  followed
    him to Zgho although the farmer occupying  his  land  must  have  known
    where he was and no doubt could be forced to disclose it.  Farmaday was
    not far away.  The appellant claimed  the  family  left  Farmaday  when
    people were being arrested. They did not say  there  was  any  specific
    enquiry about him.  The judge doubted the appellant's  claim  that  the
    authorities were actually interested in him.  The fact that the  family
    could return to Zgho without fearing for their  safety  suggested  that
    they did not perceive any significant risk.  If the authorities did not
    show interest in the appellant then as a Taliban family member, it  was
    not likely that they would now that his father was dead,  despite  what
    he said about the culture of revenge in Afghanistan.  The judge had  no
    objective evidence that non-combatants sons of  dead  Taliban  were  at
    real risk from the authorities.

15.  The judge also rejected the appellant's account that he had no  way  to
    contact his family at home.  He noted that the appellant spent time  in
    Jalalabad with his uncle, then more days with him in Pakistan  and  did
    not find it credible  that  after  what  must  have  been   significant
    expenditure, his uncle would have sent  him off without some  means  of
    reporting back.

16.  In conclusion  the  judge  did  not  find  the  appellant  credible  in
    relation  to  his  claimed  fear  of  the  Taliban  or  of  the  Afghan
    authorities.  He did not find that the  appellant  has  a  well-founded
    fear of Hizb-e-Islami  either,  as  no  credible  reason  or  objective
    evidence had been given as to why he should.  In  the  alternative,  if
    the appellant's credibility were  established,  the  judge  added  that
    taking the appellant's case at its  highest, his  account  would  still
    leave him with the internal flight  alternative  to  Kabul.  The  judge
    relied on the country guidance cases of PM and Others  heard  in  April
    2007 and RQ heard in June 2008  which  showed  at  the  time  that  the
    situation allowed for relocation to Kabul.

17.  Mr Bazini submitted that Judge Pullen made findings of fact which  were
    not challenged.  In light of fresh objective evidence,  Judge  Pullen's
    findings needed to be reviewed and that  was  why  the  appellant  made
    fresh representations which were considered by the  respondent  as  the
    fresh claim.  The new evidence that came to light was in respect of the
    situation in Kabul for someone like the appellant whose father, it  had
    been accepted, had fought  with  Hizb-e-Islami  and  with  the  Taliban
    against the coalition forces as a result of which he had  been  killed.
    He would be at risk of persecution if returned to Kabul. As a result of
    that fresh evidence Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins came  to  a  different
    view from Judge Pullen in respect of  the  risk  to  the  appellant  in
    Kabul.

18.  It is appropriate to record here UTJ  Perkins  findings  at  paragraphs
    122 in respect of risk to the appellant in Kabul.


         "122.    I do not  consider  this  to  be  a  case  where  internal
             relocation is an option.  I find Dr Guistozzi's explanation of
             the inquisitive nature of Afghani society to be persuasive  in
             all the circumstances of the case and I accept that there is a
             real risk of the appellant being identified  if  he  tried  to
             establish himself in Kabul.  It is important to emphasise that
             the appellant would not  necessarily  be  identified  quickly.
             However,  it  is  accepted  that  his  father  was  a  Taliban
             commander and I think it is likely that sooner or later  those
             links would become apparent. I think it may be right  that  he
             would risk persecution if he came  to  the  attention  of  the
             authorities as the son of a Taliban commander from  a  Taliban
             supporting area trying  to  establish  himself  in  Kabul.  Of
             course the appellant would have  an  innocent  and  compelling
             explanation for being in Kabul but I find that there is a real
             risk of  his  being  persecuted  before  his  explanation  was
             tested. However this finding is speculative, albeit  based  on
             Dr Guistozzi's report and represents the extent  of  the  risk
             from the authorities that  the  appellant  has  been  able  to
             establish. It would only  arise  if  the  appellant  tried  to
             establish himself in Kabul.  There  is  no  real  risk  of  it
             arising as he made his way through Kabul to his home area.  He
             would not be in Kabul long enough for there to be a real  risk
             of his being suspected of being a Taliban terrorist.




19.  I also record UTJ Perkins' findings which led to the Court of  Appeal's
    decision to remit the case back to the Upper Tribunal for a rehearing.




         123. I appreciate that the appellant says that he is at  risk  both
             from the Taliban because he is not prepared  to  support  them
             and from the government because they think that he is.

         124. I do not accept that the appellant has shown that there  is  a
             real risk of his being persecuted by the Taliban  for  failing
             to join their cause.   I  accept  as  a  matter  of  law  that
             pressure from members of the  Taliban,  whether  or  not  they
             happen to be members of  the  appellant's  family  too,  could
             amount to persecution if, for example, it was  accompanied  by
             credible  threats  of  serious  adverse  consequences  if  the
             appellant did not comply but  whether  or  not  it  did  would
             depend on particular findings of fact.

         125. I found it very significant that Dr Giustozzi does not support
             the claim the appellant would be  persecuted  because  of  his
             failure  to  join  the  Taliban.    Certainly   Dr   Giustozzi
             recognises that the Taliban would put pressure on a person  in
             the appellant's position.  He also recognises  that  a  father
             might beat his son for failing  to  tow  the  family  line  on
             matters of politics.  He does not support the contention  that
             the appellant, a man now aged 30 would be  risk  serious  ill-
             treatment by family members. Taunting  by  paternal  relatives
             would not amount to persecution."

20.  Before UTJ  Perkins  were  two  reports  from  Dr  Giustozzi  dated  13
    December 2012 and 1 March 2011.  For  this  hearing  Dr  Giustozzi  had
    prepared a further report dated 24 July 2013.

21.  In the light of Dr Giustozzi's  latest  report,  Mr.  Bazini  submitted
    that the appellant's case is now based on a risk in his own  area  from
    insurgents and members of his own family who are members of the Taliban
    in Hizb-e-Islami.  The gist of Dr Guistozzi's  recent  report  is  that
    whereas in the past the risk to the appellant in his own area was  from
    the authorities, this was no longer the case because of the  withdrawal
    by the authorities in recent months from  the  appellant's  home  area.
    Consequently this means that the appellant is no longer  at  risk  from
    the authorities in those areas. Those areas are  now  occupied  by  the
    insurgents.

22.  The appellant  who  was  present  in  court  was  not  called  to  give
    evidence.  The appeal was dealt with way of submissions only.

23.  Miss Isherwood was concerned about the lack  of  evidence  as  to  what
    family contact the appellant has in Afghanistan.  She said there was no
    evidence  about  the  appellant's  uncle  and  cousins  who   were   in
    Afghanistan at the time of his departure. We cannot  assume  that  they
    are still there.

24.  She was concerned that there was still a credibility issue  as  to  the
    appellant's evidence about not wanting  to  join  the  insurgents.   At
    question 15 of the interview, the appellant said that when he was  very
    young he did fight with  the  Taliban.  However,  he  has  changed  his
    evidence in that respect by saying that he did not  want  to  join  the
    insurgents. She relied on paragraph  3.10.19  of  the  OGN  Afghanistan
    issued in June 2013  which said  that  forced  recruitment  by  Taliban
    military commanders, leaders  or  fighters  (that  is  situations  were
    individuals or their families are directly  approached  and  forced  to
    join up under threat of retaliation or violence if they refused) has to
    be considered as exceptional. The risk will be highest in  areas  where
    armed anti-government groups are  operating  or  have  control  and  in
    refugee camps but the evidence is of recruitment driven more by broader
    coercive strategies, such as economics, fear, intimidation,  pride  and
    honour, religious persuasion  and  the  use  of  tribal  mechanisms  to
    pressurised individuals into joining the Taliban rather than by  force.



25.  Relying on this objective evidence  Miss  Isherwood  said  that  at  no
    stage was the appellant threatened with violence or retaliation for not
    joining the insurgents.  There  is  no  evidence  that  after  he  left
    Afghanistan and his family remained in the home area  that  the  family
    continued to have problems because of this situation. In Dr Giustozzi's
    report of 2010,  he  said  at  paragraph  6  that  the  Taliban  rarely
    practised forced recruitment.  At paragraph 7 he  said  it  was  highly
    unusual for a son to refuse the path that his  father  has  chosen  for
    him.  Miss Isherwood submitted that it  was  the  appellant's  evidence
    that his father wanted him to remain at home and be  the  head  of  the
    household.   His  father  did  not  pressurise  him  into  joining  the
    Taliban. The appellant was in his late twenties when his father died.

26.  With regard to the current  report  by  Dr  Giustozzi,  Miss  Isherwood
    relied on AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)
    which reiterated that there are packages available to a  failed  asylum
    seeker returning to Afghanistan from the UK.  At paragraph 86 the Upper
    Tribunal referred to UNHCR Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing  the
    International Protection Needs of Asylum Seekers from  Afghanistan,  17
    December 2010.  Miss Isherwood submitted that although this is  not  an
    Article 15(c) case, the UNHCR gives a list of possible people  we  need
    to consider and those at risk from insurgents.  At  paragraph  212  the
    Upper Tribunal said there is also a very significant level  of  support
    provided to the Afghan  population  by  myriad  paid  and  humanitarian
    agencies, domestic and international.

27.  Miss Isherwood asked me to treat with caution  Dr  Guistozzi's  changed
    position in respect of the appellant's claim.  She  said  that  despite
    finding that the appellant's father was  a member of  the  Taliban,  Dr
    Giustozzi accepted the appellant's  evidence  that  his  father  was  a
    commander who had 72 to 100 men under him.  She said  that  detail  was
    not part of the appellant's evidence.

28.  Miss Isherwood submitted that a lot of  Dr  Guistozzi's  latest  report
    concerns the security situation and the way the police  act.   It  does
    not directly add to how the insurgents  or  his  family  members  would
    approach him on his return to   his  home  area.  At  paragraph  17  Dr
    Giustozzi said that in his home  area,  the  appellant  would  be  most
    exposed to the pressure from his family and from the insurgents to join
    the Taliban as an active member.  The status of the family  within  the
    insurgency depends on Mr Bismillah's willingness to join; the uncle  in
    particular could by now be senior enough to qualify  for  a  promotion,
    but that could be endangered if there were doubts about the ideological
    alignment of the family as a whole.    Miss  Isherwood  submitted  that
    this assertion is based on an assumption as we do not know if the uncle
    is in a high position.  She submitted that  the report  does  not  take
    into account the support package that would be given to  the  appellant
    on  his return to Afghanistan.  At paragraph  23  Dr  Giustozzi  states
    that at the Mol, high ranking officers admit that in some  areas  there
    might be informal ceasefires with the armed opposition. Miss  Isherwood
    said Dr Giustozzi did not identify these areas. She asked  me  to  pace
    little weight on Dr Guistozzi's report.

29.  Mr. Bazini submitted that the starting point should be the findings  of
    fact that have been  made in this case -  the  appellant's  father  was
    killed fighting coalition forces and that he was a supporter of Hizb-e-
    Islami and then the Taliban.  The appellant's father was  a  commander,
    although he was not a high ranking  Taliban  official  or   high  level
    officer, would have been  in charge of between 70 and  100  men.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins found  at  paragraph  122  that  Dr  Guistozzi's
    explanation  of  the  inquisitive  nature  of  Afghan  society  to   be
    persuasive in all the circumstances and accepted that there was a  real
    risk of the appellant being identified if he tried to establish himself
    in Kabul.  This is because as the  appellant's  father  was  a  Taliban
    commander sooner or later those links would become apparent.

30.  Mr Bazini submitted that there is little doubt that  if  the  appellant
    is going to be discovered in Kabul, with his profile,  he  will  become
    apparent immediately in his home area.  He is somebody returning to  an
    area where he has not lived since 2008. He will stand out like  a  sore
    thumb.  Many of the findings in respect of the risk to him in Kabul are
    relevant to  how he will be perceived in his home area.

31.  Mr Bazini submitted that Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins seemed to  accept
    at paragraph 123 that the appellant would be at risk from  the  Taliban
    because he is not prepared to support  them  and  from  the  government
    because they think that he is. At paragraph 124  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins accepted that pressure from members of the Taliban, whether  or
    not they happen to be a member of the  appellant's  family  too,  could
    amount to persecution if, for example, it was accompanied  by  credible
    threats of serious adverse consequences if the appellant did not comply
    but whether or not he did would depend on particular findings of  fact.



32.  Mr Bazini submitted that at the time of Dr Giustozzi's report  in  2011
    his position was that there was some risk to  the  appellant  from  the
    Taliban and  the  family  but  the  main  risk  to  him  was  from  the
    authorities. However his opinion which was  genuine  at  the  time  has
    changed and deserves weight and respect.  Dr Giustozzi,  who  has  been
    accepted as an expert by  the  Tribunal,  could   have  maintained  his
    position  as  at  2011  and  relied  on  that  report  to  support  the
    appellant's case.  However, he does not do that. He recognised that the
    situation has changed with the withdrawal of coalition forces from  the
    appellant's home area and has seen it desirable  to  express  what  the
    current position in those areas and the risk  to  the  appellant  as  a
    result.  Mr Bazini said that Dr Giustozzi's new report  bears  out  his
    expertise and his independence in this field.

33.  Dealing with Miss Isherwood's submissions, Mr Bazini said that  on  the
    appellant's first arrival in the UK he lost contact  with  his  family.
    In the meantime the family moved to Pakistan and now he has  been  able
    to establish contact. There was  nothing in this evidence  that  should
    lead to an adverse credibility finding.  In any event, we do  not  know
    the position with the family in  his home area  because  he  left  four
    years ago.  The question is whether there is a real  risk  that  family
    members are still there in the area  bearing  in  mind  the  background
    material that the area is now  in  the  hands  of  insurgents  and  the
    Taliban again.

34.  Mr Bazini said that at question 15 the appellant's answer was  that  he
    never liked to fight and therefore Miss Isherwood's submission that the
    appellant fought when he was younger was without foundation.   He  said
    that the OGN report refers to honour.  This is important  because  that
    has been part of the appellant's evidence which  Dr  Giustozzi  touches
    on.  The evidence in this case is that because the  appellant's  father
    was a commander and was killed, there is a burden on him and the family
    and the Taliban that  he  seeks  honour  and  revenge  and  that  is  a
    fundamental part of Afghan society.  Dr  Giustozzi  says  that  if  the
    appellant refuses to join he would be seen as  being  sympathetic  with
    the authorities which would put him at risk.

35.  IJ Pullen's determination, paragraph 16, which was referred to  in  UTJ
    Perkins's determination  at  paragraph  8  refers  to  the  appellant's
    account of being put at risk after being told by friends  of  his  late
    father to join the Taliban as being in doubt. Mr Bazini  said  that  IJ
    Pullen's decision on this issue was on  narrow  grounds.   He  did  not
    believe the appellant because he  did  not  know  the  names  of  these
    friends even though they were always with  his father as  part  of  his
    team and the appellant himself had hosted them on  previous  visits  to
    his home with his father.  IJ Pullen found that there was no  objective
    evidence to support the  appellant's  claim  that  the  Taliban  pursue
    relatives of dead commanders who decline to join the fight.  Mr  Bazini
    said that this evidence was now in Dr Giustozzi's report and  the  OGN.
    The evidence was that honour and revenge were the reasons why  pressure
    would be put on the appellant to join the Taliban. It was this evidence
    which was in Dr Giustozzi's report which led to the fresh claim by  the
    appellant.  It is also this new evidence the appellant now  relies  and
    which is also set out in Dr Giustozzi's new report.

36.  Mr Bazini said that AK (Afghanistan ) is about Article  15(c).  It  may
    be out of date as the situation on the ground has significantly changed
    because of the pull out by the authorities.

37.  Mr Bazini said that the  appellant's  claim  has  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of what is now happening in the  appellant's  home  area.   The
    authorities have pulled out and it has now become an area  with  strong
    insurgency.  It is controlled by the  Taliban and  the  insurgents.  If
    the appellant returns to that area within  moments  people  would  know
    that he has not lived in that area for some time and he would be picked
    up. He would be asked who he is and where he has been and what  he  has
    been doing and according to case law, he is obliged to tell  the  truth
    and  say  that  he  has  been  in  the  UK  and  claimed  asylum.   The
    fundamentalist fanatics would assume that he had become westernised and
    lost his faith. They would expect him  to  take  up  arms  immediately.
    There is a real risk that his refusal would lead to persecution of  him
    by the Talban and the insurgents. In the light of the findings in   his
    favour and the powerful report from Dr Giustozzi, Mr Bazini  said  that
    the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in  his home area.
     Internal relocation to  his  home area would put him at risk.  In  any
    event Dr Giustozzi does not suggest that there is a  ceasefire  in  the
    appellant's home area.

Findings

38.  I  shall  first  deal  with  the  credibility  issues  raised  by  Miss
    Isherwood.  The appellant's evidence that his father  was  a  commander
    and had 72 to 100 men under him was accepted by UTJ  Perkins,  contrary
    to what Miss Isherwood said.  The appellant had not said in his  answer
    to question 15 that he fought when he was younger.  Her  submission  in
    that regard  was  without  foundation.  I  find  that  the  appellant's
    evidence that his father wanted him to remain at home and be  the  head
    of the household does not affect the appellant's credibility because he
    did just that while his father was away  fighting.   I  find  that  the
    appellant did not remain in  his  home  area  long  enough,  after  his
    father's death, to be threatened with violence or retaliation  for  not
    joining the insurgents.

39.  I find that this is not an  Article  15(c)  case.   In  any  event,  as
    submitted by Mr. Bazini, AK (Afghanistan) may be out  of  date  as  the
    situation on the ground has significantly changed because of  the  pull
    out by the authorities.

40.  In the light of the accepted findings and the report by  Dr  Giustozzi�
    I find that the appellant's appeal stands to be allowed for the  reason
    that relocation to his home area would put him at risk  of  persecution
    by the Taliban and the insurgents who now occupy his  home  area  as  a
    result of the withdrawal of the authorities from that area.

41.  I attach significant weight to Dr Giustozzi''s report.  I  accept  that
    it contains a lot of information about what risk, if any, the appellant
    is likely to suffer should he be  arrested  by  the  authorities  as  a
    result of the withdrawal of foreign troops from almost all the outposts
    in the villages in Afghanistan and areas of  strong  Taliban  presence,
    such as  western  Nangahar,  which  have  witnessed  a  rapid  fall  of
    government presence and influence.  I take note of his conclusion  that
    the appellant could reside in this area and face little risk  of  being
    persecuted by the authorities, unless he got caught up in a raid  aimed
    at targeting insurgent leaders.  I find that this gives objectivity  to
    his report and does not in any way diminish  the  significance  of  his
    report.

42.  From paragraph 17 Dr Giustozzi deals with the risk the  appellant  will
    be exposed to in his home area, that is, pressure from his  family  and
    from the insurgents to join the Taliban as an active  member.  He  said
    that as an adult man the  appellant  could  in  principle  reject  such
    invitations, but the family members in particular would feel humiliated
    if he persisted in refusing to replace his father in the ranks  of  the
    insurgency and avenge his death. The status of the  family  within  the
    insurgency also depends on the  appellant's  willingness  to  join  the
    uncle in  particular  could   now  be  senior  enough  to  qualify  for
    promotion  but that could be endangered if there were doubts about  the
    ideological alignments of the family as a whole.  A confrontation  with
    his family member is likely to escalate and could  become violent,  the
    more so now that they hold sway in Chapliyar.

43.  I accept Miss Isherwood's submissions that we do not know  what  family
    members remain in the appellant's home area. It was his paternal uncle,
    according to his evidence, who wanted him to  go  and  fight  with  the
    Taliban and avenge his father's death.   It is speculative  to  suggest
    that this uncle could now be senior enough to qualify for promotion and
    this  could  be  endangered  because  of  doubts  about  the   family's
    ideological alignment. The appellant's mother his  wife  and  two  sons
    remained in Zgho after he left the area.  They are now in Pakistan  and
    he is in contact with them. We have no evidence that  when  the  family
    remained in Zgho, there were any reprisals by the paternal uncle  as  a
    result of the appellant's absence or his failure to join  the  Taliban.
    We have no information about this paternal uncle or his whereabouts. In
    the absence of such evidence I am not persuaded  that  whatever  family
    there is remaining in the  Nangahar  Province  is  likely  to  put  the
    appellant under pressure to join the Taliban. According to his evidence
    he left home not because of family members putting pressure on  him  to
    join the Taliban but because of the request by his paternal uncle.   In
    the circumstances I am not persuaded that there is a reasonable risk of
    persecution from family members in his home area.

44.  I am  however  persuaded  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution from the insurgents in his home area.   In  this  regard  I
    place great weight on the report by Dr Giustozzi from paragraphs 17  to
    paragraph 25 of his report.  At paragraph 17 Dr Giustozzi said this:

         "Mr Bismillah would become a potential suspect, government  spy  or
         collaborator if he insisted on staying aloof from  the  insurgency,
         particularly given the long time he spent away  from  the  village.
         The  insurgents  would  presume  that  he  resided  in   government
         controlled areas, or if they were aware of his time spent in the UK
         they would assume that he became westernised and lost  his  Islamic
         faith. The insurgents are certainly convinced that there are plenty
         of spies within their ranks  and  among  the  population,  as  they
         regularly announce the execution  of  members  accused  of   having
         supplied information to  the Americans. One recent example of  this
         was an announcement by the Taliban of Kapisa Province, who  claimed
         to have expected one of their own on the accusation of spying on 29
         July 2008 ... The arbitrary executions of individuals on the  basis
         of simple suspicion of  spying  is  a  major  source  of  complaint
         against the Taliban, whose commanders are under  pressure  to  show
         their men that the are able to  take  action  in  response  to  the
         raids, which cause high casualties."

45.  At paragraph  18  Dr  Giustozzi  states  that  "such  peer  and  social
    pressure would take place in an already  violent  environment.   During
    2012 overall levels of violence had declined in Afghanistan, due to the
    start of the withdrawal  of  foreign  troops  (paragraph  1).  However,
    Afghan on Afghan  violence  has   actually  increased,  while  violence
    involving groups decreased quickly (paragraph 2). "

46.  He said at paragraph 19  that  the  Taliban's  intelligence  operations
    have grown increasingly sophisticated and their ability to  track  down
    individuals is very sophisticated. A former Taliban commander  in  Musa
    Qala, now hostile to the movement, said there were 200 to 250 agents of
    Taliban in the intelligence service of government when he was leader of
    a group of Taliban.  Their  number  must  have  increased  by  now.  Dr
    Giustozzi also says that government officials even  in  areas  of  weak
    Talban presence believe that the Taliban  are  informed  of  everything
    that happens.  In the villages Talibans  and  elders  all  confirm  the
    existence of these informers. At paragraph 24 he  said  that  in  other
    instances various forms of collaboration of the police with the Taliban
    were alleged.  In Helmand the British office suspected  the  police  of
    passing on information on British troops to Taliban.  Dr  Giustozzi  in
    summary said that the risk to Mr Bismillah from the  authorities  would
    be low in his home village, where the authorities  have  little  or  no
    reach now; however at the same time the insurgents  are  more  powerful
    there and would be able to  bear even more pressure on the appellant to
    join. If he  refused  he  would  be  at  risk  of  being  suspected  of
    collaborating with the government because of his long spell  away  from
    the village.

47.  The appellant has been away from  Afghanistan  since  2008.   His  home
    area is now controlled by the insurgents.  The OGN relied upon by  Miss
    Isherwood indicates that there would be pressure on  someone  like  the
    appellant with his background  to  join  the  Taliban  and  avenge  the
    killing of his father by the coalition forces.  The objective  evidence
    from Dr Giustozzi shows that were the appellant to refuse, he would  be
    seen as a spy and a collaborator and the risk  to  him  would  be  very
    high.

48.  In the light of the accepted findings, the report by Dr  Giustozzi  and
    the objective evidence, I find that the appellant  would  be  at  great
    risk of persecution by the insurgents and the Taliban in his home area.
     Internal relocation is not  an  option  for  the  appellant.   It  has
    already been found that Kabul is not a safe  place  for  an  individual
    like the appellant with the profile that he has. For these  reasons,  I
    find  that  the  appellant  has  established  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution were he to return to Afghanistan.

49.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.

 Signed                                 Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
