

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/01913/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2016                          |      On 6 June 2016                |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                     HD
                         (anonymiTY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Fountain Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  in  relation  to  the
respondent because of the nature of the case.  I consider it appropriate  to
make a similar order in the Upper Tribunal under Procedural  Rule  14(1)  to
prohibit the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the respondent.  To give effect to this order  the
respondent is to be referred to by the initials above.



 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision and
    reasons statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ferguson  that  was
    promulgated on 23 September 2015.  Judge Ferguson found the  respondent
    to be a refugee.

 2. Before considering the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  it  is
    necessary to  identify  understand  the  respondent's  immigration  and
    appeal history.  It is set out in detail in the chronology provided  on
    10 August 2015.  The salient information is as below.

 3. In September 2005, the respondent fled Tunisia to avoid being forced to
    marry her cousin.  Towards the end of 2005 she met QM (who is  now  her
    husband) in the UK  and  they  start  living  together  early  in  2006
    although not as husband and wife.  The couple underwent an unregistered
    Islamic marriage ceremony  at  the  end  of  2006.   The  marriage  was
    registered with an Imam on 7 July 2013.  QM is an undocumented Algerian
    citizen and has no lawful immigration status in the UK,  having  failed
    to show that he is a refugee.  He has not made any  applications  since
    his fresh claim for asylum was refused on 2 June 2014.

 4. On 28 June 2014 the respondent applied for asylum on the  grounds  that
    she had a well-founded fear of persecution in Tunisia from  her  family
    who were disgraced by her failure to marry her  cousin  and  there  was
    insufficient protection available to her from the Tunisian authorities.
     She claimed as a result she was a member of a particular social  group
    and for these reasons was a refugee.

 5. The Home Office refused the  respondent's  application  on  21  January
    2015.  The Home Office rejected her claim for the reasons as set out in
    detail in the reasons for  refusal  letter  of  20  January  2015.   In
    summary those reasons were.

     a. The Home Office did not accept the  facts  of  the  claim  had  the
        potential of engaging the refugee  convention  on  the  grounds  of
        particular social group because the facts claimed did not  identify
        an immutable characteristic or  distinct  identifiable  feature  in
        Tunisian society.

     b. The Home Office did not believe the respondent's account of  events
        regarding  her  studies  in  Tunisia  or  the  UK  or   about   the
        circumstances in which she left Tunisia in September  2005  because
        of her failure to provide evidence that should  have  been  readily
        available  to  her  such  as  educational  certificates   and   her
        inconsistent answers  as  to  why  those  documents  had  not  been
        provided.

     c. The Home Office did not find it plausible that the  respondent  had
        been able to maintain contact  with  one  of  her  sisters  if  the
        circumstances of her claim were true.

     d. The Home  Office  considered  the  background  country  information
        relied on by the respondent regarding "honour killings"  and  noted
        the evidence showed such incidents were rare in Tunisia and did not
        support the claim in general.

     e. The Home Office believed it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
        respondent to relocate within Tunisia, for example  to  Tunis,  and
        did not accept her relatives would be able to track her there.  The
        Home Office did not accept  the  respondent's  claim  to  have  two
        uncles in Tunisia who are high ranking police officers or  that  it
        was plausible they would or could track  her  if  she  returned  to
        Tunisia.

     f. The Home Office did not accept the respondent's husband  could  not
        live with her in Tunisia and therefore the  respondent  would  have
        the protection of a male relative.

     g. The Home Office also believed it was possible for the respondent to
        move with her husband to Algeria because it was likely she would be
        regarded as an Algerian national on the basis of marriage.

     h. The Home Office did not accept the  respondent  to  be  a  credible
        person because she had delayed claiming  asylum  for  a  number  of
        years without reasonable explanation and therefore she could not be
        given the benefit of the doubt (paragraph 339L of  the  immigration
        rules applied).

     i. The Home Office rejected the  respondent's  claim  in  relation  to
        private and family life rights because the provisions of  paragraph
        276ADE and appendix FM were not met and there  are  no  exceptional
        circumstances.

 6. Judge Ferguson made the following findings in respect  to  the  reasons
    for refusal and in favour of the respondent's claim to be a refugee.

     a. As per Shah and Islam the  facts  of  the  claim  were  capable  of
        engaging the refugee convention on the ground of particular  social
        group.  The respondent's additional background country  information
        identified that forced marriage was an issue in Tunisian society.

     b. The Home Office reasons for rejecting the respondent's  account  of
        being subject to a forced marriage were weak, being based solely on
        issues of plausibility and the delay in claiming asylum.  The  Home
        Office failed to assess the respondent's claim in the round and  in
        the  round  there  was  general  consistency  in  the   appellant's
        accounts.

     c. The background country information indicated that the  respondent's
        claim was plausible contrary to the Home Office's  assessment.   An
        expert report supported this view.

     d.  The  delay  in  claiming  asylum   undermined   the   respondent's
        credibility because the explanations given did not explain the full
        period of delay (nine years).

     e. The delay was not of  itself  sufficient  to  find  that  the  core
        account was not credible because the evidence a when looked  at  in
        the round was sufficient to establish the respondent faced  a  real
        risk of persecution from her  family.   The  respondent  could  not
        obtain protection from the Tunisian authorities because they  would
        view it as an internal family matter.

     f. The respondent would return alone because there was no prospect  of
        her husband going to Tunisia with her as he had no Algerian  travel
        document and the attempts made by the Home Office to obtain one for
        him had failed.

     g. It would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the  respondent  to  live  in
        another part of Tunisia as a single woman  without  family  support
        because of the background country information.

 7. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  focus  on  whether  Judge
    Ferguson gave adequate reasons  for  his  findings.   In  summary,  the
    grounds  argue  that  the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the  issues
    identified in paragraphs 25 to 28 of the reasons for refusal letter and
    therefore failed to give adequate reasons for finding that it would  be
    unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  respondent  to  relocate  in   Tunisia.
    Paragraphs 25 to 28 of the reasons for refusal letter indicate the Home
    Office's belief that the respondent's husband would be able  to  go  to
    Tunisia with her or that the respondent could go with him to Algeria.

 8. As can be seen, the Home Office arguments are now very  different  from
    those in the reasons for refusal letter.  There is no challenge to  the
    bulk of Judge Ferguson's findings and I proceed on the basis that there
    is no challenge to  his  findings  that  the  respondent  has  given  a
    credible account to the extent that she has  established  she  faces  a
    real risk of serious harm from her family in Tunisia and that she would
    not be able to obtain adequate protection from the Tunisian authorities
    as a lone woman in that country.

 9. The question for me is whether Judge Ferguson adequately dealt with the
    two alternatives proposed by the Home Office.  Although  not  explained
    well in the grounds of appeal, when put in context  those  alternatives
    are: (i) whether it would be unduly harsh to expect the  respondent  to
    relocate to another part of Tunisia with her husband (on the assumption
    he could return there) or (ii)  whether  the  respondent  could  go  to
    Algeria with her husband according to  Algerian  law  and  thereby  not
    require international protection at all.

10. Taking the second alternative  first,  in  our  discussions,  Mr  Mills
    acknowledged that the Home Office has no evidence that  the  respondent
    is a citizen of Algeria and accepts it is merely a possibility that she
    is such a national on  the  basis  of  marriage  given  the  background
    country information about the nationality laws of  Algeria.   The  fact
    the Home Office has been unable  to  establish  that  the  respondent's
    husband is Algerian (as conceded in paragraph 25  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter) makes the possibility of her being Algerian more remote
    and to this extent I find this part of the Home Office's allegation  to
    be speculative and unreasonable.

11. In reaching this conclusion I have proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    prospect of the respondent being sent to  Algeria  is  not  one  to  be
    considered under principles of internal relocation.  It is clearly  not
    a situation of internal relocation because the respondent would not  be
    returning to Tunisia.   Removal  to  Algeria  would  be  to  avoid  any
    persecutory treatment in Tunisia altogether.  I have proceeded  on  the
    basis that the Home Office was in fact arguing that the respondent  did
    not need international protection because she had  another  nationality
    and had no fear of persecution in that  third  country.   It  is  trite
    refugee law that a person has no need of  international  protection  if
    they have more than one nationality  and  can  live  in  one  of  their
    countries of nationality.

12. It is, of course, for the appellant to show that she does not have  any
    other  nationality.   She  has  never  claimed  to  be  Algerian.    As
    indicated, Mr Mills confirmed there was no evidence to  show  that  the
    respondent was Algerian.  The evidence relied on  by  the  Home  Office
    regarding Algerian nationality law is  far  from  conclusive  that  the
    respondent might be Algerian  because  of  her  marriage,  particularly
    since his nationality was dubious since  he  could  not  be  documented
    despite the Home Office's past attempts.  The fact  the  evidence  does
    not show that it is reasonably likely that the respondent has  Algerian
    nationality means this argument must fail.

13. It follows that there could have been no need  for  Judge  Ferguson  to
    deal with this issue beyond the comments he makes in  paragraph  26  of
    his decision and reasons statement and there no error on a point of law
    exists in relation to this matter.

14. The other option pursued by the Home Office is  that  the  respondent's
    husband could move to Tunisia and she would be safe in Tunisia  in  his
    company.  The arguments presented by Ms Rutherford in response to  this
    possibility focused on the fact there was no evidence to show that  the
    respondent could actually move to Tunisia.  He had no documentation and
    there was no reason to think he would be admitted according to Tunisian
    law. These are, in essence, the only reasons given  by  Judge  Ferguson
    for finding that the respondent would return on her own to Tunisia  and
    why she would be at risk if on her own.

15. This approach might be regarded as being contrary  to  law  because  it
    appears to ignore the requirements of paragraph 339O of the immigration
    rules regarding the internal relocation.  Those provisions are  binding
    because they transpose the provisions of article 8 of the Qualification
    Directive (2004/83/EC).  Paragraph 339O(iii) indicates  that  technical
    obstacles to return do not prevent the Home  Office  making  a  finding
    that it is reasonable to expect a  person  to  relocate  in  their  own
    country to a place where they  do  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.  On the face of the provisions, it might appear  that  the
    question of whether the respondent's husband could travel to or stay in
    Tunisia would  be  irrelevant  to  deciding  if  the  respondent  could
    relocate.

16. However, I cannot see how this provision can be extended to  cover  the
    situation of the respondent's husband.  It is clear that paragraph 339O
    is addressed only to the asylum seeker themselves and  not  to  others.
    Therefore, to make the respondent's protection in  Tunisia  conditional
    on her husband being able  to  accompany  her  is  going  beyond  these
    boundaries.  Paragraph 339O like article 8 is predicated  on  the  fact
    the person seeking asylum can be admitted to the  proposed  country  of
    destination.  It proceeds on the basis that international  law  assumes
    that a  country  will  admit  its  own  nationals.   The  reference  to
    "technical obstacles " is a reference to difficulties that might  arise
    in obtaining documents or arranging travel  in  the  context  that  the
    person is returning to a country where  they  have  a  right  to  live.
    Although I am not aware of any case specifically raising this point  it
    would appear to be consistent with paragraphs 99 to 101 of the Court of
    Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) & Ors v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, which
    identifies obstacles as being those preventing the return of  a  person
    to their country of nationality.

17. Although I have some sympathy with the Senior  Presenting  Officer  who
    settled the grounds that there was an appearance  that  Judge  Ferguson
    had not dealt with everything, on close examination and having had  the
    assistance of Mr Mills and Ms Rutherford, I conclude that there was  in
    fact no need for Judge Ferguson to do  more  than  he  did.   The  Home
    Office argument that the respondent could return to  Tunisia  with  her
    husband was speculative.

18. All that had been established at the  date  of  hearing  was  that  the
    respondent was to be removed to Tunisia.  Judge Ferguson was  bound  to
    consider the situation at the date of hearing.  There was no  assurance
    that her removal would be  delayed  so  that  her  husband  could  make
    arrangements to travel with her.  It was  open  to  Judge  Ferguson  to
    conclude that it was established the appellant  would  be  returned  to
    Tunisia on her own,  as  he  found  in  paragraph  26.   On  the  facts
    presented, there was no need for him to  go  further.   He  would  have
    fallen into legal error had he entertained  the  speculation  the  Home
    Office suggested because to entertain speculation is to move away  from
    the facts and a judge's decision must only be based on facts.

19. By way of a postscript,  I  wish  to  make  clear  that  the  fact  the
    respondent is a refugee should not be seen to give an advantage to  her
    husband.  Throughout the conduct of the appeal this appears  to  be  an
    undercurrent.  He remains  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and  is  liable  to
    removal.  Questions of his family life rights and whether they outweigh
    the public interest in his removal will no doubt have to be  considered
    at some time in the future by the Home Office but  are  not  ones  that
    Judge Ferguson had to consider or ones that can or should  be  admitted
    at this stage in proceedings.



Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed  because
there is no legal error in Judge Ferguson's  decision  that  the  respondent
(HD) is a refugee and that decision is upheld.


                               Signed                     Date 6th June
                                   2016


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
