
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01648/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th November 2015                |On 1st December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N S Ahluwalia, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce & Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in this appeal I refer
    to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  8th
    January 2015 to refuse his application for asylum.  First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Andonian allowed his  appeal  and  the  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals to this Tribunal with permission.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant obtained a  Tier  4
    student visa and entered the UK on that visa  on  12th  July  2010.  He
    claimed  asylum  on  10th  April  2013  on  the  basis  that  he  risks
    persecution on return to Sri Lanka due to his involvement with the LTTE
    and Black Tigers which led to his detention and torture in April  2009.
    The Appellant claims that he was released on payment of a bribe by  his
    uncle who also arranged for his departure from Sri Lanka with the  help
    of an agent. The Appellant's brother was granted asylum in the UK based
    on a similar account.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian allowed the appeal,  accepting  that
    the Appellant falls within the risk categories set out in  the  country
    guidance case of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

 5. The Secretary of State advances three Grounds of Appeal in  this  case.
    The first ground is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing
    to give any or adequate reasons for finding that  the  Appellant  falls
    within the risk categories set out in the case of GJ and Others. It  is
    contended that the judge failed to remind himself of  what  those  risk
    categories are and which of them the Appellant falls into and why.   At
    the hearing Mr Staunton submitted that  each  risk  factor  applies  to
    specific circumstances and it is difficult  to  say  from  the  judge's
    decision which category it is said that this Appellant falls into.

 6. In his Rule 24 notice and at the appeal Mr Ahluwalia submitted that  it
    is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  in  mind  the  primary
    question identified by the Upper Tribunal  in  GJ  and  Others  and  in
    particular the Upper Tribunal's conclusion  summarised at  paragraph  3
    of the head note as follows:
         "(3) The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka. Its focus is on preventing both (a) the  resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka."

 7. It is contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  alive  to  this
    question when he found at paragraph 10:
         "The appellants (sic) claim is  based  on  an  imputed  and/or  his
         political opinion in that he is suspected by Sri Lankan authorities
         as being a Black Tiger and a member of the LTTE.  He is someone who
         the Sri Lankan  authorities  believe  is  part  of  the  separatist
         movement trying to revive the LTTE furthermore he  is  someone  who
         witnessed atrocities carried out by the Sri Lankan authorities."

 8. Mr Ahluwalia submits that it is clear that the  judge  finds  that  the
    Appellant fell within that risk category because the judge  also  found
    at paragraph 12 that the Appellant had witnessed atrocities by the  Sri
    Lankan authorities and has spoken to the International Centre  for  the
    Prevention and Prosecution of  Genocide  and  has  taken  part  in  the
    transitional government of TGTE which is a proscribed organisation.

 9. I have considered the judge's determination in relation to the issue of
    the country guidance of GJ and I am satisfied that it  is  sufficiently
    clear from the judge's determination that he found that  the  Appellant
    falls within the general factor 3 as set out in  the  case  of  GJ  and
    Others.

10. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of State secondly contends  that
    the judge made a material  misdirection  of  law  in  that  he  grossly
    oversimplified the ratio of two cases referred at paragraph 10  of  the
    determination.   It is contended that the judge took far too simplistic
    an approach to credibility and the background evidence. At paragraph 10
    the judge said:
         "The cases of Kanakaran v SSHD 2000 - 3aller 4449 [sic]  and  HK  v
         SSHD both state  that  if  the  background  evidence  confirms  the
         objective fear/risk then the appellant is a refugee."

11. In his Rule 24 notice and at the hearing Mr  Ahluwalia  contended  that
    the judge did not misdirect himself on the standard of proof applicable
    in asylum appeals. Mr Ahluwalia accepted that it  is  likely  that  the
    judge's short hand  self-direction  was  taken  from  paragraph  10  of
    Counsel's  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal.   At
    paragraph 4 of Counsel's skeleton argument it is stated that the  cases
    of Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] 3 AllER 4499 and HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ
    1037 "Both state that if the background evidence confirms the objective
    fear/risk then the Appellant is a refugee".  He submitted that in  fact
    the skeleton argument goes on to quote from paragraphs 27 and 28 of the
    case of HK and that this largely rehearsed in the judge's determination
    at paragraph 10.

12. I am satisfied that it is clear from reading paragraphs 10 and 11 as  a
    whole that the judge did in fact understand that the Appellant's  story
    as a whole has to be considered against the available country  evidence
    as well as any expert evidence and other evidence available.  I  accept
    that if one looks at all of the evidence cited at paragraph 11 as  well
    as the assessment at paragraph 12 it is clear that the judge  does  not
    simply rely on  objective  evidence  in  order  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant is at risk in Sri Lanka.  In fact  the  judge  looks  at  the
    internal consistency of the Appellant's claim and  the  other  evidence
    before him before reaching his conclusion  [11,  12].   So  whilst  the
    judge may have oversimplified the test in paragraph 10 it is clear from
    reading the determination as a whole that that is not in fact the  test
    the judge applied.

13. The third Ground of Appeal advanced by the Secretary of State  is  that
    the judge erred in failing to give any or adequate reasons for  finding
    that the appellant is credible. It is contended that it  is  not  clear
    from paragraph 11 that Judge Andonian actually makes a finding that the
    Appellant is credible.  It is contended in the grounds  that  'One  can
    infer that the judge believes the Appellant to  be  credible  from  the
    fact that the appeal is allowed' but it is not actually articulated  in
    the determination.

14. In his Rule 24 notice and in submissions Mr Ahluwalia contended that it
    is in fact quite clear from the determination when read as a whole that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  the  Appellant's  account   of
    involvement  with  the  LTTE  and  detention  credible.   Mr  Ahluwalia
    accepted that this decision could  have  been  better  written  but  he
    submitted that it is clear when the determination is read  as  a  whole
    that the Appellant is found to be credible.  He submitted that only two
    grounds of credibility are raised in the reasons  for  refusal  letter.
    Firstly, at paragraphs 24 to 31 of the reasons for refusal letter it is
    contended by the Secretary of State that the Appellant's claim  is  not
    credible because it was not accepted that the authorities issued him  a
    passport whilst he was  in  detention.   The  second  main  reason  put
    forward in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  for  not  accepting  the
    Appellant's case is that set out at paragraphs 33 to 37  which  relates
    to the delay in the Appellant claiming asylum.

15. Mr Ahluwalia submitted that the judge did deal with these two  matters.
    The judge dealt with the passport issue at paragraphs  2  and  14.   At
    paragraph 2 the judge said that the evidence before  the  tribunal  was
    that at the time when the Appellant's passport was  issued  and  signed
    for, he was in detention, and that the Appellant gave evidence that  he
    did not know how his passport was obtained but that he had  nothing  to
    do with it.  The judge  found  that  it  was  "quite  clear"  that  the
    passport was obtained by an agent and the agent had  prepared  all  the
    paperwork and that it was not unusual for agents to  acquire  passports
    for third parties to assist in travel [2].

16.  In  support  of  this  finding  Mr  Ahluwalia  referred  to  the  Visa
    Application Form, at B1 of the  Respondent's  bundle,  which  indicates
    that the visa application was made by an agent.  He therefore submitted
    that the judge was entitled to reach the finding he did at paragraph  2
    and the conclusions he reached at paragraph 14 that the  Appellant  did
    not obtain his own  passport.   The  second  main  reason  for  refusal
    relates to delay and Mr Ahluwalia submitted that the judge  dealt  with
    that at paragraph 16 where he made his findings in the context  of  the
    psychiatric report which outlined how the Appellant had  been  admitted
    to hospital following an attempt at suicide and  that  he  was  advised
    whilst in hospital to claim asylum.

17. I accept that the judge's findings in relation to these  two  principal
    matters are clear.  The judge's findings in relation  to  the  passport
    are clearly set out at paragraphs 2 and 14. The judge  dealt  with  the
    issue of delay at paragraph 16 where he said:
         "I accept that it may sometimes be difficult for a migrant in  this
         country who does not know the rules and regulations to claim asylum
         because uppermost in that person's mind is the fear of  being  sent
         back by the authorities, that person does not know that  would  not
         happen.  Suffice it that subjectively  he  fears  to  do  so.   The
         appellant said that the agent told him  not  to  claim  asylum.  He
         reported the fear of the authorities in the UK; he said he was very
         scared of the police in Sri Lanka and said that he attempted to end
         his life by  taking  an  overdose  and  was  admitted  to  Coventry
         University Hospital for 3 days and was advised when in hospital  to
         claim asylum."

18. I also accept, reading the determination as a whole and  in  particular
    paragraphs 11 and 12, that the judge  did  find  that  the  Appellant's
    account is credible.  It is clear from  paragraph  21  that  the  judge
    accepted that the Appellant had discharged the  burden  of  proof  upon
    him.

19. The finding in relation to credibility was open to  the  judge  on  the
    basis of the extensive evidence before him. I note  in  particular  the
    evidence in relation to the  Appellant's  brother's  successful  asylum
    claim, bearing in mind that the brother's claim was based on  the  same
    set of circumstances as that leading to the Appellant's  claim.   Also,
    the judge also referred to the evidence from the  other  witnesses  who
    corroborated the Appellant's account and the two medical reports  [11].



20. The judge also found at paragraph 12 that the Appellant  has  witnessed
    atrocities by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  and  has  spoken  to  the
    International Centre for the Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide and
    had taken part in the  transitional  government  of  TGTE  which  is  a
    proscribed  organisation.  These  two  findings  were  based  on  clear
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle from both organisations.

21. Considering all of these matters and in light of all  of  the  evidence
    before the judge and  reading  the  determination  as  a  whole,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge made no error of law in his assessment of  the
    evidence in this case, that he applied the correct burden of proof  and
    that he reached conclusions open to him on the evidence before  him  in
    this case.

Notice of Decision

22. There no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 25th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 25th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
