
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01070/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th December 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akhtar, Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on the 5th August  1994.  He
       appeals with permission[1] the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       (Judge Taylor)[2] to dismiss his appeal against a decision to  refuse
       to vary his leave to remain. That decision followed the  Respondent's
       refusal to grant the Appellant asylum.

    2. On the 14th August  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  found  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal to contain a single error of law:
       the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  address  submissions  made  on
       behalf of the Appellant to the effect that the security situation  in
       Iraq had now deteriorated to the point  that  Article  15(c)  of  the
       Qualification Directive was engaged. The remaining grounds of  appeal
       were dismissed and the rest of the determination upheld.

    3. The re-making of the Article 15(c) point was then adjourned,  pending
       promulgation of the Upper Tribunal's 'country guidance' case  on  the
       current situation in Iraq.

    4. That decision is now available: AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]
       UKUT 544 (IAC). The relevant part of the headnote reads:

           1.    There is at present a state of internal armed conflict  in
           certain parts of Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
           militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL.
           The intensity of this armed conflict in the so-called "contested
           areas", comprising the governorates of  Anbar,  Diyala,  Kirkuk,
           (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah  Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a
           general matter, there are substantial grounds for believing that
           any civilian returned there, solely on account  of  his  or  her
           presence  there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to
           indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious  harm  within  the
           scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

           2.    The degree of armed  conflict  in  certain  parts  of  the
           "Baghdad Belts" (the urban environs around Baghdad City) is also
           of the intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby  giving
           rise to a generalised Article  15(c)  risk.  The  parts  of  the
           Baghdad Belts concerned are those forming the border between the
           Baghdad  Governorate  and  the  contested  areas  described   in
           paragraph 1.

           3.    The degree of armed conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
           (including Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to
           indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such  serious  harm  to
           civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics,  so
           as to engage Article 15(c).

    5. Before me the parties  agreed  that  the  only  remaining  issue  was
       whether the Appellant was entitled to Humanitarian Protection on  the
       grounds that there are substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  if
       returned home he would face, solely on account of his presence there,
       a real risk of indiscriminate violence.  They further agreed that  in
       light of the guidance set out  above,  this  turned  on  whether  the
       Appellant was from Baghdad City, deemed not  to  be  in  a  state  of
       internal armed conflict, or the contested areas known as the "Baghdad
       Belt".

    6. The Appellant has consistently stated that he is from  Falastine  St,
       Baghdad.  Before me Ms Akhtar submitted that this long street, on the
       eastern side of Baghdad, fell within the belt, rather than  the  city
       itself. The map shows Falastine St  to  run  parallel  to  the  'Army
       Canal' which divides the Shi'ite suburb of Sadr City from the  centre
       of Baghdad.  It is not in the absolute centre of the city, but having
       looked with care at the map, and at the evidence presented in  AA,  I
       am satisfied that Falastine St is within 'Baghdad City'  rather  than
       the 'Belt'. The 'belt' is defined by the Institute for the  Study  of
       War, at paragraph 138 of AA, as those residential,  agricultural  and
       industrial  areas  that  encircle  the  city.  The  places  named  at
       paragraph 138, such as Fallujah and Tarmiyah lie a good  way  out  of
       the city centre.  Falastine St is clearly within the  city.  I  could
       find  no  reference  to  any  incidents  of  indiscriminate  violence
       occurring there. I note that there are numerous government ministries
       in  the  vicinity,  so  had  there  been  any  significant  level  of
       insecurity, I would expect there to be reports of this.  Mr  Staunton
       confirmed that any removal, should it take place, would be to Baghdad
       International Airport which lies to the  West,  directly  across  the
       city centre from Falastine St. There would  be  no  question  of  the
       Appellant having to travel through a  contested  area  to  reach  his
       home.

    7. No matter how unsatisfactory it may be to be determining the issue of
       personal safety with a street by street analysis  of  where  fighting
       might be occurring in Iraq today, I am bound by the country guidance.
       The Appellant's home street is deemed to be in a zone where there  is
       not, at present, a state of internal armed  conflict.  No  doubt  the
       Respondent  will  give  careful  consideration  to  the  very  latest
       information available  before  making  any  decision  to  remove  the
       Appellant to Baghdad.

  Decisions

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to  the  limited
       extent identified by Judge Plimmer in her Error of Law decision.

    9. I remake the remaining issue in the appeal as follows:

       "the Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection".

   10.  The  anonymity  direction  made  by  the  First-tier   Tribunal   is
       maintained.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           8th December 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 16th June 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Osbourne
[2] Determination promulgated 12th May 2015

