
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01875/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 August 2016                          |On 23 September 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    M F H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The anonymity order made by the Upper Tribunal following the hearing on
    31 March 2016 remains in force.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born  on  30  June  1994.
    She comes from Mogadishu.  She arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  2
    October 2013.  On 8 November 2013 she claimed asylum.   On  10  January
    2015, the Secretary of State refused her claim for asylum, humanitarian
    protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 21 July 2015, Judge L Murray dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was initially
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on 13  October  2015  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Storey) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 5. The basis of that permission to appeal was that the  judge  had  failed
    properly to consider the risk to the appellant as a female member of  a
    minority clan, the Reer Hamar  in  returning  to  Mogadishu  where  her
    husband remained.  The specific risk relied upon was the risk of sexual
    violence.

 6. Following a hearing on 31 March 2016, I concluded that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in failing to consider whether the  appellant
    would be at risk on return to Mogadishu on this basis.  Consequently, I
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision (excluding Art 8 which had
    not been challenged) and directed that the appeal  be  relisted  for  a
    resumed hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to  remake  the
    decision.

 7. The resumed hearing came before me on 31 August 2016.

The Resumed Hearing

 8. The sole issue relied upon by the appellant  before  me  was  that  her
    return to Mogadishu would amount to persecution and a breach Art  3  as
    there was a real risk that she would be subject to sexual violence as a
    minority clan woman. It was not suggested before me that the  appellant
    was not a refugee if the risk was established on the basis that she  as
    a returning (minority clan)  woman  without  adequate  protection  fell
    within a 'particular social group' for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.

 9. Following discussion with Mr Hodgetts, who  represented  the  appellant
    and Mr Richards who represented the Secretary of State, it was accepted
    that I should determine the appeal on the basis that  the  only  family
    member that the appellant had in Mogadishu was her  husband.   Further,
    it was accepted that she would not be able  to  receive  any  financial
    support from her sister in the UK.  Whether  or  not  her  husband  was
    working, was accepted to be a matter for me to  determine  on  all  the
    evidence.

The Evidence

10. Mr Hodgetts relied upon his detailed and helpful skeleton  argument  in
    which he referred to  numerous  pieces  of  background  evidence.   The
    evidence was contained principally in two bundles -  one  prepared  for
    the initial error of law hearing ("EoL bundle") and the second prepared
    for the resumed hearing ("RH bundle").  In addition, Mr Hodgetts relied
    upon the expert report of Omer Ahmed dated 21 June 2016.

11. Mr Richards placed before me the most recent  Country  Information  and
    Guidance document from the Home Office dated  2  August  2016  entitled
    "Somalia: Women fearing gender-based harm and violence" (version 3).

12. No oral evidence was given before me.

The Submissions

13. In summary, Mr Hodgetts' submissions can be stated as follows:

    (1)  The risk  of  sexual  violence  to  women  in  Somalia  (including
         Mogadishu) is widespread and committed with impunity;

    (2)  That risk arises both from individuals and  also  from  government
         forces, militia, and Amisom troops;

    (3)  the risk of sexual violence is greater in IDP  camps  but  is  not
         restricted to it.  There is still a real risk outside an IDP  camp;



    (4)  The risk is greater to women who are members of a minority clan;

    (5)  Protection may be available where a woman has a 'male network'  of
         clan protection but  that  is  restricted  to  where  she  (or  her
         husband) is from a majority clan.  That is because  effective  clan
         protection comes from the existence of majority clan militia or the
         power to invoke  "diya"  (blood  money)  which  is  restricted,  in
         practice, to majority clans;

    (6)  The Somali state is unable to provide a sufficiency of  protection
         against sexual violence by individual or  government  officers  etc
         who commit acts of sexual violence;

    (7)  Internal relocation was not an option for the appellant.

14. In respect of the appellant's  individual  circumstances,  Mr  Hodgetts
    relied upon the fact that the appellant was a woman who belonged to the
    minority, Reer Hamar Clan.  On return to Mogadishu she would only have,
    as family, her husband who was himself a member  of  a  minority  clan.
    Their circumstances would be such that they would be likely to live  in
    a less affluent area of Mogadishu.  He accepted  that  they  would  not
    have to live in an IDP camp.  He submitted that it was likely that both
    the appellant's husband and the appellant herself would have  to  work.
    The appellant would, as a result, have to move around Mogadishu  either
    to work or visit markets etc which would expose  her  to  the  risk  of
    sexual violence.   The  appellant  would  have  no  "male  network"  or
    majority clan protection to prevent or deter  sexual  violence  against
    her.  The level of risk identified in the background material  and  the
    expert report exposed the appellant to a real risk of  sexual  violence
    and therefore a real risk of persecution and  a  breach  of  Art  3  on
    return.  There was no sufficiency of protection from that risk  and  it
    was not suggested by the Secretary of State that  the  appellant  could
    internally relocate outside of Mogadishu.

15. On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Richards  acknowledged,  not
    least on the basis of the Home Office Country Information and  Guidance
    document dated 2 August 2016, that there was a level of sexual violence
    directed against women in Mogadishu.  Mr Richards  submitted,  however,
    that the appellant would not be returning as a "single  woman"  without
    the protection of a male network.  That, he  submitted  was  the  basis
    upon which the Strasbourg Court had concluded that it could be a breach
    of Art 3 for a woman returning to Mogadishu in RH v Sweden (application
    no 4601/14) [2015] ECHR 786 (10 September 2015).  Mr Richards submitted
    that the appellant would be returning to her  husband.   As  a  married
    woman, Mr Richards submitted that as a matter of  commonsense  she  was
    less at risk than a single woman.  There was no reason to believe  that
    her husband could not economically support her on return and there  was
    no reason to conclude that they would be living  in  one  of  the  more
    deprived areas of Mogadishu such as to require her to  work  or  travel
    across  Mogadishu  with  the  consequent  risk  to  her.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that the nature of  protection  identified  in  the  evidence
    (including the expert report) provided to women from  a  majority  clan
    flew in the face of MOJ and Others (return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
    [2014]  UKUT  00442  (IAC)  that  clan  militias  were  not  active  in
    Mogadishu.

16. Mr Richards submitted that, looking at the evidence as a  whole,  there
    was no real likelihood that the appellant would face a risk  of  sexual
    violence amounting to persecution or serious harm and a breach of Art 3
    on return to Mogadishu.

17. Mr Richards did not seek to argue that the  appellant  could  obtain  a
    "sufficiency of protection" from the Somali  authorities  or  that  the
    appellant could be expected to internally relocate.

Discussion

18. The background material to which I was referred  establishes  that  the
    risk of sexual violence to women is  widespread  in  Somalia  including
    Mogadishu.  That violence is committed both by individuals as  well  as
    government forces and security forces  such  as  AMNISOM  troops.   The
    United States Department of  State  'Country  Report  on  Human  Rights
    Practices for Somalia 2015' (13 April 2016) (RH bundle  pages  371-394)
    states in section 6 as follows:

         "Although statistics on cases of gender-based violence in Mogadishu
         were unreliable, international and local  NGOs  characterized  such
         violence as pervasive.  Government forces, militia members, and men
         wearing uniforms raped women and girls.  While  the  army  arrested
         some security force members accused of such rapes, impunity was the
         norm.  AMISOM  troops  committed  sexual  abuse  and  exploitation,
         including rape  ...  Local  civil  society  organizations  reported
         several cases of gang rape.  For example, in May a 14-year-old girl
         was allegedly gang-raped after attackers forced her off  a  minibus
         taxi.  After the case was  reported  to  a  Criminal  Investigation
         Department station, the police officer in charge  refused  to  file
         the complaint and instead detained  the  victim  for  making  false
         claims.  The victim claimed the police  officer  that  ordered  her
         arrest repeatedly raped her.

         According to local human rights organizations, IGA security  forces
         in Galinsoor (between Galkaayo and Adaado) gang-raped four women on
         August 29.  The incident  was  brought  to  the  attention  if  IGA
         authorities,  but  no  legal   action   was   taken   against   the
         perpetrators."

19. The Human Rights Watch Report, "Here rape is normal a  five-point  plan
    to curtail sexual violence" (13 February 2014)  (RH  bundle  pp.  1-80)
    makes much the same point in the summary section (at pages 8-9  of  the
    bundle):

         "Sexual violence is pervasive in much of Somalia.  Two  decades  of
         civil conflict and state collapse have created a  large  population
         of  displaced  persons  and  other  people  vulnerable  to   sexual
         violence.  At the same time it has destroyed the state institutions
         that are supposed to protect those most at risk.  Armed assailants,
         including members of state security forces, operating with complete
         impunity, sexually assault, rape, beat, shoot, and stab  women  and
         girls inside camps for the displaced and as they  walk  to  market,
         tend to their fields, or forage for firewood.  Members of Somalia's
         long marginalized minority communities are particularly at risk.

         The United nations reported nearly 800 cases of sexual and  gender-
         based violence in Mogadishu alone for the first six months of 2013.
          The actual number is likely to be much higher.

         Many victims will not report rape and sexual assault  because  they
         lack confidence in the justice system,  are  unaware  of  available
         health and  justice  services  or  cannot  access  them,  and  fear
         reprisal and stigma should they report rape.  According to  the  UN
         Children's Fund (UNICEF)n about  one-third  of  victims  of  sexual
         violence in Somalia are children.

         After two decades of state  collapse  and  armed  conflict,  Somali
         medical services and the justice system, including police  and  the
         courts, are profoundly ill-equipped to support and  assist  victims
         of sexual violence.  As a result, women and young girls  face  what
         the UN's independent expert on human rights in Somalia refers to as
         "double victimization" - first the rape or sexual  assault  itself,
         then failure of the authorities to  provide  effective  justice  or
         medical and social support."

20. That report,  coming  from  a  highly  respected  NGO,  repays  careful
    consideration as it highlights the very real problem of sexual violence
    to women in Somalia  (including  Mogadishu)  and  the  breadth  of  the
    sources of such violence together with the impunity with  which  it  is
    carried out.  The prevalence and dangers to women whether or not in IDP
    camps and without protection is chilling.

21. A further Human Rights Watch, World Report published in 2016 (cited  in
    para 4.1.5 of the Home Office's Country Information and Guidance  dated
    2 August 2016) refers to "alarming levels of  sexual  violence".   That
    report goes on to refer to soldiers  deployed  with  AMISOM:  "sexually
    exploited and assaulted women and girls in their bases in Mogadishu."

22. The report continues that:

         "Few women file complaints due to fear of reprisals and absence  of
         effective and safe complaint mechanisms.  The  African  Union,  and
         Burundian,   and   Ugandan   authorities   investigated    specific
         allegations, although no  prosecutions  had  occurred  at  time  of
         writing".

23. The Home Office's own document summarises the position as regards  risk
    in Southern and Central Somalia including Mogadishu as follows in  para
    2.3.1:

         "There is widespread discrimination of women in  Somalia.   Gender-
         based violence - including domestic violence, rape,  sexual  abuse,
         exploitation and trafficking - is often committed with impunity  by
         a range of actors including government security forces, members  of
         armed opposition groups, militias, family and community actors  and
         Amisom peacekeepers ..."

24. The background evidence also  demonstrates  that  the  risk  of  sexual
    violence is not restricted to IDP camps and is greater  in  respect  of
    minority clan women.   The  United  Nations,  "Conflict-related  sexual
    violence: Report of the Secretary-General (March 2015) (23 March  2015)
    (at page 89 of the RH bundle) states that:

         "... 2,891 incidents of gender-based violence were reported between
         January and August 2014 in Mogadishu alone.   Of  these,  28%  were
         cases of rape and 9%  were  sexual  assaults.   These  numbers  are
         regarded  as  a  gross  underestimation,  as  fear  of  stigma  and
         reprisals inhibits reporting.  Most reported cases  (81%)  involved
         internally displaced persons, who number more than 1,000 across the
         country, with members of minority clans exposed to greatest risk."

25. As Mr Hodgetts  submitted,  whilst  81%  of  the  incidents  of  sexual
    violence occurred in IDPs, 19%  occurred  elsewhere  in  Mogadishu  and
    that, in itself, is a significant number.   The  risk  is  said  to  be
    "greatest" for women from minority clans.   The  figures  are  also  an
    underestimate because of the inhibition on reporting such attacks  (see
    also, e.g. Human Rights Watch Report at para 19 above).   The  fear  of
    reporting sexual violence by women is also referred to in the US  State
    Department Report in  section  6.   That  report  also  identified  the
    ineffectiveness of the government to enforce the criminal law and  that
    there are: "Patterns of rape perpetrated with impunity, particularly of
    displaced women ... and members of minority clans."  (see page  392  of
    the RH bundle).

26. In his skeleton  argument,  Mr  Hodgetts  cited  (at  para  2)  copious
    passages in the background evidence, too numerous to set  out  in  this
    determination, consistent with the material I have cited.

27. In addition, the expert report of Omer  Ahmed  is  entirely  consistent
    with and fully supports the other material I have  already  cited.   At
    page 4 citing the UN Report, he refers to  the  "significant  risk"  of
    sexual violence to Somali women,  in  particular  those  from  minority
    clans, in Mogadishu and the reporting of such violence.  At page 5,  he
    quotes the statistical figures of 81% of reported cases involving women
    in IDP camps  but  19%  of  the  2,891  reported  in  eight  months  in
    Mogadishu, being acts of sexual violence at the rate of "two  to  three
    women per day" in Mogadishu.

28. At page 6 he continues:

         "Whilst  there  has  been  some  signs   of   increased   political
         willingness at the  executive  level  to  address  sexual  violence
         within the Somali government, this has  not  manifested  itself  in
         meaningful measures to protect women or to begin  to  end  impunity
         for sexual violence which remains endemic, with IDPs  and  minority
         women at greatest risk."

29. One of the reasons, the expert states,  that  sexual  violence  is  "so
    widespread" in Mogadishu is the inability of the authorities to provide
    adequate control through the security forces.  At page 6  he  concludes
    that: "The Somali government is wholly unable to provide protection  to
    women at risk of violence".  At pages 7-8  he  sets  out  a  number  of
    reasons why sexual violence is "rampant" in Mogadishu

         "Further reasons as to why sexual violence, is rampant in Mogadisho
         include.

         a)   The presence of a large  number  of  armed  men  in  Mogadisho
             consisting of different national  armies,  and  militias  (and
             sometimes disparate factions within each), combined with  poor
             control and command, chronic indiscipline.   This  means  that
             rape and other forms of sexual violence are routinely  carried
             out by peacekeeping, government forces  and  militias  aligned
             thereto.

         b)   The Status of Forces/Status of Mission Agreement  between  the
             United Nations and the Federal Government of Somalia, is  such
             that peacekeepers are guaranteed  immunity  from  criminal  or
             civil liability for their actions.  This  has  resulted  in  a
             chronic  lack  of  accountability  of  the   UN   peacekeeping
             operations, in Somalia (AMISOM), which means that  even  where
             an individual soldier or official is identified as having been
             implicated in acts of violence  towards  civilians,  including
             rape and sexual violence, it is not possible  for  either  the
             state, or the victim to obtain legal or other  redress.   This
             underwrites the widespread impunity for sexual violence, which
             is the norm in Somalia.

         c)   Moreover, the armed groups  operating  in  Somalia,  including
             local and international security  forces,  and  the  different
             militias and have been  implicated  in  widespread  and  often
             systematic acts of sexual violence targeting Somali women, and
             minority women are likely to  be  disproportionately  targeted
             for such sexual violence.

         d)   Lack of effective command and control.

         e)   The  prevalence  in  and  around  Mogadisho  of  a  large  and
             vulnerable population of women, girls and  young  children  in
             unprotected IDP camps, the majority of which are inhabited  by
             members of minority clans including Reer Hamar.  Further,  the
             prevalence of clusters of such minority  clan  members  living
             outside of the camps but situated very close to them who  have
             similar vulnerability.

         f)   Weak indigenous legal protection and remedies for  victims  of
             sexual violence,  which  contribute  to  impunity  for  sexual
             offences.

         g)   The political settlement in Somalia established in August 2012
             (the 4.5 point formula) effectively institutionalised the clan
             discrimination which had developed  and  deepened  during  the
             Somali conflict), and this has deepened the  clan  based  deep
             social inequality within Somali society.   This  continues  to
             have a deleterious impact on the position of minority women.

         Consequently, whereas the state is unable to protect  Somali  women
         in general from sexual violence, the state is least able, and  less
         likely to protect women who are of Somali minority  clan  including
         the Reer Hamar, from sexual violence.  Consequently, minority women
         who are at heightened risk of sexual violence are less likely to be
         either  willing,  or  able  to  avail  themselves  of  the   states
         obligations to protect its citizens, be they from the mainstream or
         as members of a particular social group."

30. The fact that women from minority clans are at greater risk  is  widely
    reflected in the background material to which I was  referred  and  the
    expert report.  The basis for it is the absence of any  deterrent  that
    may flow from the fact that a potential victim of  sexual  violence  is
    not, unless your husband is a member of a majority clan, subject to the
    protection and deterrent effect of  majority  clans  including  through
    their 'clan muscle' of their militias or the deterrent  affect  of  the
    customary Somali law and 'diya' (blood money) system.  The position  is
    set  out  in  a  document  produced  by  the  Minority   Rights   Group
    International entitled "Looma Ooyaan  -  No-one  cries  for  them;  the
    predicament facing Somalis minority women) (January 2015) (at pages 97-
    128 of the RH bundle) at page 119 the report says this:

         "A major contributing factor to the vulnerability of minority women
         is their limited access to justice or legal  compensation.   Somali
         culture has a traditional mechanism of 'blood compensation'  (diya)
         for death and injury in inter-clan disputes, which is also paid  in
         lesser amounts for other crimes such as rape.  Diya  for  women  is
         half that of men and is paid to the clan of the woman's  father  or
         husband.  Discussion of sexual matters is taboo, hence  rape  often
         goes unpunished, and there is no  recourse  for  domestic  violence
         because it is not culturally considered as abuse.   Minority  women
         face greater risk of gender-based abuses amid  lack  of  access  to
         institutional protection and redress against  violations.   Payment
         of diya for instance does not extend to minority groups in the same
         manner  as  majority  clans  -  minority   groups   receive   lower
         compensation and have no recourse in instances where the payment is
         never made."

31. The same point is made by the expert at pages 10-11 of his report:

         "It is true that a Somali woman from a majority clan, could rely on
         her husbands clan for protection (assuming that he is himself not a
         member of a minority clan, in which case he would not  be  able  to
         extend protection at all).  Where the  husband  is  of  a  minority
         clan, he will not have a clan militia with kinship  obligations  to
         protect him or his family.

         For majority clans, protection operates  as  a  deterrence  against
         violence because the kinship  ties  in  place  will  guarantee  the
         existence of a substantial Diya paying group.   Diya  (blood  money
         paid as a compensatory award following a serious incident)  is  the
         essence of clan protection, and constitutes the  formal  obligation
         of all male clan members to make a financial contribute to  payment
         of Diya where for example a member of the clan has killed,  injured
         or damaged the interest of a person from  another  clan.   However,
         where a member of the clan is killed or injured, the elders of that
         clan will organise the male relatives to seek either a Diya payment
         for the insult, or violent retribution.

         Minority clans lack the numbers, to resolve incidents  using  these
         cultural  norms  of  dispute  resolution.   The  vulnerability   of
         minority women therefore stems from their position  as  a  minority
         and the paucity of male clan numbers  able  to  contribute  to  the
         deterrence and protection of a clan  militia.   Knowledge  of  this
         fact amongst other Somali clans is itself a driver of violence, and
         human rights abuses.  It is important to note  that  a  male  of  a
         minority clan is also highly vulnerable to violence  for  the  same
         reason that minority women are at risk.  A minority man is no  more
         able to extend protection to himself than to a  spouse.   Both  are
         adversely affected by the conflict dynamics in  Somalia  save  that
         the incidence of risk to women is so much higher."

32. At pages 14-15, the expert deals with the specific question put to  him
    of whether the presence of a  minority  clan  husband  would  afford  a
    greater level of protection to minority women.   The  expert  concludes
    that it would not as the "protection" stems from  the  availability  of
    protection from a majority clan.  The expert said this:

         "Firstly the presence of a  husband  is  not  per  se  a  deterrent
         against sexual violence.  Where  the  husband  is  a  member  of  a
         minority clan he will not have access to a clan militia,  and  will
         not be able to provide protection to a minority woman.  It  is  for
         this reason that men in minority clans, have often been obliged  to
         marry their daughters to members of  majority  clans,  transferring
         responsibility for her protection  and  safety  to  a  family  with
         access to clan support including the strong deterrence of an  armed
         militia if necessary.

         The current guidance suggests that a Somali woman  who  is  from  a
         minority clan (in the instant case  a  Reer  Hamar  woman),  is  at
         greater risk of  sexual  violence.   This  position  has  subsisted
         throughout the  25  year  duration  of  the  conflict  in  Somalia.
         Awareness of the plight faced by Reer Hamar and  other  women  from
         minority groups in Somali has been apparent and  reflected  in  the
         pertinent literature.

         The reasons why Reer  Hamar  women  are  at  greater  risk  of  and
         actively targeted for sexual violence is noted above and is also as
         follows:

         a)   In social  anthropological  terms,  the  Reer  Hamar  are  not
             considered to be one  of  the  noble  clans  of  Somalia,  and
             therefore do not enjoy  the  implicit  social,  political  and
             physical protection of a clan militia.

         b)   Secondly, minority clans by their nature  are  very  small  in
             number, and their population has been further sharply  reduced
             with the ethnic cleansing of areas inhabited by minority clans
             in the 1990s, and their  long  term  displacement  in  refugee
             camps in Northern Kenya and Ethiopia.  Consequently there  are
             very few Reer Hamar men available to protect the clan.

         c)   Consequently, to assert that the existence or mere presence of
             a husband is sufficient to protect a Reer Hamar woman from  an
             increased risk of sexual violence and other harm, is  to  fail
             to understand  the  nature  of  social  protection  in  Somali
             culture.

         In Mogadisho and southern Central Somalia, it is  the  presence  of
         and accessibility, to a strong clan networks  which  determine  the
         extent of deterrence and protection to which a  woman  has  access.
         Moreover  clan  protection  is  most  effective  in  situations  of
         structured organised violence, and is not particularly effective in
         protecting  women  from  sexual  violence,  but  does  extend  some
         protection in the form of  a  genuine  threat  of  retribution  and
         retaliation against members of the  offending  clan,  and  to  that
         extent  acts  as  a  deterrence  of  sorts.   Even  this  level  of
         deterrence is not available to women from minority clans.

         Moreover it is incorrect to assert that a minority Reer Hamar woman
         can be protected from violence, by her husband who is himself  Reer
         Hamar.  This is to fundamentally misunderstand how clan  protection
         operates from, and  conflates  the  existence  of  a  husband  with
         genuine  protection  from  risk.   The  former  has  no  impact  on
         protection, and the  latter  can  only  be  achieved  through  clan
         protection underwritten by the implicit threat and deterrence of  a
         clan militia.

         Because it is acknowledged that minority groups including the  Reer
         Hamar, do not have clan protection it is  factually  erroneous,  to
         also assert that a Reer Hamar husband  would  be  able  to  provide
         protection.  This is because he has no access to the  normal  means
         of deterrence and protection to be able to protect himself.  He  is
         therefore much less likely to be able to protect his spouse.

         It is access to a clan militia and the deterrent  effect  of  major
         clan networks which is  determinative  of  the  ability  to  access
         protection, not the husband of each  individual  woman.   For  this
         reason, it would not be feasible for the husband of  a  Reer  Hamar
         woman to protect her  from  attack,  unless  he  is  himself  of  a
         majority clan.

         Where a Reer Hamar woman is married to a man who is himself from  a
         minority clan, it is likely that he would be not  able  to  protect
         himself, and certainly would be unable to protect  his  Reer  Hamar
         wife or other family members from any kind of violence, such that a
         minority woman could not rely on the presence of a husband such  as
         would extinguish or significantly ameliorate the risk on return  of
         sexual violence or other harm.  In  this  context  the  appellant's
         individual vulnerability and level of risk as a  returnee,  is  not
         extinguished by the presence of a husband, as the minority woman on
         return would in this context  remain  vulnerable  to  human  rights
         violations."

33.  In  my  judgment,  this  material  strongly  supports   Mr   Hodgetts'
    submissions that there is a real risk of sexual violence  in  Mogadishu
    to a returning woman from a minority clan who will return with only the
    support of her husband who is himself a member of a minority clan.

34. Mr Richards sought to rely upon the Strasbourg Court's decision in RH v
    Sweden on the basis that in para 70 the court had identified  the  risk
    category as: "A single woman returning to Mogadishu without  access  to
    protection from a male network".

35. He relied upon para 74 where, in considering that applicant's case, and
    rejecting her claim under Art 3, the court said:

         "... she has family living in the city,  including  a  brother  and
         uncles.  She must therefore be considered to have  access  to  both
         family support and a male protection network.  Furthermore, it  has
         not been shown that the applicant would have to resort to living in
         a camp for refugees and IDPs."

36. Mr Richards sought to equate the presence of  the  appellant's  husband
    with "a male protection network".

37. Whilst I accept that the Strasbourg  Court  concluded  that  "a  single
    woman" without a "male network" for protection would be at  risk  under
    Art 3, the court did not exclude a wider potential risk  category.   It
    is wholly unclear from the  Strasbourg  Court's  judgment  whether  the
    applicant in that case was a woman from a majority  or  minority  clan.
    The judgment makes no reference to her clan status.  In any event,  the
    applicant clearly had more than a minority clan husband  in  Mogadishu,
    she had family including a  brother  and  uncles.   That  is  not  this
    appellant's situation.  I must, however,  decide  this  appeal  on  the
    basis of the evidence before me.  The Strasbourg Court did not consider
    evidence concerning the position of minority clan women explicitly.  In
    my judgment,  its  decision  cannot  be  read  so  as  to  exclude  the
    possibility of a claim by a minority  clan  woman  in  the  appellant's
    circumstances.

38. The background material and expert report establishes, in my  judgment,
    that there would not be any effective protection for  a  minority  clan
    woman returning to her  husband  as  protection  is  derived  from  the
    protective reach of being a member of  a  majority  clan.  Whilst  clan
    militia may not be actively engaged in conflict in Mogadishu  (see  MOJ
    and others), the deterrent effect of majority clan "muscle"  but,  more
    importantly, the deterrent impact  of  the  Diya  system  will  not  be
    available to the appellant and so will increase the risk to  her  as  a
    minority clan woman.

39. In addition to the background material to which  I  have  referred,  Mr
    Hodgetts also sought to pray in aid the likely  circumstance  in  which
    the appellant would find herself with  her  husband  in  Mogadishu.   I
    recognise, of course, the "economic boom" noted in MOJ and Others  that
    has occurred in Mogadishu (see [344] et  seq).   Mr  Hodgetts  did  not
    strenuously seek to argue that the appellant's  husband  would  not  be
    working on her return.  I see no reason to conclude that he would  not.
    Someone had paid for the appellant to travel to the UK: it  was  likely
    to be her husband.   Mr  Hodgetts  did  not  seek  to  argue  that  the
    situation of the appellant on return would be such that her husband and
    she would be in such dire financial straits that they would not be able
    to support themselves and would be required to live  in  an  IDP  camp.
    Nevertheless, I accept that the likely position of  the  appellant  and
    her husband is that as, minority clan members, they are may  both  have
    to work in order to support themselves.  I accept  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to obtain any financial support from  her  family  in
    the UK.  I accept the evidence of her sister (not  actively  challenged
    before me) that she would not be able  to  provide  financial  support.
    With the economic boom has also  come  increased  costs  of  living  in
    Mogadishu  in  particular  of  accommodation  (see   "Mogadishu's   new
    generation of 'rent' displaced" dated 4 September 2013).  I accept that
    there is a real risk that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  would  be
    required to live in a less affluent area of Mogadishu and that,  as  Mr
    Hodgetts submitted, the appellant may be  required  to  travel  in  and
    through Mogadishu either to work or in order to visit  markets  etc  as
    part of her domestic responsibilities. Further, the risk  in  Mogadishu
    to the appellant is present wherever  they  live.   It  would,  in  any
    event, be wholly unrealistic  to  conceive  that  the  appellant  would
    remain closeted in their home; let alone that she should be expected to
    and not engage in everyday activities in  a  city  where  the  risk  of
    sexual violence is generally prevalent. She would  be  exposed  to  the
    risk of sexual violence which the  background  material  identifies  in
    respect of minority  clan  women  in  Mogadishu  from  individuals  and
    Government and security personnel.  Their  actions  are  likely  to  be
    carried out with impunity.

40. I do not accept  Mr  Richards'  submission  that  it  is  a  matter  of
    commonsense that a single woman would be at greater risk than a married
    woman in Mogadishu.  The background material does not  support  such  a
    view.  The risk is to women and, in  particular,  women  from  minority
    clans.  Neither her husband nor her minority clan would have protective
    or deterrent  affect  on  those  individuals  or  government  or  other
    officials and peacekeepers  who  would  perpetrate  attacks  of  sexual
    violence on women such as the appellant.

41. The appellant must establish that there is a  "real  risk"  to  her  of
    sexual violence which amounts to persecution or "serious harm" for  the
    purposes of the Refugee Convention and Art 3 of the ECHR  respectively.
    It is not suggested (and nor could it be properly)  that  the  risk  of
    sexual violence, if established, does  not  amount  to  persecution  or
    serious harm.  A real risk is one which is not  a  fanciful  risk  (see
    Hariri v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 807 at [5] per Laws LJ and R v SSHD ex  p
    Adan, Subaskaran and Aitsguer [1999] Imm AR 521 at p.537).

42. Bearing in mind the findings I have made above, I accept the  substance
    of Mr Hodgetts submissions which I have set out at para 13 above  based
    upon the material to which I have been referred.  I find: (i) The  risk
    of sexual  violence  to  women  in  Somalia  (including  Mogadishu)  is
    widespread and committed with impunity; (ii) That risk arises both from
    individuals and also from government and  security  forces  and  Amisom
    troops; (iii) the risk of sexual violence is greater in IDP  camps  but
    is not restricted to it.  There is still a real  risk  outside  an  IDP
    camp; (iv) The risk is greater to women who are members of  a  minority
    clan; (v) Protection may  be  available  where  a  woman  has  a  'male
    network' of clan protection but that is limited to where  she  (or  her
    husband) is from a majority  clan.   That  is  because  effective  clan
    protection comes from the existence of  majority  clan  muscle  or  the
    ability  to  invoke  "diya"  (blood  money)  which  is  restricted,  in
    practice, to majority clans; (vi) Whilst I accept that the  appellant's
    husband would work, the appellant and her husband are likely to have to
    live in a less affluent area of Mogadishu.  There would  be  no  family
    support from the UK.  There is a real risk that the appellant  will  be
    exposed to the risk of sexual violence as a result of her everyday life
    in Mogadishu (which may including travelling to work); (vii) The Somali
    state is unable to provide a sufficiency of protection  against  sexual
    violence by individual or government or other  security  personnel  who
    commit acts of sexual violence; (viii) There is no suggestion before me
    that the appellant could reasonably be expected to internally  relocate
    within Somalia.

43. Having taken into account all the background evidence, and  not  merely
    that which I have set out above, I find that there is a real risk  that
    the  appellant  will  be  subject  to  sexual  violence  amounting   to
    persecution and a breach of Art 3 on return to Mogadishu in  the  light
    of all her circumstances as a returning women from a minority clan with
    only a husband in Mogadishu.

44.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the  appellant  would  not,   in   those
    circumstances, fall within  a  PSG  (see  para  8  above).   For  these
    reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant's return to Mogadishu  would
    breach the Refugee Convention and Art 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

45. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    under the Refugee Convention and Art 3 of the ECHR involved the  making
    of an error of law.  That decision was set aside following the  hearing
    before the UT on 31 March 2016.

46. I now remake that decision allowing the appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Refugee Convention and Art 3 of the ECHR.

47. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 8 stand.




                               Signed

                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
