
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01724/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 10th June 2013                             |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 H E (Iran)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Woodhouse of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Smart Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Archer promulgated on 24th April 2012 in which  he  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal against the removal direction to  Iran  that
        accompanied the refusal of his claim for asylum or any  other  form
        of international protection.


     2. The appellant was born  on  1st  August  1978  and  is  an  Iranian
        national. He claims that if returned to Iran he will be  killed  by
        the Etelaat. He refers to periods of  previous  alleged  detentions
        and ill-treatment at the hands of the authorities.


     3. Having considered the evidence Judge Archer set out his findings at
        paragraphs 47 to 58 of the determination which can be summarised as
        follows:


     i.   It was found remarkable that the appellant failed to mention  that
   he         had received a message from his brother-in-law, via his  wife,
   that the       authorities were still looking for him. This alleged  call
   occurred prior          to his 21st  March  2012  witness  statement  yet
   there was no mention of          what was said to be  such  an  important
   issue in an otherwise            comprehensive statement [47].


     ii.  That is reasonably likely  the  appellant  has  Kurdish  ethnicity
   [48].


     iii. The appellant's confirmation in his oral evidence that no  letters
   or         paperwork were given to him upon his release by the judge,  or
          anyone else, in Iran was found to be  wholly  irrational  and  not
     reasonably likely to be true, especially as there would at  least  have
   been  some  indication  of  when  he  was  expected  to   surrender   for
   further investigation or court proceedings.   It  was  found  not  to  be
   reasonably likely the  appellant  would  simply  have  been  released  on
   the named third party's undertaking with nothing else to follow [52].


     iv.  The core of the appellants claim is that the PJAK  left  items  at
   his        house, in a bag, which  including  three  grenades  which  was
   seized by      the authorities in August 2011. This account was found  to
   be not          reasonably  likely  to  be  true  on  the  basis  of  the
   appellants own               evidence [54].


     v.   There was no explanation for why, in all  the  circumstances,  the
   bag        was left at all [55].


     vi.  It was found the appellant himself, realising that his account was
   not        plausible during his asylum interview, alleged in question 124
   that       he was confused himself, and was searching for an excuse.  The
              appellant's suggestion in his witness statement  at  paragraph
   23 that        the answer was  wrongly  translated  was  rejected  as  no
   alternative         answer was suggested and the appellant did  not  rely
   upon incorrect          translation in his oral evidence.


     vii. In question 124 the appellant was seeking to explain the otherwise
          irrational actions of PJAK by suggesting they were somehow  acting
     in collusion with the authorities although he later resiled  from  that
   account because it is clearly inconsistent with the  object  of  evidence
   and indeed his own account  of  members  of  this  group  being  shot  on
   sight by the authorities [57].


     viii.    The core of the appellants claim is not credible.  Credibility
   issues         raised by the Secretary of State recorded in paragraph  21
   to 31 of the        determination have weight and have not been  rebutted
   by the              appellant. The appellant's account of  being  granted
   bail is not             reasonably likely to be true. The appellant is of
   no interest to the      authorities in Iran or to the PJAK. As such he is
   not at risk if returned          to Iran.


     4. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that as the  appellant
        left Iran illegally he will be subject to a fine and questioning on
        return; yet no proper consideration had been given to this  element
        in the determination.  It is said there are several aspects of  the
        appellant's case which could lead to further detention and that  if
        he is detained for questioning  he  is  likely  to  be  subject  to
        inhumane and degrading treatment which would breach Article 3 ECHR.
         The grounds allege there was no consideration of these features of
        risk which were drawn to the Judge's attention in submissions  made
        by the appellant's representative.


     5. The application was opposed by the respondent on  the  basis  that,
        bar the fact he is an Iranian Kurd,  the  appellant's  account  was
        rejected for sustainable reasons and no  adequate  basis  has  been
        advanced to show how the appellant can demonstrate a real  risk  on
        return on this basis.


     6. I accept that paragraph 12 of the skeleton argument,  prepared  for
        the purposes of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  did
        contain a contention that the appellant's  illegal  exit  made  him
        vulnerable to being detained for questioning on  arrival  and  that
        his ethnicity and past experiences  create  a  heightened  risk  of
        adverse attention leading to his further detention and persecution.


     7. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Woodhouse  submitted  that  there  had
        been changes in Iran since the country  guidance  case  of  SB  was
        decided, implying that reliance on this case was an error.



Discussion



     8. The appellant has been found to be no more than  a  failed  Iranian
        asylum seeker of Kurdish ethnicity who lacks credibility. There are
        a number of cases relevant to assessing risk on return to Iran.


     9. In FM (Risk-Homosexual-Illegal  departure)  Iran  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
        05660 (Collins J) the Tribunal concluded that "there is no evidence
        of any general  persecution  or  ill  treatment  of  failed  asylum
        seekers merely  because  they  are  failed  asylum  seekers."   The
        general view seems to be that returning asylum seekers will only be
        at risk on arrival back in Iran  where  there  were  other  factors
        which make them stand out, such as a political profile.


    10. In GN (Iran) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 112 the Court of Appeal  agreed
        with the Tribunal that the  objective  material  demonstrated  that
        neither illegal departure nor asylum failure  would  of  themselves
        give rise to mistreatment on return contrary to Article  3  of  the
        ECHR.


    11. In SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053  the
        Tribunal held at headnote (ii) that Iranians facing enforced return
        do not in general face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment.
        That remains the case even if they exited  Iran  illegally.  Having
        exited Iran illegally is not a significant risk factor, although if
        it is the case that a  person  would  face  difficulties  with  the
        authorities for other reasons, such a history  could  be  a  factor
        adding to the level of difficulties he or she is likely to face.


    12.  I  accept  that  events  in  Iran  indicate  a  clampdown  by  the
        authorities since 2009 but this was considered by the  Tribunal  in
        BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT
        00036 (IAC) in which the Tribunal held that Iranians  returning  to
        Iran are screened on arrival.  A returnee who meets the profile  of
        an activist may be detained while  searches  of  documentation  are
        made. However, there is not a real risk of  persecution  for  those
        who have just exited Iran illegally or are  merely  returning  from
        Britain. The conclusions of the Tribunal in  the  country  guidance
        case of SB (risk on return -illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
        00053 are followed and endorsed. It was also  found  in  this  case
        that If, however,  information  is  known  about  their  activities
        abroad, they  might  well  be  picked  up  for  questioning  and/or
        transferred to a special court near the  airport  in  Tehran  after
        they have returned home. It is important to consider the  level  of
        political involvement before  considering  the  likelihood  of  the
        individual coming to the  attention  of  the  authorities  and  the
        priority that the Iranian regime would give to tracing him.  It  is
        only after considering those factors that the issue of  whether  or
        not there is a real risk of his facing persecution on return can be
        assessed.


    13. Assessing the degree of risk is therefore a fact sensitive exercise
        as demonstrated in  two  further  and  more  recent  cases  of  the
        European Court of Human  Rights.  In  S.F.  and  Others  v.  Sweden
        (application  no.  52077/10)  reported  on  15th  May  2012,   when
        considering the human rights situation in Iran, the Court  observed
        that information available on Iran from a number  of  international
        sources showed that the Iranian authorities frequently detained and
        ill-treated people who peacefully  participated  in  opposition  or
        human rights activities. Those people included not only leaders  of
        political organisations or other high-profile individuals who  were
        detained, but anyone who opposed the current regime. However, taken
        on its own, the situation in Iran could not justify the finding  by
        the Court of a violation if the applicants were expelled to Iran.


         Notwithstanding the  above,  the  Court  examined  the  applicants'
personal               situation and noted that  their  story  was  credible
overall. It found that the              applicants' activities in Iran  were
not,  on  their  own,  sufficient  to  conclude  that  a           real  and
immediate risk existed of them being ill-treated if  returned  to  Iran.  On
     the other hand, the Court found that their  activities  in  Sweden  had
intensified       and grown  in  importance  since  2008.  Furthermore,  the
information available on        Iran showed  that  the  Iranian  authorities
effectively monitored internet           communications  as  well  as  those
critical of the regime, even outside Iran. In          addition,  given  the
applicants' activities and incidents in Iran before moving to
         Sweden, the Court concluded  that  the  Iranian  authorities  would
easily identify        them. That conclusion was also supported by the  fact
that the applicants did not         have valid identity  documents  and  had
allegedly left Iran illegally.

         With regard to all the above, the  Court  held  that  a  real  risk
existed of the              applicants  being  ill-treated  if  returned  to
Iran. There would, therefore, be a      violation of  Article  3  if  Sweden
deported them to Iran.


    14. In RC v Sweden [2010] ECHR 307, at paragraph 49, the ECtHR state:


          49. Whilst being aware of the  reports  of  serious  human  rights
   violations in           Iran, as set out above, the Court does  not  find
   them to be of such a nature           as to  show,  on  their  own,  that
   there would be a violation of the                      Convention if  the
   applicant were to be returned to that country. The Court              has
   to establish whether the applicant's personal situation is such that  his
          return to Iran would contravene Article 3 of the Convention.


    15. In relation to the specific facts of the appellant in RC the  Court
        found in paragraph 57:


          57. Having regard to all of the above, the  Court  concludes  that
   there  are                substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  the
   applicant would be exposed to a           real risk of being detained and
   subject  to  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3   of                 the
   Convention  if  deported  to   Iran   in   the   current   circumstances.
   Accordingly, the Court finds that the implementation of  the  deportation
     order against the applicant would give rise to a violation of Article 3
   of the              Convention.


    16. It is material to the European Court's decision that the  applicant
        in RC was found  to  have  substantiated  his  claim  that  he  was
        detained and tortured by  the  Iranian  authorities  following  the
        demonstration in July 2001. Having regard to this  finding  it  was
        found that the applicant had discharged the burden of proof that he
        had already been tortured and so the Court considered that the onus
        rested on the State to dispel any doubts  about  the  risk  of  him
        being subjected again to treatment contrary to Article 3 on return.


    17. The Court found that when assessing such risk the current situation
        in Iran and the tense  situation  where  respect  for  basic  human
        rights has deteriorated considerably  following  the  elections  in
        June 2009, had to be considered. The Court found that  regard  must
        also be had to the specific risk facing Iranians returning to their
        home country in circumstances where they cannot produce evidence of
        their having left the country legally. The  Court  considered  that
        such Iranians are likely to be scrutinised for verification  as  to
        the legality of their departure from Iran and, in relation  to  the
        applicant in RC, the Court found it probable that being  without  a
        valid exit document he would come to the attention of  the  Iranian
        authorities and that his past is likely  to  be  revealed.  It  was
        found that it was the cumulative effect of the above  factors  that
        added a further risk to that appellant.


    18. The court in RC did not find that failed asylum seekers per se  are
        at risk on return which is in accordance with the findings  of  the
        Tribunal recorded in SB (Iran). In this appeal H  E  was  found  by
        Judge Archer not to have come to the attention of  the  authorities
        and his claim to the contrary was found not to be credible. He will
        be returned, therefore, as no more than a failed asylum seeker  and
        the finding in  RC  and  the  other  cases  does  not  support  the
        contention that he will be at risk sufficient to engage the  United
        Kingdom's obligations under any Convention on this basis.


    19. Judge Archer was required to follow the existing  country  guidance
        case law. The Court of Appeal have said  that  the  Tribunal  "must
        treat as binding any country guidance  authority  relevant  to  the
        issues in dispute unless there is good reason  for  not  doing  so,
        such as fresh evidence which casts doubt upon its conclusions,  and
        a failure to follow the country guidance  without  good  reason  is
        likely to involve an error of law.


    20. What distinguishes this appellants case from the two Swedish  cases
        referred to above is that in those cases there was  clear  evidence
        of credible activities which would have come to  the  attention  of
        the authorities so as to place the individual appellants'  at  risk
        upon return.  This  is  the  key  element  missing  from  the  case
        considered by Judge Archer. The appellant was found to be  no  more
        than a failed asylum seeker who is found to have concocted a  story
        with an attempt to deceive the authorities  in  United  Kingdom  to
        recognise him as a refugee or a person entitled to any  other  form
        of international protection.  It  is  accepted  he  is  an  Iranian
        national of Kurdish ethnicity but the case law and country material
        does not show that this group are at risk per se upon  return.  The
        case law clearly states that failed asylum seekers are not at  risk
        of persecution even  if  being  returned  on  an  Emergency  Travel
        Document and who are found to have left Iran illegally.


    21. It was submitted before me that exiting illegally may constitute  a
        breach of provisions of the Iranian penal code but it has not  been
        shown that it  is  reasonably  likely  that  any  consequences  the
        appellant will face, such as a sentence or involvement in  criminal
        proceedings, will amount to an unfair  trial  or  a  sentence  that
        would  satisfy  the   definition   of   persecution   rather   than
        prosecution. It has also not been proved that prison conditions  in
        Iran, in the event that a prison sentence is imposed, are such that
        there will be a breach  of  his  Article  3  rights.  Mr  Woodhouse
        submitted that any sentence the appellant will receive will  be  at
        the upper end of the scale as a result of his profile  but  I  find
        this to be mere  speculation  and  not  supported  by  any  country
        material.


    22. It was accepted that the burden is upon the appellant to prove that
        he will face a real risk on return sufficient to engage any of  the
        relevant conventions in light of his  unchallenged  profile  as  no
        more than a failed asylum seeker who left the country illegally.  I
        find there is no evidence the Iranian  authorities  will  be  aware
        that the appellant claimed asylum  abroad.  Mr  Woodhouse  accepted
        that he had no evidence to show that if a person was returned on an
        ETD the fact he was a failed asylum seeker will be disclosed.


    23. Even  if  questioned  and  it  was  discovered  he  had  left  Iran
        illegally, the fact the Iranian penal code enables the judiciary to
        bring charges, does not necessarily  establish  that  those  powers
        will be used.  The country material does  not  establish  that  all
        failed asylum seekers are at risk on return  and  would  face  such
        charges. Mr Woodhouse, in his response to Mr  Smart's  submissions,
        accepted that  he  had  no  examples  to  draw  to  the  Tribunal's
        attention proving that the penal code was enforced or used  in  the
        way he submitted such as to create a real risk to the appellant  on
        return.


    24. I find that insufficient  evidence  was  made  available  to  Judge
        Archer and the Upper Tribunal to warrant departing from the country
        guidance case law. Mr Woodhouse's submission that  those  who  make
        claims abroad are viewed in the same way as those who  have  helped
        opposition groups, as making such  a  claim  may  be  perceived  as
        creating an adverse view/perception in the eyes of  others  of  the
        Iranian regime such as to create a real  risk,  is  noted  but  not
        substantiated. This claim is not supported by any evidence and  the
        country guidance case law makes it clear that being a failed asylum
        seeker does not create a risk.


    25. Although Judge Archer's findings in relation to the risk on  return
        do not contain an extensive examination of the case law relating to
        this aspect or appear  on  the  face  of  it  to  engage  with  the
        submission in paragraph 12 of the skeleton argument,  it  is  clear
        from reading the determination that all  relevant  aspects  of  the
        evidence were considered in detail by the Judge.  I find  that  the
        overall conclusion that the appellant has not discharged the burden
        of proof upon him to the required  standard  to  show  that  he  is
        entitled to a grant of international protection has not been  shown
        to be infected by  any  legal  error  sufficient  to  amount  to  a
        material error of law. The appellant has no adverse profile. He  is
        a failed asylum seeker returning from the United Kingdom of Kurdish
        ethnicity and no more. The finding that he will be able  to  return
        to Iran without a breach of his  Article  3  of  or  other  related
        rights is a finding he will be able to  pass  through  the  airport
        safely and return to his home area without experiencing difficulty,
        even if initially questioned on arrival. I find this to be  legally
        sustainable finding and one within the range of findings the  Judge
        was entitled to make the evidence.


Decision

    26. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    27. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


          I continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5th July 2013












