
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01901/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On  25 August 2015                   |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     S B
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan , Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice, sols
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, HOPO.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Batiste
       made following a hearing on 24 March 2015 at Bradford.

    2. Mrs Pettersen did not oppose the remittal of this determination to  a
       differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

    3. There was evidence before the judge of a diagnosis of PTSD,  and  the
       treatment prescribed, in a report from the appellant's GP, which is a
       practice comprising mainly of asylum seekers and refugees.  They  set
       out their experience  and  the  constrictions  on  their  ability  to
       provide formal medico legal reports.

    4. The judge records that he has the appellant's medical report which he
       says "indicates that she may have problems with depression  and  post
       traumatic stress disorder". He then said that it  was  not  suggested
       that it gave rise to any Article 3 or 8 claim.

    5. What was suggested in submissions, as is clear  from  the  Record  of
       Proceedings,  is  that  the  diagnosis  might  explain  some  of  the
       inconsistencies in the appellant's account i.e.  that  the  appellant
       should be treated as vulnerable.

    6. Unfortunately the judge did not assess the report in that context. He
       was not obliged to accept it as evidence that  the  appellant  was  a
       vulnerable witness, and to therefore approach  his  consideration  of
       the oral evidence with that in mind. However he was obliged to engage
       with the contents of the report and to say why, if that was the case,
       he did not accept it. Moreover, his summary, that it  said  that  the
       appellant might possibly have PTSD is not an accurate  reflection  of
       the conclusions of the report, which are clear.

    7. The second challenge to the determination,  in  relation  to  illegal
       exit risk, has much less merit, but since the matter must be remitted
       for a judge other  than  Judge  Batiste  to  make  fresh  credibility
       findings, the point is immaterial.

    8. The case should be listed in the FTT at Bradford after a period of  8
       weeks to allow for an up to date medical report to be produced,  with
       a Farsi interpreter.

    9. An anonymity order is made


Signed   Date


                                   Judge of the Upper Tribunal
