
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/01407/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 15th January 2015                |On 21st April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AW
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mair, Counsel instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date of birth 4th  May  1988.
       She appeals with permission[1] the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Edwards[2] to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
       decision to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[3].  That appeal had been brought  on
       asylum and human rights grounds.

  Background and Matters in Issue

    2. The Appellant's claim was that she faced a real risk  of  persecution
       for reasons of her membership of a particular  social  group,  namely
       women in Pakistan.  She claimed that her father wanted her  to  marry
       her cousin. She did not agree to this and was  badly  beaten  by  her
       father and uncle. They attacked her using  electrical  wire  and  her
       teeth were broken when she fell. After the beating  she  agreed  that
       she would marry her  cousin  but  only  after  one  year.    She  was
       permitted to return to her work as a teacher.  She  confided  in  the
       Headteacher of her school who helped her by arranging a visa to  come
       to the UK to study.  In October 2012 she told her family that she was
       going on a school trip but in fact she  travelled  to  Islamabad  and
       flew to the UK. After she came to the UK the Appellant fell  pregnant
       as a result of a brief relationship. Her baby was born  on  the  28th
       September 2013.   She is no longer with the child's father. The birth
       of this child outside of  marriage  was  an  additional  risk  factor
       relied upon by the Appellant.

    3. In a refusal letter dated  the  13th  February  2014  the  Respondent
       rejected the claim for want of credibility. The  Respondent  did  not
       find the Appellant's  evidence  that  she  came  from  a  strict  and
       controlling family to be consistent with the fact that  she  came  to
       the UK to study.  It was found that material  parts  of  her  account
       were lacking in detail. The  Respondent  decided  that  even  if  the
       Appellant was at risk of "honour" based violence in her home area she
       could go and live somewhere else in Pakistan or avail herself of  the
       protection of the Pakistani state.   Particular reliance  was  placed
       on the availability of Dar Ul Amaan or other shelters to where, it is
       suggested, the Appellant could go for help.

  The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal

    4. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal  which  also  rejected
       the claim on the grounds that the Appellant's evidence could  not  be
       believed.  The determination begins by  addressing  a  report  by  Dr
       Lord, adduced to substantiate the Appellant's claims  to  have  scars
       and damage to her teeth.  In  respect  of  the  latter  the  Tribunal
       declines to place weight on Dr Lord's opinion in the absence  of  any
       evidence that she has any training in dentistry. As to the former the
       Tribunal notes Dr Lord's evidence that it is impossible to  date  the
       Appellant's scars. The Tribunal considers this to  be  "an  important
       failing". Further Dr Lord is not in a position to say that the  scars
       were not inflicted otherwise than as claimed but with the consent  of
       the Appellant.  The determination then turns to the evidence  of  the
       Appellant, rejecting her claim to have  come  from  a  strict  Muslim
       family on the basis that she was educated, was allowed  to  work  and
       save her own earnings, was permitted to travel on school  excursions,
       and that she was permitted to receive dental treatment.   Weighed  in
       the balance against her was the fact that she was willing to  tell  a
       "substantial number of lies": she lied to her parents about going  to
       Islamabad, lied to the Entry Clearance Officer about the real  reason
       she wanted to leave Pakistan, and  lied  to  an  Immigration  Officer
       about the true purpose of her visit.  She  also  lied  to  a  friend,
       telling her that she was married. Having  taken  that  evidence  into
       account the Tribunal found that the Appellant had not discharged  the
       burden of proof.

  Error of Law Decision

    5. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on numerous grounds.  At
       a hearing on the 18th September 2014 Mr McVeety, who appeared for the
       Respondent, accepted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did
       contain errors of law and that it had to be set aside.  In a  written
       decision dated 10th October 2014 I made the following findings:

           The First-tier Tribunal erred in its  approach  to  the  medical
           evidence. As Mr McVeety rightly  conceded,  the  fact  that  the
           scars cannot be dated cannot rationally be grounds for rejecting
           the opinion of Dr Lord. That is because  it  is  generally  very
           difficult to date scars that are older than 6-12 months  old[4].
            The suggestion that the scars  might  have  been  inflicted  by
           proxy was not one that was made by the Respondent. That was  not
           the Respondent's case,  and  the  matter  was  not  put  to  the
           Appellant. The Upper Tribunal decision in KV (scarring - medical
           evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) is not authority for
           the First-tier Tribunal  to  reject  any  physical  evidence  of
           injury on the basis that it might have been  "self-inflicted  by
           proxy".   This only becomes an issue if there  is  a  presenting
           feature of the scarring that suggests, as more that  a  fanciful
           possibility, that it may have been deliberately inflicted at the
           behest of the claimant.   If the Respondent,  or  the  Tribunal,
           considered that to be the case the Appellant  should  have  been
           alerted to that concern to enable Dr Lord to address it[5].

           I further find that  there  was  no  evidential  basis  for  the
           finding that the Appellant's father  was  not  a  strict  Muslim
           because he allowed his daughter to be educated, to work  and  to
           have dental treatment.   The idea that the  Appellant's  limited
           degree of freedom was somehow incompatible with her  claim  that
           she was being forced in to marriage is  over-simplistic  and  is
           not supported by the background evidence.  There was  a  failure
           to assess all of the evidence in the round.  The  Appellant  had
           given consistent evidence about her experiences in Pakistan  and
           the Tribunal appears to attach no weight to that fact.

           It  was  irrational  to  find  that  the  Appellant   had   told
           "substantial lies"  such  that  her  overall  credibility  as  a
           witness was undermined. Of the lies identified,  only  one,  the
           failure to claim on entry, could reasonably be held against her.
           The remaining lies were told, on her  case,  to  enable  her  to
           avoid or flee from persecution.

           Finally there was  a  manifest  error  in  failing  to  consider
           whether there was any risk to the Appellant - or her child -  in
           being returned to Pakistan as an unmarried mother.  Visa records
           show that she had declared herself single when she left Pakistan
           - there does not appear to be any challenge  to  that  evidence.
           Nor is it in issue that she has had a baby since she came to the
           UK. At paragraph 43 the Tribunal find that it  is  in  the  best
           interests of this child to be with  her  mother,  stating  "that
           deals with any issues under s55 of the 2009 Act". With  respect,
           that does not.

           The decision is set aside in its entirety.

  The Re-Made Decision

    6. At the resumed hearing I heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant.  A
       full transcript of this evidence  can  be  found  in  the  Record  of
       Proceedings. Both parties provided bundles of evidence  and  I  heard
       helpful submissions from Ms Johnstone and  Ms  Mair.  I  reserved  my
       decision.

    7. The evidence falls into three parts:

             i) The statements of the Appellant herself;

            ii) Medical report and photographs;

           iii) Country background including expert evidence.

    8. In respect of the account given by the Appellant  I  am  required  to
       determine whether the evidence, taken in  the  round  with  (ii)  and
       (iii) above, discharges the burden of proof to the lower standard  of
       "reasonable likelihood": is it reasonably likely that the account she
       has given  is  true?    Whether  or  not  the  Appellant  manages  to
       discharge that burden, I must go on to consider whether she can  show
       that she has a well-founded fear of persecution  in  Pakistan  today.
       It may be, for instance, that she fails to demonstrate that  she  has
       suffered from any past persecution but the fact that  she  is  now  a
       mother to a young child, born  apparently  out  of  wedlock,  may  be
       sufficient to demonstrate current risk.

       The Appellant's Account

    9. The Appellant is now aged 27.  She is a Hindu speaker from a  village
       near Abbotabad,  but  also  speaks  fluent  Urdu  and  Punjabi.   She
       describes her family circumstances as comfortable  and  middle-class.
       Her father was a civil servant.  The Appellant is educated to Masters
       Level. She  was  awarded  a  Masters  in  Zoology  in  2010  and  was
       thereafter employed as a teacher at a private school.

   10. The Appellant states that she comes  from  a  family  where  she  was
       expected to behave in accordance with the expectations of her  family
       and society. She was permitted to be educated and to work, as long as
       she conformed to her father's wishes and married one of her  cousins.
       It was this expectation that, she claims, brought her  into  conflict
       with her father.

   11. The Appellant states that her problems began in January 2012 when she
       quarrelled with her father after she told  him  that  she  would  not
       marry the cousin chosen for her.  This cousin's family were "rich and
       influential" so her father considered him a good  match.  They  owned
       several fabric shops in various places in Pakistan. The Appellant did
       not want to marry this boy who was, in her view,  involved  in  drugs
       and fighting[6].  She did not consider him to be of "good character".
        When she said no, her father and uncle beat her, including  whipping
       her with the cable of an extension lead.   During  this  assault  she
       fell face front onto the floor and her teeth  were  broken.   In  the
       aftermath of this assault the Appellant  told  her  mother  that  she
       agreed to the marriage, and  that  she  would  consent  if  she  were
       allowed to continue working for a further year. This was agreed  with
       her aunt (the boy's mother) and the marriage  was  arranged  to  take
       place in early 2013.

   12. The Appellant did not go to the police. She did not think  that  they
       would help her, and she was conscious that her cousin  had  an  uncle
       who was in the police.  She knew this because it was  well  known  in
       the family that her cousin had in the past been arrested for  various
       offences (involving drugs) but his uncle had always  managed  to  get
       him out.

   13. Because her injuries were visible the Appellant had  to  take  a  few
       days off work. When she did return to work the headteacher asked  her
       what had happened and she broke down and told him everything. He said
       that he would help her.  They decided that she could apply for a visa
       to come to the UK and study, thereby getting away from her family. He
       introduced her to a friend of his who acted as a  'consultant'.  This
       person helped the Appellant. He explained the whole process  to  her.
       The headteacher organised it for the  Appellant  to  take  her  IELTS
       exam, to take a TB exam and to travel to Islamabad  to  apply  for  a
       passport and then the visa. The Appellant paid for all of this  using
       her earnings and savings, plus she sold some gold jewellery that  her
       parents had bought for her in  March  2012  in  preparation  for  her
       wedding.

   14. The visa was approved on the October 2012.  The Appellant states that
       she told her family that she was going on a trip with her school  and
       on the 28th November 2012 the headteacher brought  the  Appellant  to
       Islamabad where she boarded a flight to the UK.

   15. After she arrived here the Appellant asked a  friend  to  inform  her
       mother that she was in the UK - she wanted her to know that  she  was
       safe.

   16. Soon after her arrival the Appellant met a man at a bus-stop named AA
       whom she confided in about  her  experiences.  They  grew  close  and
       within weeks she started a relationship with him. He told her that he
       was British and that they would get married and live  together  -  he
       was going to get a council flat.  She fell pregnant by him.  He  left
       her  when  she  was  approximately  6  months  pregnant.  He  stopped
       answering her calls and his phone number went to "unobtainable".  She
       went to see his friend - they had always met at this  man's  house  -
       and he told her that he had not seen him.

   17. The Appellant's daughter was born in September 2013. His name is  not
       on the birth certificate because the Appellant had  nothing  to  give
       the registrar. The Appellant has told everyone - the  other  students
       she lived with, her midwife and her friend in Pakistan - that she was
       married to AA. She did this because she was embarrassed.  She ran out
       of  money.  She  had  to  leave  college.  She  had  to   leave   the
       accommodation she was living in. A stranger found her in  the  street
       crying with her baby and took her in. That lady was called NA and she
       has lived with her ever since.  NA has provided a  letter  confirming
       this.

   18. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 8th January 2014.   Her  fear  is
       that her own family, or that of her cousin, will kill her or  subject
       her to other serious "honour" based violence. She defied her  family,
       rejected her cousin and now would be returning alone to Pakistan with
       a baby.

       Past Persecution: My Findings

   19. In her letter of  13th  February  2014  the  Respondent  rejects  the
       account as not credible. The principal reason  for  that  finding  is
       that the Respondent does not find it plausible that a  woman  from  a
       "strict" or "controlling" family would be able  to  take  a  Masters,
       work or keep her job even after she refused marriage to  her  cousin.
       There is, as far as I can tell, absolutely no  evidential  foundation
       for the Respondent's analysis.  I do not find there  to  be  anything
       implausible in the account. Plenty of  Pakistani  women  (and  indeed
       British women  of  Pakistani  origin)  are  encouraged  to  get  good
       qualifications and jobs whilst at the same time conforming  to  their
       families' expectations about who they will marry.  As  the  Appellant
       puts it in her witness statement:

           "I spoke to my father about getting a job. He only allowed me to
           apply  for  a  job  as  a  teacher  near  the  house  with   the
           understanding that once I married I would stop this job and be a
           housewife like my mother...while we were OK financially from  my
           father's good job, he told me that most of my income needs to be
           saved to pay for my future wedding expenses. Because  a  wedding
           in Pakistan is very expensive I think part of the reason why  he
           agreed with me working was because I would save  my  salary  and
           use it for my wedding expenses"[7].

       I find there to be nothing implausible in  this  explanation.  As  it
       stood at the  date  of  decision  the  evidence  was  consistent  and
       consonant with the country background material.

   20. The other reason for refusal given in the Secretary of State's letter
       was that the Appellant had failed  to  provide  medical  evidence  to
       support her claims that she was brutally assaulted by her father  and
       uncle.   On appeal such evidence has been provided. The report of  Dr
       Lord is dated 2nd April  2014.   She  examined  the  Appellant  in  a
       consultation the previous day. The Appellant told her  that  she  had
       sustained scarring where her father and uncle had  whipped  her  with
       the extension lead, and had dental treatment  to  repair  the  broken
       teeth.  Dr Lord made the following observations:

        i) The Appellant's two upper incisors have been crowned.   Dr  Lord
           notes that there are two reasons for crowning teeth:  decay  and
           injury. Since the other teeth are healthy she deduces  that  the
           reason for crowning would be damage. These two teeth are  likely
           to be injured in a fall such as that described by the Appellant;

       ii) The left forearm has a number of fine linear scars, on both  the
           back and front. These are diagnostic of healed lacerations.  The
           linear nature of the scar is highly consistent with them  having
           been caused by an object such as an electrical cable -  they  do
           not have the appearance  of  scars  caused  by  incision  (ie  a
           knife). They are  in  the  position  one  would  expect  if  the
           Appellant had been holding up her arm to protect  her  face  and
           head;

      iii) There is a large pigmented area on  the  right  shoulder  blade.
           This is diagnostic of previous bruising, over a relatively large
           area. It could have been  caused  by  repeated  beating  with  a
           cable, as she describes.

       Ms Johnstone takes the point made by Judge Edwards, that as far as we
       are aware Dr Lord has no specialist training in  dentistry.  This  is
       true. All that her comments can reasonably by taken to  establish  is
       that the Appellant's front two incisors  have  indeed  been  crowned.
       Neither that fact, nor the report of Dr  Lord,  can  go  anywhere  to
       establishing why that procedure was necessary.   The  evidence  about
       the scarring is however helpful. The Appellant has a series  of  fine
       linear scars (I was provided with colour photographs) to her forearm,
       which Dr Lord finds to be "diagnostic of"  healed  lacerations  which
       are "highly consistent"[8] with being whipped with an object such  as
       an electrical cable.  They  are  defence  wounds:  they  are  in  the
       position one would expect to see if the Appellant had raised her  arm
       to protect herself.  I have attached  some  weight  to  these  scars,
       which taken in the round with her consistent  evidence,  support  the
       Appellant's account of the assault by her family members.

   21. In her detailed submissions Ms Johnstone made several  other  points,
       arising from the evidence that had emerged during  the  appeal.   She
       queried how it was that the Appellant was able to make several  trips
       to Islamabad in the company of her  headteacher  without  her  family
       finding out. The Appellant's explanation is  a  straightforward  one.
       She would go to the school in the morning, and as far has her parents
       were concerned she remained there all day. The journey  to  Islamabad
       could take up to three hours if the traffic was bad, but  that  still
       left enough time for  a  round  trip  within  the  school  day.   The
       Appellant was also cross-examined about her  relationship  with  this
       man. In  her  statement  she  described  herself  as  being  "like  a
       daughter" to him and yet she now claims to have  no  further  contact
       with him.  It was put to her that  her  lack  of  concern  about  the
       consequences for him of having helped her was not consistent with him
       being a father-figure. The  Appellant  replied  that  she  wanted  to
       distance herself from him in case she caused him  any  problems.  Her
       family could not know that he had helped her but she did not want  to
       be any more trouble.  That was why  she  had  not  asked  him  for  a
       statement.

   22. Ms Johnstone also asked the Appellant about  the  application  for  a
       passport and visa. The Respondent has produced the VAF records  which
       show that when she made her application the Appellant gave  her  home
       address as the place that she could be contacted during the  process.
        Ms Johnstone asked the Appellant why  she  had  risked  giving  that
       address to where correspondence might be  sent.  The  Appellant  said
       that she had been told that they never actually send you anything  to
       the address,  they  always  contact  you  by  mobile.   Ms  Johnstone
       questioned why the Appellant would risk putting her home  address  if
       she was so afraid - if the British High Commission had sent a  letter
       to her at home there was a good chance someone in  her  family  would
       have seen it.    This was a fair  point  and  I  have  attached  some
       weight to it.  I have not attached any weight to the same point  made
       in respect of the Appellant's  account  with  the  Muslim  Commercial
       Bank.   She said that her father knew she had opened a  bank  account
       to save for the wedding  so  there  was  no  risk  arising  from  the
       statements being sent to the  house.  I  did  not  find  this  to  be
       inconsistent with the Appellant's evidence that she was saving  money
       through the "Committee" since it is perfectly possible that she would
       be saving money through both.

   23. The final point related to the timing of  the  alleged  assault.  The
       Appellant has consistently claimed that it took place in January 2012
       but has been unable to give an exact date. I attach no weight to that
       failure, since I would not expect someone in a state of shock, as she
       would have been, to be able to recall that date with certainty.    In
       her closing submissions Ms  Johnstone  asked  how  it  was  that  the
       Appellant could have sustained such injuries and yet  be  posing  for
       passport photographs within weeks, her Pakistani passport having been
       issued in March of that year.   I have attached little weight to this
       submission. The photograph could have been taken well  over  a  month
       after the alleged incident - it shows the Appellant  with  her  mouth
       closed and does not show  her  arms  of  shoulder.  It  is  therefore
       perfectly possible that she still had the injuries  but  these  could
       not be seen.

   24. Overall the Appellant's  evidence  about  her  experiences  has  been
       largely consistent, detailed and it is supported to  some  degree  by
       the medical evidence. The country background material indicates  that
       girls in Pakistan - even middle class ones - are expected to  conform
       to conservative socio-religious expectations and that  some  families
       do respond with violence if those expectations are not met.   I  have
       given careful consideration to the submissions made by Ms  Johnstone,
       in particular the point about the address on  the  visa  application,
       but I am satisfied that the Appellant has, in respect of  the  events
       in Pakistan, discharged the burden of proof to the lower standard.

       Current Circumstances: My Findings

   25. The final part of the Appellant's account concerns  her  relationship
       with AA, the man she met in the UK within weeks of her  arrival,  and
       her rescue by NA, the lady who found her crying in the street.

   26. Whilst I have not found the  alleged  behaviour  of  the  Appellant's
       family to be inherently incredible, I do find it  remarkable  that  a
       Muslim girl coming from a strict and conservative upbringing  in  the
       NWFP would decide to have sex with a man very soon after she had  met
       him at a bus-stop.  It would go against  absolutely  everything  that
       she had been brought up to believe in,   notions  of  "honour"  being
       deeply instilled in Pakistani girls from childhood.  The  Appellant's
       consistent evidence is that she did not  want  to  marry  her  cousin
       because she considered him to be of "bad character",  yet she  claims
       that having arrived in the UK she immediately  behaved  in  a  manner
       contrary to all notions of what would be considered (in Pakistan)  to
       be in "good" character herself.  The Appellant's evidence about AA  -
       unlike the rest of her account - is extremely vague.   She  has  been
       unable to give any details about him other than his name. She  cannot
       say where he lived or where he was from. She has produced no pictures
       of them  together  -  unusual  in  an  era  where  young  people  are
       incessantly taking photographs of themselves on their mobile  phones.
       Nor is there a single text message, nor any evidence from the  friend
       who allegedly allowed the affair to take place at his home. It is the
       Appellant's evidence that this man simply vanished without a trace. I
       agree with Ms Johnstone that if her "fianc�" had in fact  disappeared
       the Appellant would have sought help, for instance by registering him
       as missing with the police.

   27. Having weighed what scant evidence there is in the round I find  that
       the Appellant has failed to demonstrate, to the lower standard,  that
       her version of the events leading to the birth of  her  daughter  are
       true.   Given all of the background,  in  particular  the  importance
       that the Appellant herself has attached to "good" morality, I find it
       to be far more likely that  AA  is  someone  that  she  has  in  fact
       contracted a nikah with. I note that  she  has  told  her  friend  in
       Pakistan, the housemates she lived with in the student accommodation,
       her midwife, and the family that she now lives with, that she  had  a
       nikah with her baby's father.

   28. The family that the Appellant currently lives with is said to consist
       of NA, her husband, her son, his  wife  and  their  young  baby.  The
       Respondent asks me to find  it  to  be  inherently  unlikely  that  a
       stranger who found the Appellant in the street would  invite  her  to
       live with her, especially in an already  full  household.   I  agree,
       particularly in the context of Pakistani culture where  it  would  be
       extremely unusual to invite a strange young woman to live in a  house
       with at least two men to whom she was not related.   NA  herself  has
       not come to court to support the Appellant's version of  events.  She
       has provided a handwritten  letter  in  which  she  states  that  she
       invited the Appellant to live there on  a  "temporary  basis":  there
       does not appear to be any reason why the family's  hospitality  would
       then extend to encouraging the Appellant to turn down the NASS  offer
       of accommodation. There was no need for them to take her in: NA would
       no doubt have been aware that a homeless  woman  with  a  young  baby
       would have been provided for by social services.   The  most  obvious
       inference that anyone familiar with Pakistani culture would  draw  is
       that NA is in fact the Appellant's  mother-in-law  and  that  she  is
       living in her house as part of an extended 'joint family system'.   I
       need not, however, make such a finding, since my task is confined  to
       assessing whether the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof in
       respect of her current circumstances. For the reasons set out above I
       do not accept that she has had a child outside of wedlock, nor  do  I
       accept that NA is simply a stranger who has taken her in.

   29. I have assessed all of the evidence in the round. I  have  found  the
       Appellant's  evidence  about  her  experiences  in  Pakistan  to   be
       sufficiently  consistent,  detailed  and  in  accordance   with   the
       background material to be reasonably  likely  to  be  true.   I  have
       weighed that in the balance when considering the remaining  evidence.
       I have considered the fact that AA is not named on the child's  birth
       certificate. I have also considered whether the Appellant's  defiance
       of her family makes it more likely  that  she  would  have  had  this
       relationship.   Having done so I am  still  not  satisfied  that  the
       Appellant has shown this part of the account to be reasonably  likely
       to be true.  The evidence was vague and  uncorroborated  (where  such
       corroboration would be relatively easy to obtain). Further the  claim
       that the Appellant entered into a sexual relationship within weeks of
       meeting this man is entirely at odds with her portrayal of herself as
       a Muslim girl from a strict family who  had  the  strength  of  moral
       character to reject marriage to someone whom she considered "bad".

       Risk Assessment

   30. I accept that the Appellant cannot safely return  to  her  home  area
       near  Abbotabad.  I  have  accepted  that  her  family  have  already
       subjected her to persecution. They beat, whipped and  threatened  her
       because she was a woman. She  defied  them  by  leaving.  Absent  any
       change  in  circumstances  I  find  it  reasonably  likely  that  the
       Appellant would be subject to similar serious harm should she try and
       return to her family.   Her evidence is  that  both  her  father  and
       uncle are still alive.   I am satisfied that her return to that  area
       would quickly come to her family's attention and she would be at risk
       of harm.  I am satisfied that there would  not  be  sufficient  state
       protection to be able to protect her from that risk.

   31. The question is then one of internal flight.   The  Appellant's  case
       is that it would be unduly harsh to expect  her  to  go  to  live  in
       Pakistan as a lone woman with a young child.   If I accepted that the
       Appellant is in fact a lone woman with a young child she may well  be
       able to establish that for  her,  internal  flight  would  be  unduly
       harsh: indeed that much appears to be accepted by the  Respondent  in
       her current  Operational  Guidance  Note.    The  Appellant  has  not
       however discharged that burden.   For the reasons  set  out  above  I
       expressly reject her claim to have fallen pregnant with her  daughter
       without having first contracted a nikah with the father.    I  cannot
       therefore be satisfied that she would be returned to Pakistan  as  an
       unmarried mother, or that internal flight would be unreasonable as  a
       result.

   32. Since I have found the burden not to be discharged in respect of this
       part of the Appellant's claim, I  am  unable  to  make  any  positive
       findings about the best interests of the Appellant's daughter, beyond
       stating that they lie with remaining with her mother.

       Decisions

   33. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors  of  law
       and it is set aside.

   34. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.

   35. I make a direction for anonymity having had regard to Rule 14 of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and  the  Presidential
       Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders.   I  do  so  in  the
       following terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  nor  any
           member of her  family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
           Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             30th March 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Molloy on the 21st May
2014
[2] Determination promulgated on the 25th April 2014
[3] Decision served on the 19th February 2014, reasons for refusal letter
dated 13th February 2014
[4] See for instance  KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014]
UKUT 00230 (IAC) at 229.
[5] RR (challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 274 (IAC) at 3.
[6] Witness statement 24th January 2014, para 14, page 4 Appellant's bundle
[7] Witness statement dated 24th January 2014, paras 3-5 at page 2
Appellant's bundle
[8] The report references the criteria set out in the Istanbul Protocol on
the Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment ("the Istanbul Protocol").
This establishes the following criteria: (a) Not consistent: the lesion
could not have been caused by the trauma described (b) Consistent with: the
lesion could have been caused by the trauma described, but it is non-
specific and there are many other possible causes (c) Highly consistent:
the lesion could have been caused by the trauma described and there are few
other possible causes (d) Typical of: this is an appearance that is usually
found with this type of trauma, but there are other possible causes (e)
Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been caused in any other way
than that described.

