
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/01608/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 19 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     g k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  Designated
    Judge Coates promulgated on 18th December 2014, dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent made on 7 March 2014  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom by way of directions made under Section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast who arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 10 January 2008 with leave to enter for four years  to  join
    his father who had been recognised as a refugee.  On  8  February  2012
    the appellant was arrested and charged with fourteen counts of rape  of
    a minor but was found not guilty on 31 January 2013.  In  the  interim,
    on 22 October 2012, prior to his then extant leave expiring, he applied
    for further leave  to  remain.  That  application  was  refused  on  15
    November 2012.  A  further  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  23
    February 2013 was refused with no right of appeal and following further
    arrests, which did not result in convictions,  he  was  served  with  a
    notice  declaring  him  to  be  an  overstayer  on  23  January   2014.
    Subsequent to that he claimed asylum, an application which was  refused
    for the reasons set out in a letter of 7 March 2014.

 3. In the letter of 7 March 2014 the respondent  concluded  the  appellant
    would not be at risk of persecution on return to Ivory Coast  and  also
    that his removal there would not be in breach of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of
    the Human Rights Convention.  In particular, reliance was placed  on  a
    report from the Metropolitan Police including that  he  was  deemed  of
    high harm to society given his arrest history.

 4. At the hearing before Judge Coates the Secretary of  State's  case  was
    that the appellant was not credible and that Section 8  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  was  engaged,
    given the appellant had not claimed asylum prior to  30  January  2014.
    The judge then went on to dismiss the appeal on  grounds  which  upheld
    that observation.

 5. At the time of the  appeal,  the  appellant  was  not  represented  but
    subsequently his current solicitors began to act for him in  connection
    with a civil action  for  false  imprisonment.   As  a  result  of  the
    disclosure made by the respondent in that case,  it  appears  that  the
    appellant had in fact, as he had said, had been recognised as a refugee
    since 8 September 2009 and an application for permission to appeal  was
    made years out of time on the grounds that the judge had erred:-

      i) In treating the appellant as a person  who  did  not  have  refugee
         status in the United Kingdom  and  who  thus  bore  the  burden  of
         establishing  he  is  a  refugee;  and,  in  not  noting  that  the
         respondent had taken no action to  cease  the  appellant's  refugee
         status and thus erred in not allowing the appeal;




     ii) in treating the appellant's credibility as damaged by  his  failure
         to claim asylum given that he was in fact a refugee;




    iii) in finding the appellant had in fact committed the offence of which
         he had been acquitted  in  law,  the  hearing  being  fundamentally
         unfair.

 6. On 23 May 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission to appeal.

 7. Since the grant of permission was made and subsequent to  the  Rule  24
    response which now is of little or no relevant, the Secretary of  State
    has accepted that the appellant was granted refugee status  and  whilst
    consideration had been given as to whether to revoke refugee status  or
    not, the Secretary of State stated:-

         "Having assessed the particular circumstances of your case, I  have
         decided  not  to  revoke  the  refugee  status  on  this  occasion.
         Therefore, your status as a refugee in the United  Kingdom  remains
         in tact."

    A letter to the appellant's solicitors of  the  same  date  notes  that
    there is an outstanding application for indefinite leave to  remain  on
    the basis of settlement protection  under  consideration  from  the  UK
    Visas and Immigration.  It was noted that the application was  on  hold
    awaiting the outcome of police investigation.

 8. On 7 September the applicant's solicitor sought an adjournment  on  the
    basis that if the appellant's application for leave to remain  were  to
    be granted, the appeal would be academic thus an adjournment would save
    court time.  That application was refused by an Upper  Tribunal  lawyer
    on 10 September 2018.

 9. As Mr Diwnycz accepted at the hearing, the appeal before  Judge  Coates
    proceeded on a misconceived basis.  It is unclear how in light  of  the
    acceptance that the appellant had had refugee status  since  2009  this
    could have occurred.

10. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to persuade  me  that  the  decision  of  Judge
    Coates was sustainable.

11. In light of the fact that the appellant had in fact been recognised  as
    a refugee and granted status as such, and in light of the acceptance by
    Mr Diwnycz that it would be necessary for the  Secretary  of  State  to
    take  steps  to  cease  refugee  status,  Judge  Coates'  decision   is
    unsustainable because for reasons which are entirely unclear he was not
    provided  with  the  correct  picture  and  proceeded  on  an  entirely
    incorrect basis through no fault of his own.

12. In the circumstances the decision did involve the making of an error of
    law as the judge was unaware that the appellant had been recognised  as
    a refugee as he himself had said; in drawing adverse inferences from  a
    failure to claim asylum which  in  the  context  of  somebody  who  has
    refugee status makes no sense  and  given  that  the  latter  was  held
    against  him  on  credibility  terms,  the  findings  in   respect   of
    credibility are unsustainable.  It therefore follows that the  findings
    with respect to whether the  appellant  now  had  not  perpetrated  the
    crimes of which he had been accused, was unsustainable  and  these  too
    must be set aside.

13. Having announced that I would be setting aside  the  decision  I  asked
    whether in light of the acceptance of the applicant as a  refugee,  the
    Secretary of State wished to submit either that the appellant's  status
    had ceased or whether Mr  Diwnycz  would  seek  to  persuade  me  that,
    despite it being accepted that the appellant has  refugee  status,  the
    appellant could still be removed on the basis he did not have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution.  Mr Diwnycz made no such submissions.

14. It is not in doubt that  the  appellant  has  refugee  status.   It  is
    accepted in the letters of 1 August 2018 that the  Secretary  of  State
    would need to take steps to cease this, the burden being  on  him.   On
    that basis, the appeal falls to be allowed on refugee grounds.

15. If, however, I am in wrong in that, then I am satisfied that the appeal
    ought to be  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the  law,  the  decision  having  been  vitiated  by  a
    fundamental misunderstanding of the appellant's legal position.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date  4 October 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
