
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01054/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     WM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) in the  light  of
    the matters raised by the appellant in  claiming  asylum.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure in breach of
    this order may amount to a contempt of court.  This order shall  remain
    in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt who was born on 11 April 1979.  His
    wife and two children are dependants in this appeal.  The appellant and
    his family came to the UK on 10 March 2012 and claimed asylum the  next
    day.  They claimed  to  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Egypt  as  Coptic
    Christians.

 3. On 6 January 2015, the respondent refused  the  appellant's  claim  for
    asylum and those of his family as his dependants.  On 8  January  2015,
    the Secretary of State made a decision to refuse the appellant leave to
    enter and proposed to remove him to Egypt.  The appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Following a hearing, in a decision dated 10 June  2015,  Judge  Davidge
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The  judge  accepted  that   the
    appellant  and  his  family  were  Coptic  Christians  (see  para  15).
    Further, the judge accepted the appellant's account that his  shop  had
    been subject to attack by an unidentified Islamist in order to stop him
    displaying items which were not in accordance with the  Islamic  faith.
    However, the judge did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's  house  had
    subsequently  been  raided  or  that  he  and  his  family  had  lived,
    effectively in hiding, in Cairo  for  almost  a  year  following  these
    events. On the basis of these findings, the judge did not  accept  that
    the appellant would be at risk on return.

 5. The appellant appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  and,  having  initially
    failed to obtain permission to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal,  on
    27 August 2015 the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Gill)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

 6. A central ground of the appellant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    that in para 18 of her determination the judge had counted against  the
    appellant that his wife had not given evidence.   The  judge  concluded
    that that undermined the appellant's claim in relation to the attack on
    their home (where she was present) and that they  had  lived  in  Cairo
    subsequently.

 7. On behalf of the appellant, his then Counsel (Mr David Neale) submitted
    a witness statement to the Upper Tribunal in which he  stated  that  he
    had canvassed with the judge the possibility  of  adjourning  the  case
    part-heard in order to call the appellant's wife as a witness  when  it
    became clear that her absence was being relied upon in  order  to  draw
    adverse  inferences.   Although  Mr  Neale  did  not  make   a   formal
    application to adjourn  the  hearing  or  take  instructions  from  the
    appellant, that was because the judge indicated that she would  not  be
    willing to adjourn the appeal part-heard.

 8. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Richards who represented the Secretary
    of State, indicated that in the  light  of  Mr  Neale's  statement  the
    Secretary of State did not oppose the appellant's appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  He accepted that the judge's reasoning in  para  18  of  her
    determination amounted to a material error  of  law  and  her  decision
    could not stand.

Decision and Disposal

 9. On the basis of that concession, with which I agree,  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appellant's appeal involved  the
    making of an error of law and the decision  must  be  set  aside.  Both
    representatives accepted that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

10. Mr Hoshi invited me to preserve the judge's findings in the appellant's
    favour that he is a Coptic Christian (para 15) and the judge's  finding
    that  she  accepted  the  evidence  concerning  the  attack  upon   the
    appellant's shop (para 16).  Mr Hoshi  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reconsideration of the appeal should  be  to  make  relevant
    factual findings in respect of the appellant's claim that his house had
    been raided and what had happened  to  him  and  his  family  in  Cairo
    together with consequential findings in relation to the objective  risk
    to the appellant on return,  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
    relocation.

11. Mr Richards did not seek to argue to the contrary.

12. I accept Mr Hoshi's submission that the accepted error of law does  not
    taint the judge's factual findings in favour of the appellant  that  he
    and his family are Coptic Christians and in respect of his  account  of
    the attack upon his shop.  Consequently,  those  factual  findings  are
    preserved.

13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Davidge to make appropriate findings and re-make
    the decision in accordance with this decision.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

