

                                    [pic]

 Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/01344/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15th February 2016                    | On 26th April 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     ZAB

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel; Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade dismissing the Appellants'  appeals  against
    the Respondent's decision refusing to grant asylum and to remove her by
    way  of  directions  pursuant  to  section  82  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.






 2. The Appellant appealed against the decision of  Judge  Oxlade  and  was
    granted permission to appeal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins.  The
    grounds upon which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:


      i) It is arguable that the judge's decision to dismiss the appeal; due
         to their being family support in Mogadishu is unsustainable on  the
         evidence, and


     ii) It is arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  consideration  of  the
         Appellant's return to Mogadishu.






 3. Permission was granted on that bases however there  were  five  initial
    grounds of appeal drafted by the Appellant's previous  solicitor  which
    was supplemented by further grounds on appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Given that permission was broadly granted, I shall consider the grounds
    so far as necessary.






    Error of Law


 4. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I find that there was an error of law
    in the decision such that it should be set aside.  My  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.






 5. In relation to the judge's consideration of whether  there  was  family
    support available in Mogadishu, upon which  the  entire  basis  of  the
    dismissal of  the  appeal  hinges,  the  judge's  findings  are  indeed
    unsustainable on the evidence when forensically analysed.






 6. At paragraph 64 of her decision, the judge considers the whereabouts of
    the Appellant's family however  it  is  important  to  note  that  this
    discussion occurs in the absence  of  any  explicit  evidence  on  that
    specific issue. It is unclear from the  decision  that  there  was  any
    evidence on this point at all which or any which could inform the basis
    for that decision. That is an unwise approach to take in  view  of  the
    dicta of Keene, LJ in Y v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 at [25]; and in the absence of  detailed  findings
    on the implausibility of the facts suggested by an Appellant:

         There seems to me to be very little dispute between the parties as
         to the legal principles applicable to the approach which an
         adjudicator, now known as an immigration judge, should adopt
         towards issues of credibility. The fundamental one is that he
         should be cautious before finding an account to be inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that he will be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or is not plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been influenced by his own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of our own
         society. It is therefore important that he should seek to view an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues, in the
         context of conditions in the country from which the appellant
         comes. The dangers were well described in an article by
         Sir Thomas Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in a passage quoted by
         the IAT in Kasolo v SSHD 13190, the passage being taken from an
         article in Current Legal Problems. Sir Thomas Bingham said this:
             "'An English judge may have, or think that he has, a shrewd
             idea of how a Lloyds Broker or a Bristol wholesaler, or a
             Norfolk farmer, might react in some situation which is
             canvassed in the course of a case but he may, and I think
             should, feel very much more uncertain about the reactions of a
             Nigerian merchant, or an Indian ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav
             banker. Or even, to take a more homely example, a Sikh
             shopkeeper trading in Bradford. No judge worth his salt could
             possibl[y] assume that men of different nationalities,
             educations, trades, experience, creeds and temperaments would
             act as he might think he would have done or even - which may
             be quite different - in accordance with his concept of what a
             reasonable man would have done."





 7. At any rate, it is suggested by the judge that the  Appellant  must  be
    incorrect in what family remains in Somalia, as  opposed  to  Mogadishu
    specifically. This is clear from the final  sentence  of  paragraph  64
    where the judge states that the Appellant's family  have  "remained  in
    Somalia"  and  could  "relocate"  to  Mogadishu  (from   in   Beledeyne
    presumably in South West Somalia) and receive her there.






 8. In that event, Ms Brown submits, and I accept, that  the  judge  should
    have applied [407(h)] of the relevant country guidance case  of  MOJ  &
    Ors (Return to Mogadishu) (CG) [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC), and not  [407(f)]
    of MOJ which was instead applied.






 9. Paragraph 407(h) of MOJ states as follows:

         If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu  after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all of the circumstances.  These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to:


           (i)          circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
           (ii)        length of absence from Mogadishu;
           (iii)      family  or  clan  associations  to  call  upon   in
                Mogadishu;
           (iv)      access to financial resources;
           (v)        prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that  be
                employment or self employment;
           (vi)      availability of remittances from abroad;
           (vii)    means of support during the time spent in  the  United
                Kingdom;
           (viii)  why his ability to fund  the  journey  to  the  West  no
                longer enables an appellant to secure financial  support  on
                return.


         Put another way, it  will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
         Mogadishu to explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the
         economic opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  "economic
         boom", especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees
         are taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.


10. It is clear on the face  of  the  decision  that  such  assessment  has
    unfortunately not taken  place  owing  to  the  conflation  as  to  the
    family's whereabouts in the absence of evidence on the point.






11. As to the presence of  family  in  Mogadishu,  there  is  similarly  no
    consideration of  the  mixed  clan  background  of  the  Appellant  (as
    referred to at paragraph 25 of the  Respondent's  Refusal  Letter)  and
    whether there would be any clan support available to her  in  light  of
    [407(f)] of MOJ anyhow, regardless of whether  the  mother's  relatives
    may be there. That paragraph states as follows:


         A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence will look
         to his nuclear family, if he  has  one  living  in  the  city,  for
         assistance in re-establishing himself and  securing  a  livelihood.
         Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan  members
         who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
         forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may  have
         little to offer.






12. Furthermore, my attention  was  drawn  to  [406]  of  MOJ  which  makes
    reference to the relevance of the UNCHR Report on returns to  Mogadishu
    and states as follows:

         We consider, it the light of the evidence  as  a  whole,  that  the
         position as set  out  by  UNHCR  in  its  report  published  on  25
         September 2013 continues to reflect an appropriate  starting  point
         today, upon which to build in the light of our review of the up  to
         date evidence:


             "With regard to Mogadishu, the personal circumstances  of  an
             individual need to be carefully assessed. UNHCR  considers  an
             IFA/IRA as reasonable only where the individual can expect  to
             benefit from meaningful nuclear and/or extended family support
             and clan protection mechanisms  in  the  area  of  prospective
             relocation. When assessing the reasonableness of an IFA/IRA in
             Mogadishu in an individual case, it should  be  kept  in  mind
             that the traditional extended family and community  structures
             of Somali society no longer constitute as strong a  protection
             and coping mechanism in Mogadishu as they  did  in  the  past.
             Additionally, whether the members of the traditional  networks
             are able to  genuinely  offer  support  to  the  applicant  in
             practice also needs to  be  evaluated,  especially  given  the
             fragile and complex situation in Mogadishu at present.


             For the following categories of Somalis, UNHCR would  consider
             that an IFA/IRA  will  not  be  reasonably  available  in  the
             absence of meaningful nuclear and/or extended  family  support
             and functioning clan  protection:  unaccompanied  children  or
             adolescents at risk of  forced  recruitment  and  other  grave
             violations; young males at risk of being considered Al Shabaab
             sympathizers and therefore facing harassment  from  government
             security forces;  elderly  people;  people  with  physical  or
             mental disabilities; single women and female single  heads  of
             households with no male protection and especially  originating
             from minority clans. In any other exceptional cases, in  which
             the application of an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu is considered  even
             in the absence of meaningful family or  clan  support  to  the
             individual,  the  person  would  need  to   have   access   to
             infrastructure  and  livelihood  opportunities  and  to  other
             meaningful protection  and  support  mechanisms,  taking  into
             account the state institutions'  limited  ability  to  provide
             security and meaningful protection."

              (Underlining supplied)






13. This emphasis on the careful assessment of the  personal  circumstances
    of an individual in  the  absence  of  assessment  of  the  factors  at
    [407(h)] of MOJ alongside the fact of  the  Appellant  being  a  single
    female (not to mention a child and an  unaccompanied  minor),  and  the
    earlier omissions I have highlighted, in my view result in  a  material
    error in the assessment of return  to  Mogadishu  and  the  Appellant's
    proposed return there.  In  particular,  there  would  need  to  be  an
    assessment of whether the Appellant had access to  "meaningful  nuclear
    and/or extended family support and functioning clan  protection"  which
    has not occurred.






14. In those circumstances, I find that there was an error of  law  in  the
    decision such that it should be set aside.






15. In light of my findings on the above grounds of  complaint,  I  do  not
    propose to consider the remaining grounds. I set aside the decision and
    findings of the judge in their entirety.





    Decision

16. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini










