


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA102372014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 23 May 2016                         |On: 25 May 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     HS
                           (Anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, instructed by Greater Manchester
                  Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:  Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, an Afghan national born on [ ] 1995, claims to  have  arrived
in the United Kingdom in June 2009. He  claimed  asylum  on  30  June  2009,
after being apprehended by  the  police  and  referred  to  Trafford  Social
Services. His claim was refused on 24  November  2009  but  he  was  granted
Discretionary Leave until 23 November 2012, as an  unaccompanied  minor.  He
appealed against the decision but his appeal was  dismissed  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal on 1 February 2010, and subsequently by the Upper Tribunal  on
7 December 2010. Following an unsuccessful  application  for  permission  to
appeal to the Court of Appeal, he became appeal rights exhausted on  7  July
2011.

On 23 November 2012 the appellant made an application for further  leave  to
remain, but that was refused on 6  November  2014.  On  7  November  2014  a
decision was made to refuse to vary his leave and to  remove  him  from  the
UK. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal  was  dismissed
in the First-tier Tribunal. Permission has been granted  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant is from [D] in Nangarhar Province in  Afghanistan  and  claims
to be at risk of persecution in Afghanistan as  a  result  of  his  father's
previous involvement with the Hezb-e-Islami and from  members  of  the  same
family who had killed his father. He claims that his  father  worked  for  a
Hezb-e-Islami commander and was killed by the Taliban a long time  ago  when
he was a child. He lived with his maternal grandparents,  with  his  mother,
older brother and three sisters. His mother used to travel between  [D]  and
Khyber Agency on the border of Afghanistan and  Pakistan  where  his  uncles
lived and his brother spent a lot of time living with his uncles because  he
was at risk as the eldest son of their father. The appellant  said  that  he
spent a year living with his uncles in Khyber Agency,  before  returning  to
Afghanistan for a year prior to his departure from the  country.  Five  days
before he left Afghanistan his brother was shot in the leg. His mother  told
him that the people responsible for the shooting were the same as those  who
had killed his  father.  His  brother  returned  to  Pakistan  and  he  (the
appellant) was sent to the UK for his safety. He  would  be  killed  by  the
Taliban if he returned to Afghanistan.

The respondent, in refusing the  appellant's  claim  on  24  November  2009,
accepted that his father was killed in the fighting between the Taliban  and
the Hezb-e-Islami but noted that the parties had since  formed  an  alliance
and, as a result, did not accept that the Taliban were looking to  kill  the
appellant and his brother. The fact that the Taliban took no action  against
the appellant's family when they had the  opportunity  to  do  so  indicated
that they were not interested in him. The respondent noted  the  appellant's
claim that his brother belonged to the Lashker-e-Islami, which was led by  a
Pakistani Islamic militant  and  which  shared  the  same  ideology  as  the
Taliban, and therefore did not accept that  the  appellant  or  his  brother
would be targeted  by  the  Taliban.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
appellant could return to Kabul where there was a sufficiency of  protection
available to him and did not accept that he was at risk on return.

In dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  in  February  2010,  the  First-tier
Tribunal noted that he was claiming that his father had  been  killed  by  a
member of a family from his father's home village in [K] who  supported  the
Taliban and that his brother had been shot by members of the same family  in
order to stop him seeking to avenge their father's killing.  The  First-tier
Tribunal rejected that claim as lacking in credibility  and  found  that  if
his brother had been injured, it was in a fight with armed men  rather  than
as  a  result  of  being  specifically  targeted,  and  concluded  that  the
appellant was not at any risk on return to Afghanistan.


Those findings were maintained in December 2010 by the Upper Tribunal  which
went on to consider whether the appellant would  be  at  risk  as  a  street
child in Kabul. The Upper Tribunal considered the appellant's claim to  have
lost contact with his family  in  Afghanistan  and  took  into  account  two
letters from Dr Ruth Goldwyn who  had  had  contact  with  him  through  the
Trafford Children and Young People's Services and who had diagnosed  him  as
suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The Tribunal  did  not
find the appellant's evidence to be credible and,  referring  in  particular
to his ability to recall from memory the telephone number of  his  uncle  in
Afghanistan, concluded that he had not told the truth  about  his  inability
to contact his family in Afghanistan. The Tribunal found that the  appellant
remained in contact with his family  in  Afghanistan  and  that  they  still
lived in their home village and that, accordingly, he  would  not  become  a
street child in Kabul or elsewhere if he returned to Afghanistan.

In his application dated 22 November 2012 for further leave to  remain,  the
appellant acknowledged the previous adverse credibility findings made  about
his claim and his account  of  his  family  in  Afghanistan  but  relied  on
further evidence which he said required his credibility  to  be  reassessed.
He relied in particular upon a report  from  Dr  Ruth  Goldwyn,  a  clinical
psychologist who had been treating him for over three years,  and  a  report
from his consultant psychiatrist Dr Kishan Sharma, both of which he  claimed
explained his shortcomings as a witness in his previous  appeal  and  showed
him to have memory problems. In addition he relied  upon  reports  from  his
social worker and support worker, together with the psychologist report,  in
support of his claim to have lost contact with his  family  in  Afghanistan.
The appellant claimed that he would be at risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan,
both from the Taliban and as a lone child who would end up  on  the  streets
in Kabul. Reliance was also placed by the  appellant  upon  several  medical
and other reports, and the diagnosis of PTSD, in claiming that  his  removal
would breach his Article 8 human rights.


The respondent refused the appellant's application on 6  November  2014  and
maintained the previous decision that he would be at no risk  on  return  to
Afghanistan. The respondent considered that she had  discharged  her  duties
in regard to family tracing under KA (Afghanistan)  &  Ors  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 and  noted  that  in  any
event the appellant was no longer a minor. It was not accepted that  he  had
no family in Afghanistan and it was considered that he would not be at  risk
on return or that his removal would breach his human rights.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by  Judge  Brookfield
in the First-tier Tribunal on 28 April 2015 and was dismissed in a  decision
promulgated on 13 May 2015. Judge Brookfield referred to  the  new  evidence
that was before her which had not previously been before  the  Tribunal  and
which included medical evidence referring in particular to  the  appellant's
memory, as well as an expert report from Dr Guistozzi dated 19  April  2015.
The medical evidence consisted of a report dated 16 November  2012  from  Dr
Goldwyn, the clinical psychologist who had treated the appellant during  his
minority, and a report dated 16 April 2015 from Dr  Chari,  a  psychiatrist.
The judge found that the findings of  fact  made  by  the  Tribunal  in  the
appellant's previous appeal were not  undermined  by  the  reports  from  Dr
Goldwyn or Dr Chari. The judge noted that Dr Guistozzi's  report  was  based
on the appellant's family being involved in a blood feud, but  she  did  not
accept that there was such a blood feud and considered  in  any  event  that
the appellant would not be at risk on such a basis. The  judge  went  on  to
consider the appellant's claim in regard to the loss  of  contact  with  his
family in Afghanistan and considered the letters he relied upon  in  support
of that claim, but rejected his claim. She found that  the  appellant  could
safely  and  reasonably  relocate  to  Kabul  and  that  he   could   access
appropriate  mental  health  treatment  in  Afghanistan.  The  judge  found,
further that the appellant's removal to Kabul would  not  breach  his  human
rights.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, on several grounds: that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
evidence in the round; that the judge's approach  to  the  medical  evidence
was flawed; that the judge's findings on family contact  were  flawed;  that
the judge's findings on risk on return and the blood feud were  flawed;  and
that her findings on  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  and  Article  8  were
flawed.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 8 June 2015.

Ms Mair, in her  submissions,  relied  and  expanded  upon  the  grounds  of
appeal, asserting that the judge  had  considered  the  medical  and  expert
evidence in a piecemeal fashion rather than considering it cumulatively  and
had erred in her approach to the medical evidence and failed to give it  the
appropriate weight. She submitted that the judge's approach  to  the  expert
evidence of Dr Guistozzi was perverse  and  that  she  had  failed  to  give
proper  consideration  to  the  medical  evidence  in  considering  internal
relocation and Article 8.


Mr Harrison submitted that the judge had considered the medical  and  expert
evidence and had been entitled to place the weight that she did upon it.


Ms Mair, in response, reiterated the points made previously.


Consideration and findings.

The appellant's grounds seeking permission, and Ms Mair's  submissions,  are
detailed and lengthy, but I do not consider that they  disclose  any  errors
of law in the judge's decision. Whilst the  grounds  criticise  the  judge's
approach to the medical and expert evidence, it is plain that she  undertook
a very careful and thorough assessment of that evidence.  There  is  nothing
in her clear and cogent reasoning to suggest that  she  failed  to  consider
the evidence cumulatively. The fact that she dealt with each report in  turn
does not in any way suggest that each piece of evidence  was  considered  in
isolation.

Ms Mair criticised the judge's approach to the  evidence  from  Dr  Goldwyn,
submitting that she focussed on only one  part  of  the  doctor's  evidence.
However it is clear that Dr Goldwyn's report of 16  November  2012  was  the
most recent detailed report written prior to the appellant's discharge  from
CAMHS and was the most  recent  comprehensive  summary  of  the  assessments
undertaken and treatment offered over the relevant period of  time.  It  was
in that report that Dr Goldwyn  referred  to  the  four  psychometric  tests
conducted in relation to the  concerns  about  the  appellant's  memory  and
attention.  The  grounds  suggest  that  the  judge,  in  referring  to  the
appellant's  ability  to  achieve  a  grade  D  in  his  English  GCSE,  was
attempting to substitute her knowledge for that of a trained expert, but  it
is clear that that was not the case. On  the  contrary,  at  [10(iii)],  the
judge accepted Dr Goldwyn's conclusion that the appellant had  some  memory,
attention and concentration problems. What she did not accept was  that  the
appellant's  memory  problems  were  such  that  they  prevented  him   from
functioning to the extent that that had a significant impact on  his  claim,
either as regards his account of events that  had  occurred  and  the  risks
that he faced on return or in regard to  his  ability  to  reintegrate  into
Kabul on return there. In that respect the judge was entitled  to  make  the
observations that she did and to place the weight  that  she  did  upon  the
report. Likewise with respect to the psychiatric  report  of  Dr  Chari  the
judge gave detailed reasons for placing the  limited  weight  that  she  did
upon the report and was perfectly entitled to do so.

In any event, the grounds, even if made out (which I do not find  they  are)
do  not  take  the  appellant's  case  anywhere,  given  that  the   adverse
credibility findings previously made by the First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal
were not so much based upon inconsistent evidence which could be  attributed
to difficulties with memory,  but  rather  were  findings  on  the  lack  of
credibility in the appellant's account as stated.  That  was  precisely  the
point made by Judge Brookfield at  [10(vi)],  where  she  set  out  in  some
detail the reasons why both Tribunals had  rejected  the  appellant's  claim
that he and his brother were specifically targeted by the Taliban  and  that
he remained of interest  to  elements  of  the  Taliban.  Furthermore,  with
regard  to  the  question  of  family  contact,  Judge  Brookfield  properly
observed at [10(xii)] that it was the appellant's ability  to  remember  his
uncle's mobile  telephone  number,  rather  than  his  inability  to  recall
details, that led the Upper Tribunal to  conclude  that  he  was  not  being
truthful in his claim to have no contact with his family.

The grounds make a further challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  on  family
contact, asserting that she had failed to explain why she had  rejected  the
letters from various professionals who had all  agreed  that  the  appellant
had had no contact  with  his  family.  However  the  judge  considered  the
letters at [10(xii)] and, contrary to the assertion  in  the  grounds,  gave
full reasons for concluding that the evidence was not sufficient for her  to
depart from the previous findings of the Upper  Tribunal,  noting  that  the
appellant had failed to  address  the  Upper  Tribunal's  concerns  and  had
failed to explain why he was able to remember his uncle's  mobile  telephone
number. There was no requirement upon the judge to accept  the  opinions  of
the various professionals as establishing the appellant's claim to  have  no
contact with his family, particularly bearing in mind that the  significance
of a loss of family contact to the outcome of  his  claim  would  have  been
readily apparent to the appellant. The judge, having clearly had  regard  to
the evidence from the professionals providing support to the appellant,  was
entitled to place the weight that she did upon that evidence. In any  event,
the issue of family ties  and  contact  was  plainly  not  as  material  and
relevant a consideration as it was in  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the
First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, when the appellant was a  minor.
It is clear from the judge's findings at [10(xiii)] to  [10(xvi)]  that  she
did not consider the appellant's family ties as being a relevant  factor  in
concluding that internal relocation to Kabul was a viable option.

The grounds also criticise the judge's findings on the expert  reports  from
Dr Guistozzi, asserting that she wrongly rejected his opinion by  reason  of
him having characterised the events in the  appellant's  claim  as  a  blood
feud. However, whilst the appellant, in  his  statements,  referred  to  his
father having been killed at  the  hands  of  the  leader  of  a  particular
Taliban family and to the attack on his  brother  having  been  intended  to
prevent attempts to avenge their father's death, it is  clear  that  he  had
never suggested that the circumstances amounted to a blood  feud.  That  was
the point made by the judge. She referred in  particular,  at  [10(ix)],  to
the appellant's own description in his web page at page 121  of  his  appeal
bundle, which suggested that the risk arose because of  his  father's  links
to the Hezb-e-Islami.  The  judge  went  on  to  give  further  reasons  for
rejecting the expert's opinion that the appellant was at risk  as  a  result
of a blood feud, noting that the expert's conclusions were  based  upon  the
appellant's account of the ongoing interest  by  the  Taliban  family  being
true,  whereas  proper  reasons  had  been  given  for  not  accepting   the
credibility of that account. She noted  further,  at  [10(viii)],  that  the
existence of a blood feud was inconsistent with the circumstances  described
by the appellant, including his brother's  freedom  in  travelling  and  his
frequent journeys between [D] and the Khyber Agency.  The  judge  also  gave
careful consideration to other  background  information  about  blood  feuds
which she found undermined the conclusions reached by the  expert.  Ms  Mair
submitted that the judge's reliance on that evidence in  preference  to  the
expert's opinion  was  perverse,  but  I  do  not  agree.  Having  carefully
assessed all the relevant evidence  the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
place the  weight  that  she  did  upon  that  evidence  and  to  reach  the
conclusions that she did.

Finally, the grounds criticise the judge's findings on  internal  relocation
and Article 8, asserting that she took into account irrelevant  matters  and
failed to take into account material matters. However again I disagree.  The
judge, in her findings at  [10(xiii)  to  (xvii)]  gave  very  detailed  and
careful consideration to the appellant's mental health and to  the  evidence
of the support he received in the UK,  including  the  various  medical  and
other reports, as well  as  to  the  circumstances  to  which  he  would  be
returning in Kabul, in considering the viability of internal relocation,  in
terms  both  of  safety  and  reasonableness.  Likewise,  she  gave  careful
consideration to those circumstances and to the  evidence  before  her  when
considering Article 8, at [10(xxii) to (xxx)].  Whilst  she  may  have  been
wrong, at [10(xxvi)], to have  considered  there  to  be  a  possibility  of
ongoing support from Mr Critchlow after the appellant's departure  from  the
UK it is clear that that was not a material consideration  since  she  found
such support not to be necessary to the enjoyment of private life  in  Kabul
in any event. Contrary to the assertion made by Ms Mair, the judge had  full
regard to the opinions of the medical experts and was  particularly  mindful
of the submissions made in regard to the appellant's mental  health  and  to
the accessibility of treatment in Afghanistan. The findings  that  she  made
in response were based upon a careful assessment of  all  the  evidence  and
were ultimately open to her on the evidence.

For all of these reasons I find that the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  do
not disclose any errors of law in the judge's decision.  The  findings  that
she made, and the conclusions reached, were clearly based upon  a  full  and
detailed consideration of all the evidence and are supported  by  clear  and
cogent reasoning. The weight to be attached to the  evidence  was  a  matter
for the judge and she was perfectly entitled to reach the  conclusions  that
she did.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity


    The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order.  That  order  is
    continued, pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2014.







                               Signed                     Date 25th May
                               2016


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
