
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/01807/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 12 September 2014                          |On 29 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E M DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Grubb, instructed by Hoole & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    us to rescind the order and we continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  12  December
    1960.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 March  1995  with  a  six
    month visa to receive medical treatment.  On 3 April 1995,  he  claimed
    asylum but did not attend an interview on 5 March 1997 due to  illness.
    In a handwritten letter dated 21 May 1997, the appellant indicated that
    he wished to withdraw his asylum case and requested the return  of  his
    passport which was done  on  6  June  1997.   On  20  April  2000,  the
    appellant's (then) representatives informed the Home  Office  that  the
    appellant wished to be considered under a backlog procedure.  On 6 June
    2000, the Home Office wrote to the appellant's representative rejecting
    that request and advising that the appellant should leave the UK as  he
    had no outstanding applications.  On 11 September 2006 the  appellant's
    representatives wrote to the Home Office indicating that the  appellant
    had not withdrawn his asylum claim and had lost contact  with  him  for
    six years.  He now wished to apply again to regularise his stay in  the
    UK.

 3. By a notice dated 6 October 2008 (IS151A), the appellant  was  notified
    that he was subject to removal as  an  overstayer  under  s.10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  On 1  December  2008,  the  appellant
    made an application for leave based on long residency which was refused
    on 28 April 2009.  Further representations were made on the appellant's
    behalf on 16 May 2009.

 4. On 29 June 2011, his representatives made a request that the  appellant
    be considered under  the  'legacy'  scheme.   The  Secretary  of  State
    rejected that application on 3 March 2014 under the  Immigration  Rules
    (HC 395 as amended) and Art 8 of the ECHR.   On  that  date  also,  the
    Secretary of State made a  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  as  an
    overstayer under s.10 of the 1999 Act.

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A  hearing  took
    place on 22 May 2014 before Judge A Cresswell at  which  the  appellant
    was legally unrepresented.  Judge Cresswell dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  First, he rejected the appellant's claim  to  be  at  risk  on
    return from  his  wife's  family  and  consequently  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal under the Refugee  Convention  and  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.   Secondly,  the
    judge concluded that the appellant did not succeed  in  establishing  a
    breach of Art 8 based upon his private life  in  the  UK  formed  since
    1995.

 6. On 18 June 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge A  K  Simpson)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Thus,  the
    appeal came before us.

The Issues

 7. The grounds of appeal raise three issues.

 8. First, the judge erred in law (as had the  respondent)  in  considering
    the appellant's claim under the Immigration Rules in force from 9  July
    2012.  The appellant's application was made on 29 June  2011  and  was,
    applying Edgehill and Another  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402,  to  be
    determined on the basis of the Immigration Rules in force  before  that
    date.  In particular, the long residence rule in para 276B of the Rules
    should have been applied rather than para 276ADE.

 9. Secondly, the appellant met the requirements of para  276B  because  he
    had fourteen years' continuous residence in the UK since his arrival on
    14 March 1995.

10. Thirdly, the judge erred in law in assessing the  appellant's  evidence
    at the hearing when he was unrepresented and there was medical evidence
    that he was suffering from depression as set out in a  doctor's  letter
    dated 3 April 2014.  He was, therefore, a vulnerable witness.  Reliance
    was placed on the UNHCR's Handbook at  paras  207  and  210  and  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010,  "Child, vulnerable adult and
    sensitive appellant guidance".

11. In her skeleton argument and oral submissions,  Ms  Grubb  relied  also
    upon a further point not raised in the  grounds.   She  relied  upon  a
    letter from Dr Yaqub, a GP at  the  practice  where  the  appellant  is
    registered, dated  24  July  2014  dealing,  in  particular,  with  the
    appellant's mental health.  Ms Grubb submitted that  in  the  light  of
    this letter it was questionable whether the appellant had  capacity  to
    give evidence or conduct litigation on his own behalf and if he  lacked
    capacity then the First-tier Tribunal's decision was a nullity.

12. In support of her additional submission, Ms Grubb invited us to adjourn
    the hearing in order that a psychiatric report could be obtained on the
    appellant in order to assess his capacity to given evidence before  the
    First-tier   Tribunal.    We   heard   oral   submissions   from   both
    representatives on all the  issues  raised  in  the  appeal,  including
    whether to adjourn the hearing.  Having done so, after deliberation, we
    indicated that we were refusing the application for an adjournment  and
    our decision on the substantive issues would be reserved.  We now  give
    our reasons.

The Adjournment Application

13. The only medical evidence before Judge Cresswell was in a short  letter
    from Dr Yaqub, a GP dated 3 April 2004.  In that letter he stated:

         "[The appellant] ... suffers anxiety symptoms  he  has  started  on
         treatment.  Prev history left inguinal hernia and chronic low  back
         pain."

14. In support of her application for an adjournment, Ms Grubb relied  upon
    a letter from Dr Yaqub postdating the hearing on  24  July  2014  which
    states as follows:

         "[The appellant] ....has suffered with anxiety and  depression  for
         the last few years.  He is having problems with stress and  anxiety
         symptoms which are progressively getting worse.   He  also  suffers
         with social phobia, forgetfulness, and long term headaches after  a
         head injury a few years ago.  His general mental  health  state  is
         not very stable at the moment.  He also suffers  with  chronic  low
         back pain and is going for a hernia repair soon under the  surgical
         team.  I assessed him  today  again  as  he  is  very  anxious  and
         depressed.  He also suffers with fluctuating high  blood  pressure.
         We  have  started  him  on  antidepressants.   He  is  also  taking
         medication for his panic attacks and anxiety  and  some  medication
         for his back pain."

15. Ms Grubb submitted that this raised the possibility that the  appellant
    lacked capacity to give  evidence  and  take  part  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal proceedings.  If it did, she submitted  that  the  proceedings
    were a nullity.

16. We will consider this letter despite the fact that no  application  was
    made to admit it in  the  Upper  Tribunal  under  rule  15(2A)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rule 2008 (SI 2008/2698).   In  our
    judgment, it provides no basis for an adjournment in order to obtain  a
    psychiatric report concerning the appellant's capacity to take part  in
    the First-tier Tribunal proceedings.

17. Ms Grubb referred us to no authorities on the meaning of  capacity  and
    the effect, if any, on proceedings if the appellant had, indeed, lacked
    capacity.   Ms  Grubb's  submissions  entail  the  argument  that   the
    appellant was, in effect, a "protected party" which,  for  example,  in
    the High Court would require the appointment of a  "litigation  friend"
    (see CPR, Part  21).   No  equivalent  provisions  were  drawn  to  our
    attention applicable in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   For  the  present
    purposes,  we  will  assume  (without  deciding)  that  retrospectively
    demonstrating that the appellant lacked  capacity  would  render  those
    proceedings  sufficiently  irregular  to  be  set  aside  even  if  the
    proceedings could not properly be said to be a nullity.

18. As regards the meaning of 'capacity', it suffices for these purposes to
    note the definition set out in the Mental Capacity Act 2005 as follows:



         "2.  People who lack capacity

             (1)  For the purposes of this Act, a person lacks capacity  in
                  relation to a matter if at the material time he is  unable
                  to make a decision for himself in relation to  the  matter
                  because of an impairment  of,  or  a  disturbance  in  the
                  functioning of, the mind or brain.

             (2)  It does not matter whether the impairment or  disturbance
                  is permanent or temporary.

             (3)  A lack  of  capacity  cannot  be  established  merely  by
                  reference to-

                  (a)  a person's age or appearance, or

                  (b)  a condition of his, or an  aspect  of  his  behavior,
                      which  might  lead   others   to   make   unjustified
                      assumptions about his capacity.

             (4)  In proceedings under this Act or any other enactment, any
                  question  whether  a  person  lacks  capacity  within  the
                  meaning of this Act must be  decided  on  the  balance  of
                  probabilities.  .....


         3.   Inability to make decisions

             (1)  For the purposes of section 2, a person is unable to make
                  a decision for himself if he is unable-

                  (a)   to  understand  the  information  relevant  to   the
                      decision,

                  (b)  to retain that information,

                  (c)  to use or weigh  that  information  as  part  of  the
                      process of making the decision, or

                  (d)  to communicate  his  decision  (whether  by  talking,
                      using sign language or any other means).

             (2)  A person is not to be regarded as  unable  to  understand
                  the information relevant to a decision if he  is  able  to
                  understand an explanation of it given to him in a way that
                  is  appropriate  to  his   circumstances   (using   simple
                  language, visual aids or any other means).

             (3)  The fact that a person is able to retain the  information
                  relevant to a decision for a short period  only  does  not
                  prevent him from  being  regarded  as  able  to  make  the
                  decision.

             (4)   The  information  relevant  to   a   decision   includes
                  information about the reasonably foreseeable  consequences
                  of-

                  (a)  deciding one way or another, or

                  (b)  failing to make the decision."


19. Put simply, a person lacks capacity, therefore, if he or she lacks  the
    ability to understand, retain and weigh information concerning what  is
    involved in a decision or  to  communicate  that  decision  due  to  an
    impairment, or disturbance in the functioning, of the  brain  or  mind.
    Here, the required capacity relates  to  taking  part  in  (and  making
    decisions in relation to) the  First-tier  Tribunal  proceedings  as  a
    litigant and witness.

20. What is abundantly clear  to  us  is  that  nothing  in  either  letter
    prepared by Dr Yaqub comes anywhere near suggesting that the  appellant
    lacked sufficient understanding to take part in the First-tier Tribunal
    proceedings as a litigant and witness.  That is not  raised  explicitly
    or by implication as a result of the appellant  being  said  to  suffer
    from  "anxiety  and  depression"  for  which  he  has  been  prescribed
    antidepressants.  Reference is  made  to  him  suffering  from  "social
    phobia" and "forgetfulness" and, indeed, "panic attacks", the latter of
    which is no doubt treated by the  antidepressants.   In  our  judgment,
    this medical evidence (even that obtained  since  the  hearing)  cannot
    form a proper basis for an adjournment in order to obtain a psychiatric
    report in relation to an asserted  consequence  of  his  mental  health
    which is simply not raised in the letters.

21. We also note that this issue was  raised  for  the  first  time  in  Ms
    Grubb's skeleton argument for the hearing before us.  It was not raised
    in the grounds of appeal drafted by Counsel (not Ms Grubb) dated 6 June
    2014.  We are not aware of any explanation as to why the issue  of  the
    appellant's capacity and the need for  a  psychiatric  report  was  not
    raised earlier, in particular since the letter of Dr Yaqub on  24  July
    2014.

22. Applying the overriding objective of dealing with the appeal fairly and
    justly as set out in rule 2 of the 2008 Procedure Rules,  we  exercised
    our discretion at the hearing not to grant an adjournment.

23. We turn now to the issues raised in the grounds.

The Immigration Rules

24. In  his  determination,  Judge  Cresswell  considered  the  appellant's
    private life under para 276ADE of the Rules.   He  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of para 276ADE(iii) as he had
    not been in the UK for at least twenty years.   Further,  he  concluded
    that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  para  276ADE(vi)
    on the basis that he still had ties with Pakistan.

25. The grounds do not challenge those findings.  Rather, it is  argued  in
    the grounds that the judge erred in law by considering the  appellant's
    case under para 276ADE rather than para 276B which was in force until 9
    July 2012.  On the basis of Edgehill, the grounds argue that the  pre-9
    July 2012 Rules applied as the appellant's application was made  before
    that date.  In her rule 24 response dated 10 July 2014,  the  Secretary
    of State appears to accept that the First-tier Tribunal  was  wrong  to
    apply the Rules in force from 9 July 2012.  However,  it  is  submitted
    that the error was immaterial as the appellant could not succeed  under
    the old Rule  in  para  276B  based  upon  fourteen  years'  continuous
    residence.  That was because the notice  of  6  October  2008  (IS151A)
    notifying the appellant that he was liable  to  removal,  'stopped  the
    clock' short of fourteen years.  Mr Richards adopted  the  respondent's
    reply and told us that that notice had been served on the appellant  on
    9 October 2008 at Cheltenham Police Station.  In the light of this,  Ms
    Grubb accepted that she was in difficulties on this ground.

26. We accept the respondent's submissions on this  issue.   Even  if  para
    276ADE was wrongly applied, and the respondent's concession may not  be
    consistent  with  the  Court  of  Appeal's   subsequent   decision   in
    Haleemuddin and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558, the appellant  could
    not succeed under the long residence rule in para 276B in force  before
    9 July 2012.  That rule applied where an individual could establish "at
    least fourteen years' continuous  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom".
    However, para 276B(i)(b) excluded from consideration:

         "Any period spent in the United Kingdom following service of notice
         of liability of removal or notice by way of a decision to remove by
         way of directions under paragraphs 8-10A or 12-14 of Schedule 2  to
         the Immigration Act 1971 or  Section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 1999 or notice of intention to deport  from  the  United
         Kingdom."

27. On 9 October 2008, the appellant was served with notice of liability to
    removal.  That 'stopped  the  clock'  in  relation  to  his  period  of
    "continuous residence in the UK".  Having entered the UK  on  14  March
    1995, by 9 October 2008 the appellant had not been resident, therefore,
    for "at least fourteen years".  He had only been resident for  thirteen
    years and five months.   Consequently,  even  if  Judge  Cresswell  had
    applied para 276B the appellant could not  have  succeeded  under  that
    rule.

28. Ms Grubb did not seek to argue that the judge's decision was  otherwise
    unlawful in dismissing the appeal under Art 8.  The appellant could not
    succeed under the old or new long residence rule.  The evidence of  his
    private life was meagre.  He had been in the UK since March 1999 but he
    did not work and he survived on money from friends.  He had  no  family
    in the UK and owned no property.  His family remained in  Pakistan  and
    he had continuing contact with Pakistan.  As we have said, Ms Grubb did
    not seek to challenge the judge's finding under Art 8  apart  from  her
    third submission that he applied the wrong rule.  We see no  basis  for
    concluding that his decision was other than properly open to him on the
    evidence.

The Appellant's Evidence

29.  Ms  Grubb  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's evidence in the light of the  medical  evidence  concerning
    his mental  health.   She  submitted  that  he  was  an  unrepresented,
    vulnerable witness and relying upon paras 206-212 of the UNHCR Handbook
    and the Joint Presidential Guidance Note on the treatment of vulnerable
    witnesses  where  it  is  stated,  "if  there  is  no   or   inadequate
    representation it is important that you  obtain  clarification  of  all
    matters of which you are unclear" (para 10.2(vii)), Ms Grubb  submitted
    that the judge had erred in law.  She further placed reliance upon  the
    post-decision letter of Dr Yaqub dated 24 July 2014.

30. The judge dealt with the appellant's evidence at paras 21(i)-(viii)  as
    follows:

         21.  I find that  the  material  facts  relevant  to  this  appeal,
             applying the standard of  proof  referred  to  above,  are  as
             follows:

             (i)  Even if I take the  Appellant's  claim  at  his  highest,
                  there are no grounds for believing that  he  would  be  at
                  risk  on  return  to   Pakistan   such   as   to   require
                  international protection.  The hearing was the first  time
                  he had expressed in any detail his fears for a return.   I
                  will deal with his account at its highest, but  note  that
                  there  is  a  substantial  reason  to  believe  that   the
                  Appellant has not given a truthful account.

             (ii) I have recorded that the Appellant told me that he  spent
                  time working in Saudi Arabia before coming to the UK,  but
                  note that he told those presenting him in 2009 that whilst
                  he was in Pakistan he was not in employment and was solely
                  financially dependent on his family there, there being  no
                  mention of the 14 to 15 years in Saudi Arabia he  told  me
                  about in his closing submissions, after hearing Ms Randall
                  say that he spent the majority of his life in Pakistan.

             (iii)    He told those representing him in 2009  that  he  did
                  not know the whereabouts of 1 brother and sister.  He  did
                  not mention a sister or 2 brothers to me, only telling  me
                  that his brother was shot dead whilst speaking to  him  on
                  the telephone in 2007.  He is not likely to forget  detail
                  like that when instructing his solicitor about  the  death
                  of his other brother.  Nor did he, apparently, mention his
                  son or concerns about in-laws to his solicitor.

             (iv) He told his representative in 2009 that his wife was dead
                  and told me she is alive.  He has clearly not been at  all
                  honest about his true circumstances in Pakistan.

             (v)  He told his current solicitors (16 March 2011) that he is
                  fluent in English, but I saw no evidence of that.  He told
                  them that he has become a useful part of  British  society
                  and has a restaurant where he employed 12 people, but told
                  me he had not worked since 2008  and  does  nothing  other
                  than talk to his friends.  Someone is not being  told  the
                  truth.  In 2009, those  representing  him  then  tried  to
                  paint him as  a  man  'reaching  a  delicate  age  of  50'
                  incapable of securing work in Pakistan, yet in  2011  'our
                  client is a hard working man'  running  a  restaurant  and
                  employing 12 staff.

             (vi) He fears his in-laws and  the  general  circumstances  in
                  Pakistan, he told me.

             (vii)    He told me that his own village no longer exists,  so
                  (if true) he could not return to his village in any event.
                   He still speaks fluent Urdu and required the interpreter.
                   He has shown, if his evidence can be  believed,  that  he
                  can work in different  jobs  in  different  places  (Saudi
                  Arabia, London and Bristol) where his own language is  not
                  the norm.  How much better can he fare in his own country,
                  speaking his own language and  with  the  benefit  of  his
                  varied experience?  He is older now than when  he  started
                  his work career, but has many years of working life  ahead
                  of him.  The  medical  note  was  not  suggestive  of  any
                  serious problems likely to  impact  upon  his  ability  to
                  work.

             (viii)   If he does not want to live near his in-laws then, as
                  he himself accepted, Pakistan is a huge country with  many
                  large cities.  There was no evidence before  me  that  the
                  security situation across Pakistan is such that  he  could
                  not safely return and live safely in one of those  cities.
                  He has no assets now in the UK and relies upon the charity
                  of others; he would have available to him to  give  him  a
                  head start on return the possibility of a grant under  the
                  Voluntary Assisted Returns AVRFC programme  under  Choices
                  to help him find accommodation, etc."

31. The judge found the appellant's evidence  to  be  unsatisfactory  in  a
    number of ways, including that  he  gave  inconsistent  accounts  about
    whether his wife was still alive in Pakistan or had died in  2008,  and
    in relation to his family in Pakistan.  However, as the judge stated in
    para 21(i),  he  took  the  appellant's  claim  "at  its  highest"  and
    concluded that he would not be at risk on  return.   His  reasoning  at
    paras 21(vii)-(viii) was that the appellant could safely and reasonably
    internally relocate within Pakistan so that, even if he were at risk in
    his own home area from his in-laws, he could safely and reasonably live
    elsewhere in Pakistan.  That is a finding which is  not  challenged  in
    the grounds. That, in itself, leads us to conclude that the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision should stand.  The judge's conclusion did not  turn
    upon the appellant's evidence.

32. In any event, we do not accept Ms Grubb's  submission  that  the  judge
    failed properly to assess the appellant's evidence in the light of  him
    being unrepresented and the medical  evidence.   At  para  16(iv),  the
    judge set out the evidence before him in Dr Yaqub's letter of  3  April
    2014 which stated that the appellant suffered from  "anxiety  symptoms"
    for which he was receiving treatment together with a number of physical
    conditions including back pain.  At para 19, the judge explicitly noted
    that he had considered that letter.  At para 19 the  judge  also  noted
    that the appellant "gave oral evidence assisted by  me".   We  have  no
    evidence to contradict the latter.  The appellant did  not  attend  the
    hearing before us and no witness statement was submitted.

33. Nothing in the determination or in  the  medical  evidence  before  the
    judge leads us to conclude  that  the  appellant  as  an  unrepresented
    litigant was in any way unable to give his  evidence  and  conduct  the
    proceedings on his  own  behalf.   It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
    discrepancies in the appellant's evidence, for example whether his wife
    had died in 2006 or not, could be attributed to any mental health issue
    raised in Dr Yaqub's letter of 3 April 2014.  The post-decision  letter
    of 24 July 2014 was, of course, not available to  the  judge.   In  any
    event, it goes little further than the earlier letter in describing the
    appellant as having suffered "anxiety and depression for the  last  few
    years" and that his symptoms are "progressively getting worse".  Whilst
    it does refer to the appellant  suffering  from  "forgetfulness",  that
    cannot explain his differing recollection.  His general  mental  health
    is described as "not very stable at the moment"  but  he  is  receiving
    treatment by antidepressants.  Even if this evidence had been available
    to the judge, we reject the submission that the  judge  unfairly  dealt
    with the appellant at the hearing or was not entitled to  rely  on  the
    stark  inconsistencies  in,  and  difficulties  with,  the  appellant's
    evidence identified by the judge.  The judge indicated, and we have  no
    reason to doubt, that he assisted the appellant give his oral  evidence
    (see para 19). Given all the circumstances, and  the  medical  evidence
    such as it was before the judge, we see no unfairness or breach of  any
    applicable guideline in the proceedings.    But,  as  we  have  already
    said, in truth the judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds even if his account were true.

34. Finally, we have already dealt with Ms  Grubb's  additional  submission
    that the evidence supports a finding  that  the  appellant  lacked  the
    capacity to take part in the First-tier Tribunal's proceedings.  It did
    not and still does not.

Decision

35. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds did not  involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law.  That decision stands  and  we  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.





                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

