
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01305/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 June 2016                      |On 26 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     tb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp Counsel instructed by Danielle Cohen
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing on  3  March  2016
    which resulted in my setting  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("the FtT") for error of law.  The error of  law  decision  is
    set out as an Annex to this decision.

 2. To summarise, the appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on [ ] 1980.
     He arrived in the UK on 16 September 2004 with leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor, using a Malawian passport to which he was not entitled.

 3. On 12 October 2010 he was convicted of  offences  of  possession  of  a
    false identity document and a further  offence  of  dishonestly  making
    false representations with a view to gain.  He  received  sentences  of
    twelve months and four  months'  imprisonment  respectively,  making  a
    total of sixteen months' imprisonment.

 4. On 14 January 2015 the respondent made a  decision  to  deport  him  to
    Zimbabwe under the automatic deportation provisions of the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007.  The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss  ("the  FtJ"),  whereby  the
    appeal was allowed with  reference  to  the  (deportation)  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. To summarise further, and in order to put this decision  into  context,
    the basis upon which the appellant resists deportation is in  terms  of
    his relationship with his partner, BA, whom he married  in  an  Islamic
    ceremony in December 2013, and his relationship with her  daughter,  H.
    Both the appellant and BA are HIV positive.  H was born on  [  ]  1999,
    and is therefore now just short of 17 years of age.

 6. I indicated in the error of law decision that the findings of fact made
    by the FtJ are to stand, save insofar as those findings are infected by
    the error of law.  Neither party made  submissions  before  me  at  the
    resumed hearing as to what findings of fact  should  be  preserved  but
    equally there was no dispute between the parties on  that  issue.   The
    preserved findings are as follows:

      i) BA was a person of considerable intellect who was passionate  about
         her faith which had a clear and direct impact  upon  the  decisions
         that she made in  her  life.   She  came  across  as  a  person  of
         sensitivity. There was no  reason  to  believe  that  she  was  not
         sincere in what she said in her evidence.

     ii) The appellant has  family  life  with  his  partner  and  with  his
         partner's daughter, notwithstanding that they were  not  living  in
         the same household.  He speaks  with  his  partner's  daughter,  H,
         regularly and visits for periods of three to four  days,  providing
         "strong emotional support".

    iii) The nature  of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  BA
         appeared to exist  "at  a  religious/spiritual  level",  with  both
         parties being HIV positive, learning to live "in that condition" in
         a manner which is "low key" but  demonstrating  a  high  degree  of
         commitment to each other.

 7. At the resumed hearing, I heard oral evidence from both  the  appellant
    and BA, as set out below.

    The oral evidence

 8. The appellant adopted his original witness statement in examination-in-
    chief. In cross-examination, he accepted that the only  information  he
    gave as to his relationship with H is in that witness statement,  which
    was before the FtT.  Whereas he said in that witness statement that  he
    was getting to know H, now she is more comfortable around him.   A  lot
    of things have changed.  It takes time to make  a  relationship  and  a
    person cannot just come into someone else's life.

 9. He met his partner in 2013, in about October  or  November.   They  met
    through someone else.  As at the date of the  hearing  before  the  FtT
    they had been in a relationship for over two years.  Every time he came
    to London he saw H as well.  As to whether he was only still getting to
    know her after two years, he said that she spent a lot of the  time  in
    her room and on her phone.  She would come out of  her  room  and  then
    return.  He is still getting to  know  her  now,  and  would  not  know
    everything about her.  He comes to see them every two  or  three  weeks
    and stays for four or five days.  He does not have the money to come to
    London all the time.  He receives �40 on his NASS card,  now  his  NASS
    support has stopped.  If he had money he would support them.

10. As to what had changed in his relationship with H, sometimes she  comes
    home late and his partner would phone him to say that it would be  1.30
    am and asking him to find out where she was.  His partner is  not  able
    to talk to her ex-husband.  He would pass a message on to him about  H.
    Sometimes her ex-husband would not answer him when he phoned.

11. He has now started talking to H more and more.  She talks to him as she
    has respect for him.  He plays the role as a sort of mediator.   He  is
    in Birmingham and H is in London so he would not know H's  whereabouts.
    If he were living with them the situation would be different.

12. His partner would ask him to get in touch with her  ex-husband  but  he
    does not answer the phone.  His partner  is  keen  for  H's  biological
    father to know what she is doing because it is within the Islamic Rules
    that ties of kinship should be kept.  He has  a  right  to  know  as  a
    father.

13. H's father lives in London, although he does not know where.   He  came
    to London recently from Nigeria.  He does not have a job at the moment.
     H last saw him perhaps the other month although he is not able to  say
    exactly when.  He came to see them once, maybe about six months ago.

14. He does not live with H and his partner.  He has to  report  every  two
    weeks.

15. He does not know the name of the school that she is studying at or  the
    names  of  any  of  her  teachers.   It  is  true  that   the   primary
    responsibility for H's welfare lies with her mother.  He has  not  made
    any major decisions in her life in the last eight months.

16. In re-examination he said that he had participated in decisions about H
    with his partner.  An example of this is  in  relation  to  her  mobile
    phone, for example if she runs the bill up to �100 or  �200.   If  they
    fall out, or if his partner is a bit  harsh  with  her,  he  tells  his
    partner to be calmer in dealing with her.  In relation to H's  decision
    not to wear the headscarf, he told his partner that she has to make her
    own decision and that he could not force her.

17. There are rules that his partner sets for H in terms of what  time  she
    comes home, and about her homework, as well as keeping  in  touch  with
    her father.  Sometimes she does not want to ring him.  He and H get  on
    in a way and maybe she respects him.  He talks to her about clothes and
    they play basketball together.  They also talk about food.   She  likes
    his traditional Zimbabwean food and he sometimes cooks  for  them  all.
    He does give guidance to H about trying to do well at school and  about
    listening to what her mother tells her.  She listens to what  he  says,
    telling him that she is doing her best.

18. In answer to my questions, he said that H had just finished  her  GCSEs
    this month.  He thinks her last exam was last week or the  other  week.
    As to what subjects she was studying, he said that she  likes  art  and
    sewing and making clothes.  She would do A Levels, although he does not
    know what subjects because he had not asked her.

19. BA appeared at the hearing wearing a full face veil, but said that  she
    was willing to remove it if it aided communication.  She said that  she
    works with children and removes it in that work  in  order  to  improve
    communication.  Since the witness said that she was willing  to  remove
    the face veil  I  asked  that  she  did  so,  but  the  issue  was  not
    contentious and I indicated at the outset that if she did not  want  to
    remove it then she did not have to.  No issues arose in connection with
    this aspect of the hearing.  I did however, direct, pursuant to rule 37
    of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  2008  ("the  2008
    Rules"), that the hearing during her oral evidence  be  closed  to  the
    public.  As it happened, no members of the public were in fact  present
    and none sought to enter the hearing room.

20. BA adopted her witness statement in  examination-in-chief.   In  cross-
    examination she said that H had finished her GCSEs on  Friday  of  last
    week.  She was planning to do A levels,  although  sometimes  she  says
    that she wants to do them and at other times says  that  she  wants  to
    take a year out.  She referred to the schools at which she could do her
    A levels.  She gave evidence about  an  incident  referred  to  by  the
    appellant in evidence when a few months ago her biological  father  had
    come to the house but she did not want to come down to  speak  to  him.
    There was a commotion and she was a little distressed but that  is  not
    unusual  when  she  sees  him.   They  do  not  have  regular  contact.
    Sometimes her biological father says that he would meet  her  and  then
    changes his mind and says that he has something else to do.  She thinks
    he last saw her about seven weeks  ago  or  so.   They  generally  meet
    outside.  Often she calls her and is upset when she meets him.  About a
    year ago she said that she would wear the face veil to please her,  BA,
    but not because of her own beliefs in the Islamic faith.  She then told
    her that she could take it off but she did not tell H's father.   Often
    she has trouble getting out of the house in struggling to put the  veil
    on.  She does it sometimes to please him.  He  says  that  it  is  her,
    BA's, fault that she has taken off the veil.  He uses profane words and
    insults her to H, which upsets her greatly.

21. As to whether it is important  for  H  to  keep  in  contact  with  her
    biological father, that is debatable because of the distress  that  she
    goes through.  She wants her to grow up a decent person  and  sometimes
    she does not think that he should see her.  It would be easier for  her
    not to see him as she is not balanced when he sees her.

22. As to why there is no  updating  statement  from  H  in  terms  of  her
    relationship with the appellant, she did not know that it  was  needed.
    H wrote the first letter without any help from  her.   She  would  have
    been happy to write a letter.  She has her own mind.  She said to  make
    sure she passes on her greetings to the appellant, and  she  said  that
    she would.

    Submissions

23. Mr Kotas relied on the decision letter.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    appellant is not able to bring himself  within  paragraph  399(b)  with
    reference to his partner as the appellant has no status  here  and  the
    relationship was formed when his status was precarious and when he  was
    in the UK unlawfully.

24. It is also the case that he cannot bring himself within paragraph  399A
    because he has not been lawfully resident in the UK.

25. So far as paragraph 399(a) is concerned, and his relationship  with  H,
    it was conceded on behalf of the respondent that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect H to go to Zimbabwe.

26. It was also accepted that the witnesses gave broadly credible evidence,
    but it was submitted that the evidence fell far short  of  establishing
    anything near a parental relationship  between  the  appellant  and  H.
    There was a belated attempt in the most recent witness  statement  from
    BA to plug the gap in the  evidence  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    involvement in H's life.  There was a real silence on this issue in the
    witness statements before the FtT.  All the appellant had said was that
    he is building a good relationship with her, which is also what BA says
    in her witness statement.  There was no evidence of any  role  that  he
    plays in her life.

27. At [6] of the decision of the FtT, the evidence recorded  is  that  the
    appellant said that he was still getting to know H.  That was only some
    eight months ago.  It was hard to see what  evidence  there  was  of  a
    parental role in her life.

28. As regards the oral evidence at the hearing before me, it was submitted
    that that evidence did not disclose that the appellant made  any  major
    decisions in H's life.  The appellant accepted that he was unsure as to
    what she was studying, and did not know what school she went to or  who
    her teachers were.  Anyone who had stepped into the shoes of  a  parent
    would know those sorts of things.  He is  not  financially  responsible
    for her, for obvious reasons, and is not her primary carer.   His  role
    is as a slightly  detached  figure,  like  an  uncle.   He  performs  a
    mediating role and they are still getting to  know  each  other.   Even
    taking into  account  the  context  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and BA, for example in terms of their  HIV  status,  none  of
    that reflects on the relationship that H has with the appellant.

29. I was referred to the decision in  R  (on  the  application  of  RK)  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (s.117B(6);  "parental
    relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC) in terms of the assessment of a
    parental relationship.  It was submitted that H is now almost 17  years
    of age and is far more independent.  She is growing up.  Her biological
    father still has an input in her life.  Although it did seem  from  the
    evidence that there was acrimony between H and her  biological  father,
    and he only sees her on an ad hoc basis, and sometimes says  things  to
    upset her, he still plays a role in her life.

30. Reference was also made to the decisions in KMO (section 117  -  unduly
    harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC), and that of the Court  of  Appeal
    in MM (Uganda) & ANR v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450 in terms of the extent to which it  could  be  said
    that separation between the appellant and H would be unduly harsh.   It
    was submitted that the appellant's criminality had to be borne in mind,
    and that there was no further information  from  H  on  the  effect  of
    separation.  There was no witness statement from her, and all  that  BA
    said in terms of what H had said in relation to the  hearing  was  that
    she sent her greetings to the appellant.  That was not evidence of  any
    deep-seated feelings.  The appellant had been in her life on an ad  hoc
    and intermittent basis.

31. Referring again to the decision  in  MM  (Uganda),  not  only  was  the
    appellant's criminality and the sixteen months' sentence to be borne in
    mind, but also his immigration history.  He had never had lawful status
    in the UK.  The appellant's relationship with H arose after  notice  of
    liability to deportation.  It was submitted that the appellant  is  not
    able to meet the requirements of paragraph 399(a).

32. It was further submitted that over and above the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, there were no compelling circumstances.  The appellant's medical
    condition does not advance his case.  This  was  not  a  case  where  a
    person sought to resist removal in terms of  their  medical  condition.
    It was  a  criminal  deportation  case.   S.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  counts  against  the
    appellant.  He has had NHS treatment and he had no leave when he formed
    any family or private life.  Any interference with  family  or  private
    life was proportionate.

33. In submissions, Mr Fripp pointed out that  the  appellant's  conviction
    was as long ago as 2010.  It involved the use of a passport  to  obtain
    employment as a support worker  for  autistic  children,  at  which  he
    worked conscientiously.

34. It was accepted that the appellant could not rely on paragraphs  399(b)
    (relationship with a partner) or 399A (lawful residence etc.)  for  the
    reasons advanced on behalf of the respondent.  The  relevant  provision
    is paragraph 399(a) and his relationship with  H.   She  is  a  British
    citizen and has lived in the UK all her life.

35. In terms  of  whether  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the appellant and H, that must be assessed in  the
    light of H's age and maturity.  A seventeen  year  old  has  increasing
    autonomy and needs guidance rather than command.

36. As to undue harshness (if she were to remain in the UK without him)  it
    was accepted by the respondent that the evidence was broadly  credible.
    That evidence pointed to the development of a relationship  over  time.
    It was not the case for the appellant that the findings made by the FtJ
    showed a parental relationship, but it  could  not  be  said  that  the
    evidence on this issue was a late creation.  In the appellant's use  of
    the expression of "still getting to know" H, that must be seen as  part
    of a process of learning and catching up where there is a  transfer  of
    custody.  It was entirely realistic of him to express the  relationship
    in that way.

37. Although it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant did not make any major decisions in H's life,  it  was  clear
    from the evidence that H's age was a factor to be taken  into  account,
    as already explained.  Where there is more than  one  parental  figure,
    guidance and support are important.

38. He is not able to provide for the appellant and H  financially  because
    of  his  circumstances.   No  adverse  inference  in   terms   of   the
    relationship could be drawn from that.

39. Although BA is the primary carer for H,  that  does  not  mean  that  a
    person who is not the primary carer has no parental relationship with a
    child.  Mr Fripp also relied on the decision in RK,  in  particular  at
    [45].

40.  It  was  submitted  that  there  was  a  parental  relationship  here,
    construing the phrase according to its ordinary meaning.  The appellant
    has a sustained responsibility for the support and counselling of H.  I
    was referred to the evidence given by both the appellant and BA on this
    issue, as well as the witness statements.  The appellant has  a  formal
    basis to his relationship with H, within  the  family.   Reference  was
    also made to the evidence  in  terms  of  the  extent  of  cohabitation
    between the appellant and BA.  It was submitted that it was relevant to
    take into account that the appellant has contact  with  H's  biological
    father and he is treated as a step-parent.

41. The deportation regime requires a  sentence  of  at  least  one  year's
    imprisonment.  The appellant was sentenced to one year and four months.
     Although  the  offences  should  not  be  minimised,  the  appellant's
    sentence was at the bottom end of the spectrum, which is a factor to be
    taken into account.

42. The fact that it is accepted that it would be unduly harsh for H to  go
    to Zimbabwe is relevant in terms of whether it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for her to remain in the UK, in circumstances where the alternative  is
    untenable.    Removing   the   appellant   would   unsettle   all   the
    relationships,  including  between  H  and  her  mother.   It  is  also
    important to bear in mind the weight  BA  attaches  to  the  duties  of
    marriage.  It is also relevant that Zimbabwe has quite serious problems
    which would affect the appellant and his wife, in terms of  his  access
    to medication.

43. I was referred to the report of Professor Barnett in the  supplementary
    bundle in terms of H's situation should she go to  Zimbabwe.   Equally,
    if BA went with the appellant, or visited,  there  would  be  risks  in
    terms of access to medication.

44. BA has said that she would feel 'split in two' if the appellant had  to
    return.  That would inevitably affect her ability to provide for  H  at
    an important time of her life.  Although it was accepted that having  a
    close relationship between the appellant and H  is  not  sufficient  to
    establish undue harshness under the Rules, on the particular  facts  of
    this case it would be unduly harsh for H to remain in the UK  were  the
    appellant to be deported.

45. In the alternative, the issue under Article  8  is  whether  there  are
    exceptional circumstances, using the expression in the  Rules  as  they
    applied at the date of the decision.  Although the phrase is now  "very
    compelling circumstances", the difference in meaning may  not  be  very
    great, it was submitted.  All the  factors  that  had  previously  been
    advanced are relevant to that assessment.  It was relevant to take into
    account again that the  sentence  was  low  down  in  the  spectrum  of
    sentences relevant to  deportation.   The  appellant  did  not  have  a
    history of criminal offending and there  are  very  compelling  reasons
    that outweigh the public interest when seen in the light of  all  three
    affected individuals.

46. So far as s.117 of the 2002 Act is concerned, the  appellant  would  be
    financially independent if he had a legal basis of stay in the UK.  The
    evidence was that he would wish to support his partner and H.  Although
    s.117B(4) refers to little weight being given to a relationship with  a
    qualifying partner formed when a person is in the UK  unlawfully,  that
    does not say anything about the situation  of  a  relationship  with  a
    child.

    Conclusions

47. Although in my written decision on the error of law I  gave  directions
    to the parties in relation to any further evidence  to  be  relied  on,
    those directions were not complied with on behalf of the appellant.  It
    was initially proposed to call BA to give oral evidence in the  absence
    of  a  witness  statement  from  her.   Accordingly,  I  asked  that  a
    manuscript written statement be provided, which was done,  and  I  have
    taken it into account. A manuscript statement was also taken  from  the
    appellant in which he adopted what was said in BA's statement.

48. After the resumed hearing on 21 June 2016, by letter  dated  15  August
    2016, without permission  or  invitation  to  do  so,  the  appellant's
    solicitors sought to adduce further evidence in the form of a newspaper
    article from the (UK) Guardian  Newspaper,  dated  11  August  2016  in
    relation to health provision in Zimbabwe.  Not only is this attempt  to
    introduce further evidence not the result of any invitation,  agreement
    or direction by  me,  it  is  a  further  example  of  the  appellant's
    solicitors failing to comply with directions, it having been made clear
    in the error of law decision the process by which any proposed  further
    evidence was to be introduced.  Likewise,  the  appellant's  solicitors
    have not complied with rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Rules.

49. Furthermore, although the letter states that if  the  Home  Office  are
    minded to respond to the information a reply in writing is  asked  for,
    there is nothing on the face of the letter to indicate that a  copy  of
    that document was sent to the respondent.

50. Additionally, it is said in the covering letter that the information in
    the newspaper article is "critical" to  the  paragraph  399A  argument.
    However, it was conceded on behalf of the appellant before me that  the
    appellant could not succeed with reference to paragraph 399A.

51. In any event, because of the failure to  comply  with  directions,  the
    failure to comply with rule 15(2A) and the fact that no permission  was
    given for further evidence to be  provided,  I  decline  to  take  this
    evidence into account.  It forms no part of my assessment.

52. It was common ground between the parties that the only basis upon which
    the appellant could succeed under the Immigration Rules in relation  to
    specific categories, as it were, is with reference to his  relationship
    with H, as set out in paragraph 399(a).  That states as follows:

         "399.    This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported...".

53. Within paragraph 398, after setting out the generality  of  those  that
    come within deportation cases, and the sentences of  imprisonment  that
    mean that their deportation is conductive to the public good and in the
    public interest, it states as follows in relation to Article 8 claims:

         "... the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A"

54. At the time the decision to deport this appellant was made, the  phrase
    that  applied  to  that  last  paragraph  of   398   was   "exceptional
    circumstances".  That was  replaced  by  the  phrase  "very  compelling
    circumstances" by HC 532, on  28  July  2014.   The  skeleton  argument
    provided on behalf of the appellant for the renewed hearing before  me,
    quotes the former manifestation of the Rules, as Mr Fripp acknowledged.
     He suggested that the difference in phraseology may not be that great.
     Nevertheless, if that point is reached, it is appropriate to  consider
    the appeal with reference to the phrase "very compelling circumstances"
    as set out in the changed version of the Rules.

55. Although neither party suggested that there was any dispute  about  the
    fact that the new version of the Rules is to apply, the matter it seems
    to me is put beyond doubt following the decision of the Court of Appeal
    in YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
    Civ 1292, in particular at [39].

56. Although I note what the appellant says in his witness statement  dated
    27 May 2015 about having a daughter, J, in respect of whom  he  is  the
    biological father, and who was born on 27 December 2001, there  was  no
    mention of her in the hearings before me, and no argument was  advanced
    in terms of his relationship  with  her,  or  in  terms  of  any  other
    relationship the appellant has had whilst in the UK.

57. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect H to live in  Zimbabwe.   The  question  therefore,  is
    whether it would be unduly harsh for H to remain in the UK without  the
    appellant.

58. However, before getting to that point of assessing 'undue hardship'  it
    is necessary to determine whether  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with H.  I have taken into account the
    further written and oral evidence given before me.

59. In the error of law hearing I considered the evidence that  was  before
    the FtJ in terms of what was  said  about  the  appellant  being  in  a
    parental relationship with H.  I analysed what  I  considered  the  law
    required in that respect.  I also said that I could not  see  that  the
    evidence before the FtJ supported the conclusion that the appellant has
    a "parental relationship" with H, even contextualising the evidence  in
    the way contended for on behalf of the appellant.  It is as  well  then
    to reproduce what I said on that issue in that decision as follows:

         "27. So far as 'parental relationship' is concerned, I accept  that
             paragraph 6 of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to  the
             definition of 'parent' is not determinative.  I agree with the
             analysis in RK on that issue.

         28.  A finding that there is family life between the appellant  and
             H (and the appellant's partner) is not necessarily  equivalent
             to a finding that the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting
             "parental" relationship with  H.   This  is  relevant  to  the
             contention that the issue of family life  was  not  'seriously
             challenged', as said by the FtJ  at  [22].   It  is  the  case
             however, that it was not accepted on behalf of the  respondent
             before the FtT that the appellant has a parental  relationship
             with H, as can be seen from the submissions recorded at [17].

         29.   Whilst  the  situation  in  RK   was   different   from   the
             circumstances of this appellant and his relationship  with  H,
             it does seem to me that what was said in that decision at [42]
             provides useful guidance.  There it was said as follows:

                  'Whether a person is in a 'parental relationship'  with  a
                  child  must,  necessarily,  depend   on   the   individual
                  circumstances.  Those circumstances will include what role
                  they actually play in caring for and making  decisions  in
                  relation to the child.   That  is  likely  to  be  a  most
                  significant factor.  ... What is  important  is  that  the
                  individual can establish that they have taken on the  role
                  that a 'parent' usually plays in the life of their child.'

         30.  I do not emphasise the consideration of the  making  decisions
             in relation to the child, and I accept what Mr Fripp  said  in
             submissions  on  that  issue.   The  circumstances   will   be
             variable.

         31.  However, whilst the evidence before the FtT in this  case  was
             that the appellant provides strong emotional support for H, it
             seems to me to be clear that the relationship that he has with
             her, at least  on  the  evidence  before  the  FtT,  is  as  a
             'favourite uncle'.  That was indeed the precise phrase used by
             the FtJ.  In evidence the appellant's partner said that in her
             letters she refers to the appellant as a "stepfather" but "she
             had the same relationship of affection that she has  with  her
             uncles".  The appellant's partner herself made the distinction
             between a stepfather and an uncle.  The appellant is  recorded
             at [6] as having said that he provides  support  to  H  of  an
             emotional nature but cannot do more because H and  her  mother
             live in London, whereas he lives in Birmingham.  They maintain
             contact by phone and when he goes to London he stays for three
             or four days, going on to state that he is  "getting  to  know
             her".

         32.  Although on behalf of the appellant it was sought to interpret
             the FtJ's conclusions in the context of the poor  relationship
             that H has with her natural father and the  good  relationship
             that she has with her uncles, that, it seems to me, is to 're-
             mould' or  're-fashion'  the  FtJ's  decision  to  create  the
             reasons which are lacking in the decision itself.

         33.  I cannot see that the evidence before the  FtJ  supported  the
             conclusion that the appellant has  a  "parental  relationship"
             with H, even contextualising the evidence in the way contended
             for on behalf of the appellant."

60. It  seems  to  me  that  the  evidence  in  terms  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with H has not advanced significantly beyond the  evidence
    that was before the FtT in October 2015.   There  is  perhaps  slightly
    more depth to the evidence in terms of the manuscript witness statement
    dated 21 June 2016 from BA (adopted also by  the  appellant),  and  the
    oral evidence.   The issue is not in terms of credibility but in  terms
    of what the evidence amounts to.  I accept that  the  appellant  and  H
    have an understanding between them, and that to some extent he provides
    guidance to her and mediates between her, her mother and her father.  I
    said in the error of law decision at [30] that I do not  emphasise  the
    consideration of the making of  decisions  in  relation  to  H  by  the
    appellant.  However, that is not to say that this is not a matter to be
    taken into account.  It is a factor.  The evidence before me  was  that
    the appellant has taken no major decisions in H's life, a  matter  that
    was accepted in evidence.  He was unsure what she was studying, did not
    know what school she went to and did not know any of the teachers.   As
    Mr Kotas submitted, those are the sorts of things that a  person  would
    know if they had 'stepped into the shoes' of a parent.  The  fact  that
    her mother is the primary carer is not determinative but again it is  a
    factor that must be considered.  That does not mean that the  appellant
    is 'remote' from H and has no relationship with her, but  the  role  he
    plays in her life, mediating between her, her mother and her biological
    father, and the time they spend together and the discussions they have,
    do not on the facts of this appeal establish that he has a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with her.

61. That conclusion is sufficient to dispose of the appeal  with  reference
    to paragraph 399(a).  There is no need therefore, to  consider  whether
    it would be unduly harsh for her  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant. However, for completeness I do consider that issue.

62. Therefore, if I am wrong and the appellant  does  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with H, I would not have been satisfied that it
    would be unduly  harsh  for  her  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant.  The issue of 'undue harshness' requires regard to be had to
    all  the  circumstances,  including  the  appellant's  immigration  and
    criminal history, as confirmed by the decision in MM (Uganda) at  [26].
    The Court of Appeal decided that MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh")  [2015]
    UKUT 435 (IAC) was wrongly decided on that point.

63. It is significant that both the appellant and BA are HIV positive,  and
    that is an important context within which to  make  the  assessment  of
    undue hardship, in particular in terms of BA's religious  and  personal
    views about only being able to commit herself to someone who, like her,
    is HIV positive.  I note what BA said in evidence  before  the  FtT  in
    terms of what would happen if the appellant was  removed  to  Zimbabwe.
    The FtJ noted, at [13] that she became emotional, in stating  that  she
    would be separated from the appellant, but that she could not live with
    the separation.  She went on to say that H could not live in  Zimbabwe,
    and that she had friends and family in the UK  (presumably  meaning  BA
    does, although no doubt this applies to H as well).

64. Mr Fripp sought to emphasise in submissions the effect that  separation
    from BA would have on H herself  in  terms  of  BA's  response  to  the
    separation and the need for the stability that the appellant brings  to
    their family.  It is also the case that inevitably, with the  appellant
    in Zimbabwe; he would not be able to have the face-to-face contact with
    H that both of them are used to and the mediating role that he plays in
    the family would not continue, at least not to the same  extent  or  in
    the same depth, because of the separation.  H's age  is  a  significant
    factor to be taken into account in the assessment, going  with  it  the
    stage of her education and development.

65. The difficulty that the appellant would encounter in Zimbabwe in  terms
    of accessing medication for his HIV is also  a  significant  factor  in
    terms of BA's and H's  response  to  the  difficulties  that  he  would
    encounter.  I have taken into account the report of  Professor  Barnett
    on this issue and I accept  that  there  would  be  such  difficulties.
    Although not canvassed in evidence before me, there  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that BA would not be able to provide at  least  some  financial
    support to  the  appellant  on  his  return  to  Zimbabwe  such  as  to
    ameliorate the difficulties of obtaining antiretroviral drugs,  insofar
    as the availability of finance can ameliorate the difficulty.   I  bear
    in mind in that context that BA is in employment.  But  my  conclusions
    on 'undue harshness' do not depend on any finding about the  extent  to
    which the appellant could receive financial support from BA.

66. It was not suggested that BA would go to Zimbabwe with  the  appellant,
    and indeed the evidence was to the opposite effect, with BA having said
    in evidence before the FtT that they would be separated.   There  would
    not therefore, be the indirect effect  on  H  of  separation  from  the
    appellant by reason of her mother's absence were her mother  to  go  to
    Zimbabwe to be with the appellant.  That case was not argued on  behalf
    of the appellant before me.

67. I accept that for H, not only in a direct sense but indirectly  because
    of the effect on her mother, the appellant's removal to Zimbabwe  would
    be difficult for her emotionally. I have taken into account what H says
    in her letter dated 19 June 2015.  I accept that she  would  miss  such
    guidance and support as he  provides.   However,  the  matter  must  be
    looked at in context.  The appellant arrived in  the  UK  in  September
    2004 with leave to enter as a visitor using a passport to which he  was
    not entitled.  His presence in the UK has always been unlawful.  He has
    been convicted of  offences  which  have  attracted  a  sentence  which
    Parliament has provided must result  in  deportation,  subject  to  the
    operation  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  appellant  is  not   H's
    biological father.  Indeed, even if he were her biological father,  the
    case for deportation and the assessment of undue hardship would not, in
    my judgement, have resulted in a decision in his  favour.   Still  less
    can it be the case that undue harshness is established in circumstances
    where he is not H's biological father and in  circumstances  where  the
    appellant has only been in H's life since 2013.

68. Therefore, even if it could be said, contrary to my  conclusions,  that
    the appellant does have a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    with H, I would not have found that it would be unduly harsh for her to
    remain in the UK without the appellant.

69. It is established that in deportation cases the Article 8 Rules  are  a
    'complete code'.  Thus, the question arises as  to  whether  under  the
    Rules, in circumstances where neither paragraph  399  nor  399A  apply,
    there  are  "very  compelling  circumstances"  over  and  above   those
    paragraphs.  I have taken  into  account  all  the  factors  previously
    considered.  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  nothing  beyond  those
    considerations  which  indicate  the  very   compelling   circumstances
    necessary to outweigh the public interest in deportation.  I have taken
    into account s.117B-C of the 2002 Act, but nothing in those  provisions
    avails the appellant in a positive sense.  His  private  life  and  his
    relationship with BA is to attract  little  weight  because  both  were
    established when he was in the UK unlawfully.  His relationship with  H
    is not a parental relationship.  It is part of his  private  life.   He
    could obtain treatment for his HIV in  Zimbabwe,  albeit  to  a  lesser
    standard, than in the UK.

70. In conclusion therefore, I am not satisfied that the appellant is  able
    to establish that he  meets  any  of  the  requirements  of  the  Rules
    relevant to deportation and accordingly the appeal must be dismissed.

    Decision

71. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision, dismissing the appeal under Article 8.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family, which for the  purposes
of the anonymity order includes  the  other  persons  referred  to  in  this
decision.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            26/08/16
                                  APPENDIX

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 16 September 1980.   He
    arrived in the UK on 16  September  2004  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor, using a Malawian passport to which he was not entitled.

 3. On 12 October 2010 he was convicted of  offences  of  possession  of  a
    false identity document and a further  offence  of  dishonestly  making
    false representations with a view to gain.  He  received  sentences  of
    twelve months and four  months'  imprisonment  respectively,  making  a
    total of sixteen months' imprisonment.

 4. On 14 January 2015 the respondent made a  decision  to  deport  him  to
    Zimbabwe under the automatic deportation provisions of the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007.  The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss  ("the  FtJ"),  whereby  the
    appeal was allowed with  reference  to  the  (deportation)  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. The respondent's grounds contend that  the  FtJ  failed  adequately  to
    explain why the effect of the appellant's removal on his partner  would
    be unduly harsh.  The same complaint is made in relation to  separation
    between the appellant and his partner's daughter.

 6. Furthermore, it is argued that the FtJ failed to give adequate  reasons
    for his conclusion that there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between him and his partner's child, given that he is  not
    the biological father and the evidence was that the child is  still  in
    contact with her father.   In  addition,  the  evidence  was  that  the
    appellant does not live with the child, or indeed his partner, and that
    he is  more  like  one  of  the  child's  favourite  uncles.   That  is
    inconsistent, it is said, with the finding of a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The FtJ heard evidence from the appellant and his partner, Ms  BA.   He
    found that  the  appellant's  partner  was  a  person  of  considerable
    intellect who was passionate about her faith  which  had  a  clear  and
    direct impact upon the decisions that she made in her life.   He  found
    that she came across as a person of sensitivity, stating that he had no
    reason to believe that she was not sincere in  what  she  said  in  her
    evidence.

 8. He found at [22] that the appellant has family life  with  his  partner
    and his partner's daughter,  H,  notwithstanding  that  they  were  not
    living in the same household.  He accepted that the appellant  had  not
    been able to live with them but that he speaks  with  H  regularly  and
    visits for periods of three to four days, providing  "strong  emotional
    support".

 9. At [23] he concluded that the nature of the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his partner appeared to exist "at  a  religious/spiritual
    level", with both parties being HIV positive, learning to live "in that
    condition" in a manner which is "low  key"  but  demonstrating  a  high
    degree of commitment to each other.

10. In the same  paragraph  he  concluded  that  paragraph  399(a)  applies
    because  the  appellant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with H.  He further concluded  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for H to live in another country such as Zimbabwe, or  to  remain
    in the UK without the appellant "with whom she has grown to like  in  a
    manner that she has with her favourite uncles".

11. At [27] the conclusion was that there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the appellant and his partner "and his  stepchild"
    such that the effect of the deportation on both would be unduly  harsh.



    Submissions

12. Mr Kotas relied on the grounds of appeal.  It was  submitted  that  the
    reasoning in terms of 'undue harshness' and in terms of  whether  there
    is a parental relationship between the appellant and H are  inadequate.
    It appeared from the FtJ's decision that the support  provided  by  the
    appellant is emotional in nature and no more.  He is described  by  the
    appellant's partner as like a favourite uncle to H.

13. It was nevertheless conceded that it would be unduly harsh to expect  H
    to return to Zimbabwe with the appellant.

14. In terms of the relationship between the appellant and H however, I was
    referred to the decision in R (on the application of RK) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (s.117B(6); "parental relationship")  IJR
    [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC), in particular at [42] in terms of the  role  that
    the appellant plays in the child's life, and what decisions he makes in
    respect of her.  There was no evidence before the FtT of what decisions
    the appellant makes in H's life.

15. It is not explained in the FtJ's decision how it would be unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to be separated from H in circumstances where he  had
    only quite recently come into her life.  Furthermore,  H  still  has  a
    relationship with her father.

16. Mr Fripp submitted that the FtJ's findings in terms of the  appellant's
    relationship with H had to be seen in the context  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with his wife, as found by the FtJ.  It was submitted that
    the appeal was advanced on "almost unique" facts, taking  into  account
    the circumstances in which the appellant and his partner  'found'  each
    other.  Both of them have HIV and she was advised that she  could  only
    marry someone who also had HIV.

17. The report of Professor Tony Barnett is central to the findings of  the
    FtT.  The appellant and his partner may be able to  get  treatment  for
    HIV but there would be the risk of an interruption to  that  treatment.
    Professor Barnett took the view that it would be highly adverse  for  H
    to go to Zimbabwe.  I was referred  to  various  aspects  of  Professor
    Barnett's report.

18. It was submitted that the FtJ had heard evidence from the appellant and
    his partner, being particularly struck by the evidence of  his  partner
    as is clear from [8] of the decision.   The  relationship  between  the
    appellant and H, as  explained  in  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    partner set out at [15], was not in terms of  H  identifying  with  the
    appellant  more  like  an  uncle,  but  in  terms  of   the   difficult
    relationship with her father.  It is also to be noted  Mr  Fripp  said,
    that the family life that the appellant has with his partner and H  had
    not been seriously challenged, as indicated in [22].

19. As regards any suggested inconsistency in [23] in terms of whether  the
    appellant has a parental relationship with H  or  a  relationship  more
    like a favourite uncle, again, the relationship between  the  appellant
    and H had to be seen in context as previously explained.

20. So far as the decision in RK is concerned, what was said there in terms
    of the assessment of a parental relationship  does  not  establish  any
    sort  of  test.   For  example,  in  some  circumstances  it  would  be
    understandable  that  important  decisions  would  be  taken   by   the
    biological parent rather than the  partner  of  the  biological  parent
    where the 'step-parent' had been part of the family unit  for  a  short
    period of time.

21. So far as concerns the  respondent's  reliance  on  the  definition  of
    'parent' in paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules, that is  plainly  not
    determinative, as is clear from [40] of RK.  I was also referred to the
    Immigration Directorate's Instructions ("IDI's") at Chapter 13  of  the
    Criminality Guidance in Article 8 ECHR  Cases,  paragraph  3.3.2  which
    sets out a non-exhaustive list of relevant  factors  to  consider  when
    assessing whether a foreign  criminal  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a child.  That plainly goes well beyond  the
    definition of 'parent' in the Rules.

22. His partner had explained the effect of separation from  the  appellant
    (see  [13]).   That  evidence  is  also  consistent  with   the   FtJ's
    conclusions at [23] about separation of  the  appellant  from  H.   The
    FtJ's survey of the evidence and  his  overall  thinking  informed  the
    assessment of the effect on the appellant's partner  of  the  appellant
    being returned to Zimbabwe and the indirect effect on H of  her  mother
    being faced with that terrible choice.

23. In reply, Mr Kotas submitted that it was not argued that  the  findings
    of the FtJ were perverse, but that there was a lack of findings  and  a
    lack of reasoning.  The FtJ does not offer any conclusions on  what  is
    advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  as  being  the  very  nuanced
    circumstances.

24. As to whether there was any challenge to the evidence of  family  life,
    it is clear from [17] that it was argued in submissions  on  behalf  of
    the respondent before the FtJ that there was a question as  to  whether
    the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  H   was   a   parental
    relationship within paragraph 399(a).

25. Furthermore, far from the IDI's weakening the respondent's  case,  they
    actually strengthen  it  when  one  considers  the  number  of  factors
    referred to in the IDI's.

    My assessment

26. The respondent's arguments boil down essentially  to  two  contentions.
    The first is in relation to the FtJ's conclusion that the appellant has
    a parental relationship with H, and the second concerns the  conclusion
    that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to be separated from H.



27. So far as 'parental relationship' is concerned, I accept that paragraph
    6 of the Immigration Rules in relation to the definition of 'parent' is
    not determinative.  I agree with the analysis in RK on that issue.

28. A finding that there is family life between the appellant  and  H  (and
    the appellant's partner) is not necessarily  equivalent  to  a  finding
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting "parental" relationship
    with H.  This is relevant to the contention that the  issue  of  family
    life was not 'seriously challenged', as said by the FtJ at [22].  It is
    the case however, that it was not accepted on behalf of the  respondent
    before the FtT that the appellant has a parental relationship  with  H,
    as can be seen from the submissions recorded at [17].

29. Whilst the situation in RK was different from the circumstances of this
    appellant and his relationship with H, it does seem to me that what was
    said in that decision at [42] provides useful guidance.  There  it  was
    said as follows:

         "Whether a person is in a  'parental  relationship'  with  a  child
         must, necessarily, depend on the individual  circumstances.   Those
         circumstances will include what role they actually play  in  caring
         for and making decisions in relation to the child.  That is  likely
         to be a most significant factor.  ... What is important is that the
         individual can establish that they have taken on the  role  that  a
         'parent' usually plays in the life of their child."

30. I do not  emphasise  the  consideration  of  the  making  decisions  in
    relation to the child, and I accept what Mr Fripp said  in  submissions
    on that issue.  The circumstances will be variable.

31. However, whilst the evidence before the FtT in this case was  that  the
    appellant provides strong emotional support for H, it seems to me to be
    clear that the relationship that he has  with  her,  at  least  on  the
    evidence before the FtT, is as a 'favourite uncle'.   That  was  indeed
    the precise phrase used  by  the  FtJ.   In  evidence  the  appellant's
    partner said that in her letters she  refers  to  the  appellant  as  a
    "stepfather" but "she had the same relationship of affection  that  she
    has with  her  uncles".   The  appellant's  partner  herself  made  the
    distinction between a  stepfather  and  an  uncle.   The  appellant  is
    recorded at [6] as having said that he provides  support  to  H  of  an
    emotional nature but cannot do more because H and her  mother  live  in
    London, whereas he lives in Birmingham.  They maintain contact by phone
    and when he goes to London he stays for three or four days, going on to
    state that he is "getting to know her".

32. Although on behalf of the appellant it  was  sought  to  interpret  the
    FtJ's conclusions in the context of the poor relationship  that  H  has
    with her natural father and the good relationship that she has with her
    uncles, that, it seems to me, is  to  're-mould'  or  're-fashion'  the
    FtJ's decision to create the reasons which are lacking in the  decision
    itself.

33. I cannot see that the evidence before the FtJ supported the  conclusion
    that  the  appellant  has  a  "parental  relationship"  with  H,   even
    contextualising the evidence in the way contended for on behalf of  the
    appellant.

34. Furthermore, I also take the view that the FtJ's  conclusions  on  this
    issue are inconsistent.  At [23] it was said that the appellant  has  a
    "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with H "her  stepfather,
    with whom she has grown to like in a  manner  that  she  has  with  her
    favourite uncles".  Even when seen in the context of  the  decision  of
    the FtJ  as  a  whole,  the  FtJ's  conclusions  in  this  respect  are
    inconsistent.

35. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the appellant has a parental relationship with H.  That
    error of law in itself is sufficient to mean that the  decision  should
    be set aside, because it is the foundation upon which the FtJ concluded
    that the appellant met the requirements of the Rules.  It is only where
    there is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship that the  Rules
    also require consideration of 'undue harshness'.

36. In any event, I am similarly satisfied that the FtJ erred in law in his
    assessment of whether it would be unduly harsh for H to remain  in  the
    UK without the appellant.  It was conceded on behalf of the  respondent
    that it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  her  to  go  to  Zimbabwe.
    However, aside from the conclusion that the appellant has  family  life
    with H and provides her with strong emotional support, the FtJ does not
    explain the basis of the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for H
    to live in the UK without the appellant.  Having a  close  relationship
    is manifestly under the Rules not sufficient.

37. It does seem to me that if the FtJ's conclusion that it would be unduly
    harsh for the appellant's  partner  to  live  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant is sustainable, any error of law in relation to H  would  not
    be material.  The appellant would succeed under the Rules  in  relation
    to his partner.

38. However, again, under  the  Rules,  having  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a partner is not by itself  sufficient.   It  can  be
    assumed that such a (genuine and subsisting) relationship  is  a  close
    one, as it is in this case.  It may  be  that  with  reference  to  the
    evidence, the FtJ could have articulated  reasons  for  the  conclusion
    that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner to remain  in
    the UK without him, but those reasons are not evident.  Similarly,  the
    conclusion that there is a "high degree of commitment" between them  is
    inherent in the Rules  in  terms  of  their  being  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  It is not explained in the decision  what  is
    the undue harshness inherent in the separation, even accepting that the
    appellant is HIV positive, and the circumstances  in  which  they  came
    together as a couple. The appellant's adverse  immigration  history  is
    also part of those circumstances.

39. Accordingly, I am also satisfied that the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in  his
    conclusions in relation to it being unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's
    partner and H to remain in the UK apart from the appellant.

40. Thus, I set aside the decision of the FtT.  The decision will  have  to
    be re-made.  I canvassed with the parties their views as  to  what  the
    appropriate course of action should be if I decided to  set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT.  Mr Kotas  expressed  the  view  that  the  matter
    should be remitted to the FtT.  Mr  Fripp  suggested  that  if  it  was
    remitted to the FtT, certain findings of fact should be preserved.

41. Having reflected on the appropriate course, I am satisfied that the re-
    making of the decision should take place in the Upper Tribunal,  having
    regard to the Practice Statement at 7.2.  A number of findings of  fact
    were made by the FtT and those findings of fact, save  insofar  as  any
    are infected by the error of law, are to stand.  The nature and  extent
    of the fact-finding exercise is not such as to warrant the appeal being
    remitted to the FtT.

42. The parties are to note the  directions  below,  in  particular  number
    (iv).

    DIRECTIONS

    (i)  At the resumed hearing the parties must be in a position  to  make
         submissions as to what findings of fact are to be preserved.

      i) There would not appear to be the need for any further oral evidence
         to be given.  If either party seeks  to  adduce  further  evidence,
         that party must comply with rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

     ii) Any further evidence to be relied on is to be filed and  served  no
         later than 14 days before the next date of hearing.

    iii) In respect of any witness it is  proposed  to  call  to  give  oral
         evidence, there must be a witness  statement  drawn  in  sufficient
         detail to stand as evidence-in-chief, such that there  is  no  need
         for any examination-in-chief beyond the  adopting  of  the  witness
         statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

In order to protect the anonymity of the appellant's partner and her  child,
unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his or his partner's family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            31/03/16
