
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01432/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                     N P
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka who is  now  28  years  of  age,
brings this appeal against a decision by  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge
Ford sent on 15 October 2015 dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
rights grounds.  The judge did not  find  credible  his  account  of  having
suffered ill treatment at the  hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan  security  forces
during a visit back to Sri Lanka in 2012 whilst pursuing studies in the  UK.
The judge did accept, however, that  he  may  have  been  kidnapped  by  the
Kuruna group when he had lived in Sri Lanka earlier, when aged 17.

2.   The grounds  of  appeal  were  short  even  if  not  succinct.  It  was
submitted that the FtT had erred in law by: failing to engage with the  fact
that the CG case of GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka)  CG  (Rev  1)
[2013]  UKUT  319  (IAC)  (5  July  2013)   demonstrates   that   there   is
insufficient psychiatric treatment  for  the  appellant  in  Sri  Lanka;  by
failing to find that the appellant had sustained his poor mental  health  as
a result of being ill-treated in Sri  Lanka;  by  failing  to  consider  the
medical report of Dr Lingam as clinically corroborative of  the  appellant's
scars having been caused in the manner claimed; and finally  in  misapplying
the burden of proof by requiring documentary evidence as  to  the  existence
of the Grama Niladhari before accepting the probative value of the  extracts
from the diary and the day book of the Grama Niladhari.

3.   I am grateful to the submissions made by both representatives.

4.   I am not persuaded that the grounds disclose a material error of law.

5.   First of all, it is clear that in GJ the Tribunal's findings at  [441]-
[456], did not amount to a finding that  mental  health  facilities  in  Sri
Lanka were unavailable to returnees generally and that its specific  finding
as to risk on return in the case of GJ were based in part on  "the  severity
of  this  appellant's  mental  illness"  ([456]).  Its  findings  in   these
paragraphs did not form part of the country guidance in any event. For  this
ground to have any purchase in the appellant's case would require it  to  be
shown that there was an error of law in  the  judge's  assessment  that  the
appellant's mental health difficulties were not severe. At  [34]  the  judge
found that the appellant was not at risk of suicide  and  that  at  most  he
suffered from anxiety and depression ([83]) and there  has  been  no  viable
challenge to those findings.

6.   I turn to consider the challenge  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
medical evidence insofar as it went to the issue of  whether  the  appellant
had suffered ill treatment as claimed. I am not  persuaded  that  the  judge
failed  to  give  proper  consideration   or   weight   to   the   "clinical
corroborative value" of the medical  evidence  from  Dr  Lingam.  The  judge
devoted considerable passages in his determination to the  medical  evidence
including the report from Dr Lingam dated 21 April  2015  and  a  subsequent
note. The appellant had claimed to Dr Lingam that in July 2012 he  had  been
beaten and dragged into a jeep by the neck and slapped,  beaten  and  kicked
by Sri Lankan security forces and he considered  that  he  was  burnt.   His
neck has already been injured from a fall and possible  whiplash  injury  in
the UK in April/May 2012. The judge  identified  a  number  of  difficulties
with Dr Lingam's evidence. First, Dr Lingam inappropriately mixed  reference
to the appellant's injuries  being  "consistent"  with  reference  to  their
being "highly consistent" with the appellant's account.  Second  the  doctor
appeared to have accepted without  question  that  the  appellant  had  been
diagnosed with PTSD, even though there was no  reliable  diagnosis  to  that
effect and there was no evidence he ever saw a PTSD report.  Third  although
Dr Lingam said the appellant had three scars  typical  of  scars  from  burn
injury, the diagram did not show any scarring to  one  of  the  three  areas
specified by Dr Lingam (the right  scapular  area)  and  the  appellant  had
never claimed to have such a scar in  that  area.  Although  Dr  Lingam  had
subsequently said the reference to a scar on the right scapular area was  an
error and that the appellant did not have such a scar, the judge  considered
that this original error was of considerable concern. He  observed  that  Dr
Lingam's  measurements  of  Scar  2  were  also  not  consistent  with   the
photograph in the file. He noted that the appellant  in  his  SEF  interview
when asked about what injuries he had suffered in  detention  in  Sri  Lanka
made no mention of any burn injuries, even though he had been to  a  private
doctor in Sri Lanka before returning to the UK. He noted that the  appellant
had not produced a report identifying any  burn  injuries  from  either  the
private doctors in Sri Lanka or the Accident and  Emergency  doctor  he  had
seen whilst in detention after return from Sri Lanka. Fourth, Dr Lingam  had
said the injuries he had observed were "old" but did not state how  old  and
as a result, in the judge's  view,  "...  if  that  is  the  case  then  his
injuries may date back to the time when the Appellant  was  in  an  accident
and suffered whiplash or even earlier when the appellant  was  kidnapped  by
the Kuruna group".

7.   I consider that these reasons  given  by  the  judge  for  finding  the
report of Dr Lingam unsatisfactory were sound and entirely within the  range
of reasonable responses. The report showed a lack of regard for the  rigours
of the Istanbul Protocol hierarchy of causation, a failure to  consider  the
relevance of the fact that the appellant himself in  his  SEF  had  made  no
mention of burn injuries or of his  private  doctors  in  Sri  Lanka  or  UK
Accident and Emergency observing any burn injuries, an inaccurate  treatment
of the evidence of scars and a failure to consider causation  in  the  light
of the state of medical knowledge regarding the dating of scarring:  see  KV
(scarring - medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC) (23 May 2014 whose  head
note included the proposition that:

    "Whilst the medical literature  continues  to  consider  that  scarring
    cannot be dated beyond 6 months from when it was  inflicted,  there  is
    some medical basis for considering in  relation  to  certain  types  of
    cases that its age can be determined up to 2 years."

8.   In the appellant's case, even on his own account  his  scars  had  been
inflicted over two and half years before he was examined by Dr Lingam.

In relation to the contention that the judge erred in his assessment of  the
copy extracts from the diary and daybook of the Grama Niladhari to whom  the
appellant's father  was  said  to  have  complained  about  the  appellant's
detention (and also later a search of his own house in February 2015  by  an
unknown armed group), it is clear that the judge  considered  this  evidence
in the  context  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  that  notwithstanding
"authentication" dated 7 August 2015 from a Sri Lankan Attorney  a  Law,  he
identified specific difficulties  with  it,  including  the  fact  that  the
complaint came from an entirely different division, namely Kalmunai and  the
implausibility that such a record would record that the father  had  paid  a
bribe. There was no reversal of the burden of proof or an undue reliance  on
fuller corroboration.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the appellant's  appeal  must
stand.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
