

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01861/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 1st October 2014                           |On 9th October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         P B                Claimant

 Anonymity order made
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Ms H. Short (Counsel instructed by Wilson & co
solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.  This matter comes before me for consideration as to  whether  or  not
      there is a material error of law in the determination  promulgated  on
      23rd July 2014 by the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  CJE  Nicholls)  in
      which he allowed the appeal under  Article  3  ECHR  and  humanitarian
      protection grounds.


   2.  For the purposes of this appeal I shall refer to the appellant as the
      Secretary of State and to the claimant, who is the respondent in these
      proceedings.


   3. The claimant is a citizen  of  Mongolia  and  her  date  of  birth  is
      10.3.1965. She has a son who resides in Mongolia.

Background

   4. The appellant entered the UK  using  her  Mongolian  passport  on  3rd
      August 2006 for business purposes with a 6 month visa.  The  appellant
      made an application for asylum on 13th May 2013 on  the  grounds  that
      she faced a real risk of persecution from relatives  of  her  deceased
      husband who had seriously abused her during  their  marriage  and  she
      remained at risk on return from his  relatives.  Her  application  was
      refused and certified as unfounded on 11.6.2013 and a decision made to
      detain and removal directions  issued.  Further  representations  were
      made  by  her  solicitors.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was
      judicially reviewed.  The claimant produced a referral letter from the
      Helen Bamber Foundation. Permission was granted for judicial review at
      an oral hearing.


Reasons for refusal
   5. In a letter dated 13.3.2014 it was accepted that the  claimant  was  a
      national from Mongolia. The asylum claim was rejected on  the  grounds
      that there was no Convention reason; the claimant  did  not  establish
      that she was a member of a particular social group (PSG). The evidence
      from the Helen Bamber  Foundation  was  regarded  as  inconclusive  as
      evidence of the claimant having suffered  domestic  violence.  It  was
      considered that there were credibility issues under Section 8  Asylum&
      Immigration (treatment of claimants etc) Act 2004.


   Determination
   6. The Tribunal found  the  claimant  to  be  credible  as  to  suffering
      domestic violence from her former husband and the risks she faced from
      his relatives in Mongolia.  The asylum claim was dismissed because the
      Tribunal found that the claimant was not  a  member  of  a  PSG.   The
      Tribunal reached the conclusion  that  there  was  no  sufficiency  of
      protection  available  to  the  claimant.    Further   that   internal
      relocation was not a viable alternative.  At [29] the  Tribunal  found
      as follows :
         " I accept that there is only one place in Mongolia where she could
         work at her chosen career for which she is fully qualified and that
         location would mean that she  was  easily  identified,  making  her
         liable to the unlawful conduct that she previously suffered.  There
         is no realistic or reasonable internal relocation option that would
         ensure that the appellant did to come to adverse attention  of  her
         ex- husband's family."

   7. The Tribunal went on to consider sufficiency of protection  from  [30]
      and found that there was no sufficiency  of  protection   for  her  to
      ensure that she did not become the victim of serious  violence,  which
      might belief threatening, at the hands of her ex husband's family.
   8.  The Tribunal concluded that there was no protection available and  no
      reasonable relocation [31] .


   Grounds of appeal

   9. The Secretary of State asserted that the Tribunal  erred  in  law  for
      reaching a conclusion on internal relocation solely  because  she  was
      able to pursue her chosen career as a vet in only one  location  where
      she  would  be  easily  identified.  The  claimant  could  seek  other
      employment and thus  avoid  ill  treatment.   The  claimant  willingly
      undertook cleaning work in the UK.


 Permission to appeal


  10. Permission was grated by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pirotta  on  the
      grounds that it was arguable that relocation could not be founded on a
      choice to follow a certain profession for which  employment  was  only
      available in one location in Mongolia.


Hearing re error of law
Submisssions

  11.  Mr  Deller  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  amplified  his
      submissions.  He relied on the general principles in Januzi.  It could
      not be realistic nor reasonable for the  claimant  to  argue  internal
      relocation on the grounds that she was unable to work  elsewhere.   It
      was not  inherently  unreasonable  to  expect  that  she  should  move
      elsewhere in order to be safe.  Vocation was not a  characteristic  to
      be protected.


  12.  Ms  Short  relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  from  the  First-tier
      proceedings.   She  submitted  that   the   wording   "reasonableness"
      appearing in the Qualification Directive was correctly applied by  the
      Tribunal.  The Secretary of State had identified one paragraph of  the
      determination in isolation where it should properly be considered as a
      totality. She referred to specific findings made in the determination,
      which she argued showed that the decision was reached by  looking  all
      factors relevant to safety and reasonableness as per Sedley LJ [17] in
      Jasim v SSHD[2006] EWCA Civ 342.  The decision was sustainable on  the
      facts and in the context that the threats  made  were  individual  and
      seeking revenge.

  13. Mr Deller responded that the claimant's chosen career  may  well  have
      been unwittingly become the central focus for the determination and in
      effect  contaminated  the  Tribunal's  consideration.   The   Tribunal
      clearly gave the issue significant  weight.   Mr  Deller  acknowledged
      that internal relocation must encompass both safety and reasonableness
      and the determination when read as a whole made findings as to safety.

Discussion and conclusion

  14. I have decided  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
      determination.  The findings and conclusion reached in  this  thorough
      and considered decision are sustainable on the evidence. There was  no
      challenge to the findings as to sufficiency of protection in Mongolia,
      nor the risk of ill treatment from non State agents.  It  is  internal
      relocation that is in issue.


  15. I am satisfied that at first  blush  there  certainly  appears  to  be
      considerable weight and focus  placed  on  the  issue  the  claimant's
      chosen profession in  the  context  of  internal  relocation,  in  the
      determination.   However,  in  light  of  Ms  Short's   very   careful
      submissions and  indeed  Mr  Deller's  realistic  reappraisal  of  the
      determination when read in its entirety, I find  that  the  Tribunal's
      approach to internal relocation discloses no material  error  of  law.
      The Tribunal made findings as to safety issues having  regard  to  all
      the evidence and plainly looked at risk and reasonableness.  There was
      evidence of a number of factors such as that highlighted by Judge Gill
      (sitting as a Deputy high Court Judge)  in  granting  permission.  She
      considered  the reasonableness of the claimant being expected  not  to
      see or make contact with her son in the  event  that  they  were  both
      living in Mongolia and the fact that contact with her son  could  lead
      to her being identified and ill treated .

  16. Where the Tribunal erred was in placing too much weight on  the  issue
      of the claimant's profession in considering relocation such  that  the
      finding took on a greater significance  than  was  possibly  intended.
      However this does not amount to a material error of law.



Decision
    17.  There is no material error of law disclosed in  the  determination
    which shall stand.

                               Signed                     Date 3.10.14




                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




                               Anonymity order maintained
                               No fee award applicable.




                               Signed                     Date 3.10.14




                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
