


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01464/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                          |Promulgated                          |
|On 5 January 2016                         |            On 2 February 2016       |
|                                          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                             mohamed fajeed usan
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N M Hashmi, instructed by Lyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 6 July 2015, Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Henderson
    that was promulgated on 10  June  2015  on  the  grounds  that  it  was
    arguable that the  judge  had  applied  the  wrong  standard  of  proof
    throughout.

 2. In its rule 24 response notice,  the  Home  Office  accepted  that  the
    judge's decision and reasons  statement  was  fatally  flawed  for  the
    reasons identified by Judge Macdonald.  I am in agreement.  Although at
    paragraph 53 of his decision  and  reasons  statement  Judge  Henderson
    refers to the "reasonable likelihood test", everywhere else,  including
    his self direction  at  paragraphs  21  and  22  and  his  findings  at
    paragraphs 32 and 41 he applies a balance of probabilities test.

 3. Such a fundamental error cannot be considered to be  a  mere  slip  and
    therefore the whole decision is unsound  and  must  be  set  aside  and
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing.   Ms  Hashmi
    thought some positive findings might be preserved but I suggested  that
    it would be wrong to pick and  choose  since  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge rehearing the appeal will have  to  make  their  own  credibility
    findings on all the available evidence in the round.  For the avoidance
    of doubt,  nothing  whatsoever  is  preserved  from  Judge  Henderson's
    decision and reasons.

 4. I direct that the appeal is to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  Henderson.   As  per  the
    appellant's request, the appeal is to be heard in Birmingham.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Henderson contains an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  as
per the direction given above.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
