
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01853/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 15 July 2013                                 |On 23 September            |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           Abdelrahim Abdelrahman
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Daley, instructed by Saeraphus, London
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Abdelrahim Abdelrahman, was born on 3 December  1983  and
    is a male citizen of Sudan.  The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 2 January 2013 and claimed asylum the following day.  A decision was
    taken on 14 February 2013 to remove the appellant by way of  directions
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The appellant
    appealed against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Fletcher-Hill) which, in a determination which is dated 16 April  2013
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. His appeal turns upon the appellant's Baha'i faith.  Both the judge and
    the respondent [57] found that the appellant was a practitioner of  the
    Baha'i faith.  However, the judge took the view that  the  practice  of
    the Baha'i faith was "an essentially private matter"  [63].   At  [68],
    the judge wrote:

    I find that the only feature of the Baha'i faith that the appellant has
    identified and which would be likely to alert a passing stranger to any
    difference [with the practice of Islam] is that he has identified  that
    Baha'i members fast during the month of March,  rather  than  observing
    Ramadan in the autumn.  Given that one normally eats and drinks at home
    privately there is no reason for strangers to notice that.  Indeed, the
    appellant has stated that he only became aware of differences with  his
    friend Hani when Hani was staying at his own home prior to his  wedding
    to assist him with his wedding preparations.  It was only because  they
    were sharing accommodation at mealtimes that any queries arose.

 3. The judge went on to find that "it clearly suited the appellant and his
    friends to meet  together  and  pray  on  weekly  basis  but  this  was
    completely a matter of their own choice and nothing to do with a ritual
    laid down for the observance of their faith."  [69].

 4. The grounds of appeal [28] make the point that the appellant in his own
    evidence indicated that he had modified his behaviour and  practice  of
    the Baha'i faith in Sudan for the purposes of avoiding persecution (see
    RT (Zimbabwe) 2010 EWCA Civ 1285)  The grounds also point out  at  [26]
    that the  background  evidence  before  the  judge  confirmed  that  an
    obligation fell upon practitioners of the Baha'i faith to attend annual
    meetings or ceremonies referred to as Feast and Fireside.  The  grounds
    assert that "nowhere in the background evidence does it say  state  the
    faith is entirely private in practice, quite  the  opposite  in  fact."
    The grounds also make the important point that, quite  apart  from  the
    manner in which the appellant might  practise  his  Baha'i  faith,  his
    adherence to that faith would indicate to others within  his  community
    that he was no  longer  publicly  expressing  an  adherence  to  Islam.
    Whilst there is a dearth of background material relating to the  Baha'i
    faith and its practice in Sudan, it is  clear  that  members  of  other
    religious groups  [for  example,  Christians]  encounter  very  serious
    problems not only for following religions which many  Muslims  consider
    heretical but also by failing to  express  an  adherence  to  Islam  by
    attending the mosque.  The grounds quote the  respondent's  Country  of
    Origin Information Report (COIR) which recorded that,

         "In 2011  nearly  170  persons  were  imprisoned  or  charged  with
         apostasy, a crime punishable  by  death  in  Sudan.   In  the  past
         suspected converts were subject to intense  scrutiny,  intimidation
         and  sometimes  torture  by  Government  security  personnel.   The
         individuals [referred to in the  report]  were  released  ...  only
         after  they  renounced  their  faith  and  agreed  to  follow   the
         Government's interpretation of Islam."

    Reference is made in the grounds  to  other  parts  of  the  background
    evidence which indicate that apostates  and  suspected  apostates  from
    Islam may be tortured and murdered.

 5. We find that the judge (and the respondent in her refusal  letter)  had
    adopted the wrong approach to the risks which this appellant  may  face
    upon return to Sudan.  The respondent, whilst accepting the appellant's
    adherence to the Baha'i faith, effectively rejected his  claim  because
    he had been unable to show specific  evidence  of  the  persecution  of
    members of the faith in Sudan.  That was an argument which  appears  to
    have been adopted by the judge, but it ignores what we have said  above
    about the fate of those who, even though they may  practise  their  own
    faith in private, place themselves at risk by not attending the  mosque
    or  otherwise  publicly  expressing  an  adherence  to   Islam.    Many
    individuals may attend the  mosque  purely  out  of  a  fear  of  being
    persecuted for not  doing  so,  and  we  consider  that  the  principle
    established in RT applies.  Likewise, we are  not  satisfied  that  the
    judge has had proper regard to evidence before her which indicated that
    the practice of the Baha'i faith is not an entirely private matter, but
    may, particularly at the time of important festivals, involve adherents
    of the faith meeting together in order to worship.  We  are  satisfied,
    on the evidence adduced in this  appeal,  that  (i)  the  appellant  is
    likely to avoid such communal  worship  only  because  he  fears  being
    persecuted for engaging in it (ii) he is likely to claim to be a Muslim
    and/or attend mosque for the same reason.  Those findings  lead  us  to
    conclude that he requires to be considered a refugee.

 6. In all the circumstances, we find that the judge erred in law such that
    her determination falls to be set aside.  We told  the  representatives
    at the Upper Tribunal hearing that we intended to remake  the  decision
    on  the  basis  of  the  existing  evidence.   Neither   representative
    disagreed with that proposed course of action and Mr Diwnycz,  for  the
    respondent, accepted that, in light of what we had  to  say  about  the
    likely risk to this appellant in Sudan, his appeal should be allowed.

DECISION

 7. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  16  April  2013
    contains errors of law such that it falls to  be  set  aside.   We  set
    aside the determination  and  remake  the  decision.   This  appeal  is
    allowed on asylum grounds.  This appeal  is  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds (Articles 2/3).






Signed                              Date 29 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
