
[pic]
SELF-TYPED

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01262/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 19 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                    Y R P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Turner, Counsel instructed by Greater London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hussain sitting at Hatton Cross  on  20  May
    2015) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to recognise him as a refugee from  Sri  Lanka,  or  as
    otherwise requiring  international  or  human  rights  protection,  and
    against her concomitant decision to remove him as  an  illegal  entrant
    (having gained entry by verbal deception) and/or as a person subject to
    administrative removal under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999, his asylum claim having been refused. The First-tier Tribunal
    made an anonymity direction in favour of the appellant  on  account  of
    his asylum claim,  and  for  the  same  reason  we  consider  that  the
    appellant should be accorded anonymity for  these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 20 August 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   The First Tier Tribunal Judge may have  erred  by  failing  to
             demonstrate that he has given  careful  consideration  to  the
             medical evidence and it is on that basis I  grant  permission.
             Whether that was material in all the circumstances will be for
             the Upper Tribunal to decide.

The Rule 24 Response

 3. On 2 September 2015 Mr Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a
    Rule 24 response on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  opposing  the
    appellant's appeal:

         2.   The respondent opposes the appellant's  appeal.   In  summary,
             the respondent will submit inter alia that the  judge  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.

         3.   It will be argued  that  though  the  judge  has  had  limited
             consideration of the medical evidence at  paragraph  50,  this
             cannot be deemed as material when balanced against the  manner
             in which the judge has addressed all the competing factors and
             set out detailed conclusion/reasons for rejecting  aspects  of
             the appellant's evidence.

The Factual Background

 4. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose  date  of  birth  is  2
    August 1990. In January 2011 he applied to study at Bloomsbury Business
    School. His passport had been issued to him in Colombo  on  8  November
    2010. He was interviewed on skype, and the ECO was  satisfied  that  he
    spoke English to level B1. A Tier 4 student  visa  was  issued  to  the
    appellant on 9 February 2011, valid until 10 April 2012, and he arrived
    in the UK on 24 February 2011 where he was granted entry as a student.

 5. On 21 May 2012 the Home Office considered curtailing his leave  as  the
    college had surrendered its licence in July 2011.  But  no  action  was
    taken  as  his  leave  had  already  expired.  The  appellant  made  an
    appointment with the ASU on 15 November 2013 (or on 15  November  2012-
    the internal record is discrepant), and he claimed asylum at the ASU on
    16 December 2013.

 6. At his screening interview, he was asked  to  explain  briefly  why  he
    could not return to his home country. He said he had been  arrested  by
    the Sri Lankan army in 2008 and again on 19 October 2010. On the second
    occasion, he was detained for 14 days.  He  was  tortured  during  this
    time. He had marks on his face, when they put a petrol bag on his face.
    He was accused of helping the LTTE. He was not a member but  helped  on
    national heroes day, preparing programmes for them.

 7. The appellant was detained at Harmondsworth on 16 December 2013, and  a
    doctor examined him and prepared a Rule 35 report. He claimed  to  have
    been hit on the head, his head was hit against walls and  his  genitals
    were beaten by a stick. His head was also put in  a  basket  containing
    petrol. Since detention, he said he thought about events more  and  had
    difficulty sleeping, although this was not a problem before. The doctor
    said he could not validate any of the claims as there were no  physical
    signs or evidence.

 8. The appellant's legal representatives arranged for him to be seen by Dr
    Rozmin  Halari,  Senior  Clinical   Psychologist,   and   the   initial
    consultation took place on 22  December  2013.  In  her  report  of  24
    December 2013, she said she had been  asked  to  carry  out  an  urgent
    assessment because he reported feeling very anxious  and  panicky  when
    taken to the detention centre.

 9. He told her that his uncle had supported the LTTE. He had worked for  a
    NGO, which helped to transport goods for refugees  and  the  LTTE.  The
    army had arrested and questioned the driver of a  vehicle  transporting
    goods, and the driver had mentioned his uncle's  name.  His  uncle  had
    escaped to France, where he was now settled. In 2010 his uncle had sent
    him a mobile phone as a gift. The appellant had gone  to  Colombo  with
    his mum to  collect  it.  On  their  return  they  were  stopped  at  a
    checkpoint in Habarana and questioned about the phone. As  he  and  his
    mother gave contradictory  answers,  he  was  arrested  and  taken  for
    further interrogation. They suspected him of carrying out  his  uncle's
    previous duties for the LTTE.

10. His mother eventually secured his release by offering the army a bribe.
    He was told to report to the police station daily. He managed  to  flee
    the country with the help of an agent in Colombo. But as  a  result  he
    did not attend a court hearing which he was expected to be at, and they
    were now looking for him. His mother had recently returned from  India,
    because her family there were no longer able to support  her,  and  she
    had been arrested and questioned about his whereabouts. She had  to  go
    and sign at the police station every day.

11. He said that being in detention had caused him to be very  anxious  and
    he had started getting flashbacks and nightmares. He showed no signs of
    self-neglect, but he presented as very  anxious,  tearful  and  in  low
    mood. On the Hamilton Anxiety and Depression rating  scale,  he  had  a
    score of 22 for depression, which equated to moderate depression, and a
    score of 26 for anxiety, suggesting moderate to high levels of anxiety.



12. Dr Halari's initial assessment was  that  he  was  displaying  symptoms
    consistent with PTSD and a depressive illness which was  largely  being
    maintained by his fear of going back to Sri Lanka.

13. The appellant was interviewed about his asylum claim on 7 January 2014.
    He said his English solicitor was trying  to  get  documents  from  the
    lawyer who acted for him in Sri Lanka, whose name was N.  Kesevan.  The
    documents would include  court  documents  showing  that  he  had  been
    produced to the court and then released on bail on  condition  that  he
    reported to the police. Also, he could ask  his  uncle,  who  left  Sri
    Lanka in 2008, to send from France his asylum claim support papers.

14. On 28 February 2014 the appellant's solicitors sent to the Home  Office
    the following: (1) a letter of instruction to Mr Karikalan, Sri  Lankan
    attorney, dated 5 February 2014; (2)  Mr  Karikalan's  reply  dated  24
    February 2014; and (3) a further report from Dr  Halari  based  on  the
    same examination and interview that had been the  basis  of  her  first
    report.

15. In his letter, Mr Karikalan said he had perused  the  appellant's  case
    record in front of the registrar but since he was not the  Counsel  who
    appeared for the appellant when he was produced before the  Trincomalee
    Court, "a certified copy was refused".

16. In her  report,  Dr  Halari  addressed  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant was feigning or exaggerating his symptoms:

    '97. Overall his clinical presentation is consistent with  the  account
         he has given to me and with that of other torture  victims  I  have
         seen in clinical practice. With reference to the Istanbul Protocol,
         I would consider his overall clinical picture as "typical" of those
         found in torture survivors. This would  be  the  highest  level  of
         consistency I would be able to use in an asylum case, as  there  is
         not a certain way from a clinical  picture  of  PTSD  the  specific
         details of the torture can be "diagnosed".  There  is  a  potential
         problem differentiating torture as a potential cause  of  his  PTSD
         from other similar traumas, without relying on the victim's account
         of the content of their symptoms.'

17. On 9 January 2015 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for  refusing
    to  recognise  the  appellant   as   a   refugee.   There   were   many
    inconsistencies in his  account.  The  psychologist's  report  did  not
    mention anything about his head  hurting  whenever  he  remembered  his
    claimed traumatic experiences (a claim made  in  interview).  Also,  in
    view of the psychologist's analysis, his mental health conditions could
    not only be the result of his claimed torture by the Sri  Lankan  army,
    but in fact there could be any number of other  reasons  why  he  could
    have the mental health issue that he had been diagnosed with:

         'It is your own evidence that you have come from a war torn country
         where your father was killed, you were raised by a  single  parent,
         and people known to you including your uncle were harassed  by  the
         authorities. In view of this it is  considered  that  these  issues
         could have also been contributing factors to your mental state.'

18. On the issue of risk on return,  reference  was  made  to  the  country
    guidance of GJ and Others. On his own evidence, he was never  a  member
    of the LTTE. But even if  he  was  suspected  in  the  past,  his  past
    activities would not place him within one of the risk categories.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

19. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Hussain. In addition
    to the documents which had been served in advance of the  hearing,  the
    appellant relied on a witness statement dated 19 March 2015  which  had
    purportedly been signed by SN, a Sri Lankan  refugee  from  Trincomalee
    whose date of birth was 7 May 1983 and who had  entered  France  on  22
    February 2008. This information could be gleaned from  the  photocopies
    of the front and back of a 10 year residence card issued to  SN  on  25
    May 2009. (The photocopies accompanied  the  statement,  but  were  not
    formally exhibited to it, with the consequence that the  maker  of  the
    statement did not identify the photocopies or state  that  he  was  the
    holder of the 10 year residence card which had been photocopied).

20. In the statement  SN  said  that  he  was  the  appellant's  uncle  and
    confirmed that he supported the LTTE whilst working for a NGO.  He  had
    received a threat that he would be arrested in 2008 and so he had  fled
    the country, and had claimed asylum in France. His statement  had  been
    accepted, and  he  had  been  granted  asylum  without  an  appeal.  He
    confirmed he had sent a mobile telephone to the appellant in  2010.  It
    had been taken by a friend who was travelling  from  France,  and  this
    friend had handed it over at the airport on arrival. He then got a call
    from his sister reporting the appellant's detention. She arranged for a
    lawyer named Varathan  to  intervene.  He  arranged  for  his  nephew's
    production before the Court so that he could be released on  bail.  His
    sister had sold her land in Sri Lanka to raise funds to pay an agent to
    bring the appellant to the UK. She  had  gone  back  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    October 2013 to obtain some documents in order  for  the  appellant  to
    claim asylum, and he had not  been  happy  about  this.  She  had  been
    arrested, detained for 4-5 days, and later released  on  condition  she
    report every day. In consequence, he had advised the appellant to claim
    asylum. The last he had heard from  her  she  was  planning  to  go  to
    Malaysia, but he had not heard anything from her since and he had  been
    unable to reach her.

21. The appellant was called as a witness. In  cross-examination,  he  said
    that he was financially supported by his uncle who sent him money via a
    friend's bank account. But he did not have the bank statements to prove
    receipt of funds. His mother had arrived in  Malaysia  on  18  February
    2014, and she had last called him from Malaysia on 20 March 2014.   His
    uncle had visited him once here, in 2011. His mother had gone  back  to
    Sri Lanka to see if the problems had been sorted out.

22. He was asked whether his uncle had sent any documents to  show  why  he
    had been granted a residence card. He replied that he had not.  He  did
    not have any proof either that the person concerned was his uncle.

23. In his subsequent decision, Judge Hussain's findings were  set  out  at
    paragraphs [41] onwards.   The  appellant  had  not  given  a  credible
    explanation for  his  delay  in  seeking  asylum  (paragraph  45).  The
    appellant had not given consistent evidence about the impact on him  of
    his uncle's flight from Sri Lanka and the level of interest  showed  in
    him by the authorities  after  being  allegedly  questioned  about  his
    uncle's whereabouts (paragraph 46). The appellant had been inconsistent
    about whether he had been released in 2010 on payment of a bribe or  as
    a result of bail being posted. In his witness statement he  claimed  to
    have done both, but in cross-examination he denied  that  he  had  been
    released on payment of a bribe (paragraph 47).

24. The letter from the lawyer in Sri Lanka did not  constitute  sufficient
    evidence  that  the  appellant  was  arrested  and  detained  in   2010
    (paragraphs 48-49).

25. On the topic of medical evidence, the judge said:

    "50. I also note that the appellant claimed to have been tortured  very
         day and the details of that have been noted above. Yet, I  find  it
         unlikely, as does  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  with  so  much
         physical mistreatment, the appellant  has  no  scar  on  his  body.
         Whilst he has  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  post-traumatic
         stress disorder and depression, I accept the Secretary  of  State's
         view that these conditions can arise from many other factors [than]
         that [of] the alleged treatment of the appellant in Sri Lanka."

26. The evidence did not show that the authorities came looking for him for
    breaching his bail conditions, and the fact that he was able to  remain
    in the country until 24 February  2011,  albeit  allegedly  in  hiding,
    reinforced his finding that the appellant was not the subject of arrest
    on 19 October 2010 (paragraph 51).

27. His mode of exit from the country,  including  him  obtaining  a  valid
    passport, was not credible, given he was allegedly subject to  an  open
    arrest warrant (paragraph 52). His account of his mother  returning  to
    Sri Lanka was not credible, and also he had not been consistent  as  to
    why she had gone back. It could easily have been proved that his mother
    had fled to Malaysia by the appellant producing a copy of her  passport
    with the endorsement on it. He did not believe the  appellant  had  not
    been in contact with her (paragraphs 53-54).

28. But if he was wrong about the  appellant's  credibility,  even  if  his
    claim was taken at its  highest,  he  did  not  come  within  the  risk
    categories set out in GJ and others.

The Grounds of Appeal

29. The renewed grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal were settled by  Mr
    Turner of Counsel, as were the initial grounds which were rejected by a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge. The renewed grounds were to the same  effect
    as the initial grounds.

30. Ground 1 was that the judge had committed a fatal error by  failing  to
    consider Dr Halari's report  first.  Alternatively,  he  had  erred  by
    seeking to go behind the findings of Dr Halari, an expert in her field.

31. Ground 2 was that his decision was undermined by his  failure  to  have
    any or any proper regard to the fact that  the  appellant's  uncle  had
    been granted refugee  status  in  France  or  to  the  uncle's  witness
    statement.

32. Ground 3 was that the judge had erroneously rejected  the  evidence  of
    the Sri Lankan lawyer, contrary to PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

33. At the hearing before us to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Turner sought to develop all three grounds of appeal.  Mr  Nath
    objected, pointing  out  that  the  appellant  had  only  been  granted
    permission on Ground 1.  We allowed Mr Turner to develop Grounds 2  and
    3 de bene esse as it was  open  to  debate  whether  UTJ  Chalkley  had
    granted permission generally, albeit that Ground 1 was the only  ground
    he identified as having a realistic prospect of success, or whether  he
    had meant to limit his grant of permission  to  Ground  1:  see  Ferrer
    (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC).

Discussion

Ground 1

34. The first limb of Ground 1 is that the judge erred in  not  considering
    the medical evidence at the outset of his credibility  assessment.  The
    progenitor for this line  of  argument  appears  to  be  the  principle
    affirmed in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and SA  (Somalia)  [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1302.

35. The principle affirmed by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Mibanga  was  as
    follows:

         "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant to
         credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with  it  as  an  integral
         part of the findings on credibility rather than just as an  add-on,
         which  does  not  undermine  the  conclusions  to  which  he  would
         otherwise come."

36. In SA Somalia, the Court of Appeal found at  paragraph  [33]  that  the
    Adjudicator's decision was open to  the  criticism,  in  the  light  of
    Mibanga, that, as a matter of form, the content of the  medical  report
    was dealt with as an add on, following  the  section  in  which,  as  a
    result of examination of the evidence of the appellant, the Adjudicator
    found him to lack credibility and to have fabricated his case:

         "[O]n that narrow basis there appears to have been a breach of  the
         approach  proscribed  in  Mibanga,  namely  that  medical  evidence
         corroborative  or  potentially  corroborative  of  the  appellant's
         account of torture and/or fear of persecution should be  considered
         as part of the entire package of evidence to be taken into  account
         on the issue of credibility."

37. We do not consider that the judge has breached the  Mibanga  principle.
    He considered the expert evidence of Dr Halari as part  of  the  entire
    package of evidence which needed to be taken into account on the  issue
    of  credibility.  He  was  not  required  to  consider  it  first.  The
    requirement which he had to observe  was  not  to  address  her  expert
    evidence as an add-on, which did not undermine the conclusions to which
    he would have otherwise  have  come.  He  clearly  complied  with  this
    requirement, as he went on to address additional considerations bearing
    upon the credibility of the core claim in paragraphs [51] to [54].

38. The second limb of Ground 1 is that the judge failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for going behind "the findings" of Dr Halari. As stated by  the
    First-tier Judge who refused permission to appeal,  Judge  Hussain  was
    the ultimate arbiter of the appellant's credibility and it was  not  Dr
    Halari's role to make "findings" on whether his account of torture  was
    credible. Dr Halari  acknowledged  in  paragraph  [97]  of  her  second
    report, which we have quoted above, that there was a potential  problem
    differentiating torture as a potential cause of  the  appellant's  PTSD
    from other similar traumas, without relying on the victim's account  of
    the content of their symptoms.  In  adopting  the  line  taken  by  the
    respondent in the  refusal  letter,  which  he  earlier  summarised  at
    paragraphs [18] and [19] of his decision, the judge was accepting  that
    Dr Halari's expert diagnosis of PTSD had independent  probative  value,
    while at the same time holding, as it was open to him to do,  that  the
    signs and symptoms of PTSD (some of which Dr Halari observed, and  some
    of which were reported to her by the appellant) could have  many  other
    causes apart from being tortured  in  detention  in  2010.   Mr  Turner
    submits that this finding was not open to  the  judge  because  it  was
    speculative. We do not agree. Dr Halari's expert evidence supports  the
    proposition that the appellant's PTSD could be caused by other traumas,
    including the trauma of being detained at Harmondsworth, which was what
    triggered Dr Halari's involvement in the first place.

39. Although the judge has only  given  one  reason  for  not  treating  Dr
    Halari's expert evidence as  significantly  advancing  the  appellant's
    case, the one reason given is sufficient.  Further  discussion  of  her
    expert evidence was not going to lead to a different outcome.

Ground 2

40. Although not cited to us, we have had regard to Muse & Others  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 on the topic of challenges to  the
    adequacy of a judge's reasons.   In  South  Bucks  District  Council  v
    Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33, cited with approval by the Court  of  Appeal
    at paragraph [33], Lord Brown said:

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in  the  dispute,  not  to  every  material   consideration.   (our
         emphasis)"

41. The evidence purporting to come from, and pertaining to, the uncle  was
    a material consideration in the appeal, but it was not one of the  main
    issues in dispute. On the contrary, it was  self-evidently  of  limited
    probative value and of only peripheral relevance. As had been  explored
    in cross-examination, there was no documentary proof that  SN  was  the
    appellant's uncle. Even assuming that he was, he had not  produced  his
    asylum papers to show that what he was saying in his witness  statement
    accorded with what he had told the French authorities on entry; and  it
    was also not shown that he had been recognised as a refugee in  France.
    The appellant agreed that the photocopied documents did not  show  that
    SN had a 10 year residence card as a result of being  recognised  as  a
    refugee. But even if all the above was assumed to be true, SN was not a
    witness to the alleged events that had unfolded in Sri Lanka  since  he
    had left the country in  early  2008.  So  he  could  not  provide  any
    evidential support at all for the pivotal claim that the appellant had,
    on one version of events, been produced at court and then  released  on
    bail, and so was still of adverse interest to the authorities as he had
    jumped bail. This claim was pivotal because, absent  credible  evidence
    of bail jumping and there being an extant warrant for  the  appellant's
    arrest, the appellant did not have a profile which  engendered  a  real
    risk of him being on a stop list  or  wanted  list.  Following  GJ  and
    Others, the uncle would not be of any ongoing adverse interest  to  the
    Sri Lankan authorities for transporting goods for the LTTE  during  the
    civil war; and so the appellant  would  also  not  be  of  any  ongoing
    adverse interest, merely because of his association with the uncle.  So
    the fact that the judge's reasons do not refer to the  uncle  does  not
    translate into an error of law.

Ground 3

42. Mr Turner cites the following passage in PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011, which is taken from
    paragraph [41]:

         "While it is undoubtedly the case that false documents  are  widely
         available in Sri Lanka, once it was established that the  documents
         in question originated  from  a  Sri  Lankan  court,  a  sufficient
         justification was required for the conclusion  that  the  appellant
         does not have a well-founded fear of persecution  ...  there  is  a
         letter from the Magistrate at the relevant court to the  Controller
         of Immigration and Emigration  stating  the  appellant  is  in  the
         United Kingdom and that he is to be arrested on his return  to  Sri
         Lanka.  In the  absence  of  a  sufficient  reason  for  concluding
         otherwise,  the  inescapable  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this
         material - retrieved independently, it is to be  stressed,  by  two
         lawyers from the Magistrates' court on separate occasions - is that
         the appellant will be arrested on his return  to  Sri  Lanka  as  a
         result of links with the  LTTE  and  their  activities  ...  it  is
         difficult to understand how the appellant could  have  falsified  a
         letter from the Magistrate at the relevant court to the  Controller
         of Immigration and Emigration ordering the appellant's arrest which
         he then placed in the court records  so  that  it  could  later  be
         retrieved by two separate lawyers. At the very least, this  feature
         of the evidence required detailed analysis and explanation."

43. The case of PJ is  not  authority  for  the  proposition  that  it  was
    unlawful for the judge not to give significant weight to  the  evidence
    from a Sri Lankan lawyer, Mr Karikalan. As is apparent from the passage
    quoted above, the case turned  on  its  own  special  facts  which  are
    readily distinguishable from the facts of this case.  For  the  reasons
    given by the Court of Appeal, in that case there was strong prima facie
    evidence of the authenticity,  and  hence  reliability,  of  a  warrant
    issued by a Magistrate for the  appellant's  arrest,  as  two  separate
    lawyers (one of whom was accepted by the UT Judge to  be  a  bona  fide
    lawyer) had retrieved a copy  from  the  court  file  on  two  separate
    occasions.  Here,  in  stark  contrast,  no  court  document  has  been
    produced, despite the appellant promising to provide evidence from  the
    court  files  in  his  asylum  interview.  Far  from   supporting   the
    credibility of Mr Karikalan's letter, PJ actually  undermines  it.  For
    the implication of the evidence which the Court of Appeal found  cogent
    in PJ is that Mr Karikalan should have had no difficulty in obtaining a
    certified copy of the alleged court document relating to the appellant,
    as he had been instructed to act as the  appellant's  lawyer  for  this
    purpose and so he had the necessary authority.

Summary

44. The judge gave adequate reasons for finding that the appellant was  not
    credible, and hence that he had not discharged the burden  of  proving,
    to the lower standard of proof, that his account of past persecution or
    future risk was true.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

