
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01646/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th April 2016                            |On 18th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     y l
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China born on [ ] 1981 and  she  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent dated 25th January 2015 to  remove
    her from the United Kingdom, as  a  person  unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom, under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 18th June 2015, First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Lagunju dismissed the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  also
    under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules

 3. The appellant claimed that her return to China would place her at  risk
    from the Chinese authorities because  of  an  incident  which  occurred
    before she left in 2004 during a Fu Yin Pai (otherwise  known  as  'the
    Shouters') religious meeting.  She claims that when  in  China  and  in
    2003, she attended the Fu Yin Pai Church,  an  unregistered  church  in
    China otherwise named as "The  Shouters"  and  during  an  authorities'
    raid, in an attempt to obstruct or prevent the arrest  of  her  father,
    she assaulted one of the police officers and hit him a number of  times
    with a metal object.  Subsequently she had become actively involved  in
    an evangelical church in the UK.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju dismissed the appellant's appeal  and
    I set aside his decision.   The  judge  did  not  made  an  overall  or
    cumulative assessment of the risks  to  the  appellant  on  return  and
    therefore there was an error of law.

 5. Although I find the overall assessment flawed the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made series of findings as  follows  which  have  been  preserved
    (except I do not preserve paragraph 17 below):

         "12. The appellant fears return  to  China  on  the  basis  of  her
             religion as a Christian.  The appellant's fear  is  threefold;
             the appellant fears return  firstly  because  of  an  incident
             which occurred before she left in 2004 during  a  Fu  Yin  Pai
             religious meeting.  Secondly because she has  become  actively
             involved in an evangelical Christian church in  the  UK.   The
             appellant fears that she will face persecution at the hands of
             the  Chinese  authorities  as  a  member  of  an  unregistered
             Christian church.  Finally the appellant fears return  as  she
             has since her departure had a second child  and  is  currently
             pregnant with her third child.

         13.  The appellant claims that  her  parents  were  Christians  and
             attended the Fu Yin Pai church which is an unregistered church
             in China;  as  a  result  the  gathering  received  a  lot  of
             attention from  the  authorities.   The  appellant  gives  the
             impression in her witness statement that she only attended the
             church meetings because her parents instructed her to and  not
             because of any personal conviction she had.

         14.  The appellant claims that during a Fu Yin Pai meeting that she
             attended with  her  parents  sometime  in  October  2003,  the
             authorities raided the meeting and began rounding up  all  the
             male attendees.  In an attempt  to  obstruct  or  prevent  the
             arrest of her father the appellant assaulted one of the police
             officers by hitting him a number of times with a metal object.
              Immediately afterwards, the appellant managed to  escape  the
             meeting and arrest with the aid of a friend.  After hiding for
             some time, arrangements were made by  the  appellant's  mother
             for the appellant to leave  the  country.   According  to  the
             appellant wanted posters  were  erected  and  the  authorities
             visited her parents' home looking for her.

         15.  The appellant, with the assistance of a snakehead, fled  China
             to the UK via France (where she remained for 2 months).  It is
             notable that she did not  claim  asylum  in  France  or  claim
             asylum in the UK for 10 years.   I  consider  the  appellant's
             behaviour with s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
             Claimants  etc)  Act  2004  in  mind.   I  consider  that  the
             appellant's failure to claim asylum in France and the delay of
             10 years in the UK does  not  assist  the  appellant's  claim.
             Although I accept that the appellant was under the control  of
             a  snakehead  in  France  and  in  the  UK,  I  consider   the
             appellant's behaviour as part of my overall global  assessment
             of the appellant's credibility.

         16.  I found the appellant to  be  on  the  whole  a  credible  and
             reliable witness.  I accept the appellant's account about  her
             parents' religion and involvement with Fu Yin Pai.   I  accept
             also  and  find  that  the  appellant  attended  Fu  Yin   Pai
             gatherings principally because of her parents and not  due  to
             any conviction of her own.  I  accept  that  the  Fu  Yin  Pai
             meeting  was  raided  in  October  2003  as  claimed  as  this
             behaviour by the authorities is consistent with the background
             evidence; the authorities tend to disrupt meetings and  refuse
             requests for premises and planning permission in a bid to make
             life difficult for unregistered churches.

         17.  I note however on the appellant's own evidence that during the
             raid the authorities were interested in the male attendees and
             had no interest in the appellant who was also at the  meeting.
             I note also the  appellant's  lack  of  person  conviction  or
             involvement with Fu Yin Pi is  consistent  with  the  lack  of
             interest the authorities had in her during the raid or on  any
             other occasion.

         18.  I find it is entirely  reasonable  and  it  follows  that  the
             police would  be  looking  for  the  appellant  following  the
             meeting because she committed a criminal offence, in that, she
             assaulted a police officer during the operation of his duties.
              Despite the fact that the  police  officer's  acts  could  be
             considered persecutory and unfounded,  the  fact  remains  she
             committed an assault.

         19.  I find therefore that the authorities had no interest  in  the
             appellant for a convention reason  and  were  not  seeking  to
             persecute her but rather arrest and possibly prosecute her for
             assaulting a police officer.  The fact that she was  at  a  Fu
             Yin Pai meeting may exacerbate matters, however I do not  find
             that the appellant's actions  (assaulting  a  police  officer)
             would give rise to a risk on return for a convention reason."

 6. I found an error of law in that decision in that it  was  not  apparent
    that the judge had followed the guidance  in  QH  (Christians  -  risk)
    China CG [2014] UKUT 00086, in particular  paragraph  137(iv)  of  that
    decision and country guidance which stated:

         "There may be a risk of persecution, serious harm or  ill-treatment
         engaging international protection for certain individual Christians
         who choose to worship in  unregistered  churches  and  who  conduct
         themselves in such a way as to attract the  authorities'  attention
         to them or their political, social or cultural views."

 7. I specifically noted that the judge had identified that  the  appellant
    was credible, despite his findings in relation  to  Section  8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants)  Act  2004  that  she
    delayed in claiming asylum between her entry in 2004 and claim in 2014.
     The judge also found that she had assaulted a police officer.

 8. There were detailed submissions made before me at the  resumed  hearing
    and Mr Palmer  referred  to  his  skeleton  argument  noting  that  the
    appellant had committed a criminal offence and that she  had  committed
    this in the circumstances of a  banned  religious  movement  and  of  a
    meeting in which she had attacked a police officer.  Although there was
    no evidence of an arrest warrant it was unsafe to find that  there  was
    no formal move for her detention bearing in mind it was accepted by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that there  were  posters  of  her  identity.
    Groups such as "The Shouters" were seen as people who were  willing  to
    undermine the integrity of the state and this  would  bring  them  into
    conflict  with  the  Chinese  authorities  and  therefore  the  Refugee
    Convention was engaged.

 9. It was submitted that she would be on a formal record.   As  identified
    in QH an individual who puts their head above the parapet and adherents
    of such group would be at risk.  She has attracted the attention of the
    authorities as she was part of a group because of her  parents  but  it
    was  the  perception  of  her  engagement  and  involvement.    It  was
    submitted that it would be very difficult for her to suggest  that  she
    would be able to relocate safely or that she would not be subject of  a
    record which would  be  accessible  throughout  China.   She  would  be
    arrested under Chinese law, particularly for assault against  a  police
    officer.  Any punishment would be severe and this was  referred  to  in
    his skeleton argument.  A  previous  Operational  Guidance  found  that
    prison conditions were frequently degrading and the likelihood  of  the
    reasons that she would be arrested and detained and ill-treated.

10. The second issue was the serious violence against those  considered  to
    be from "The Shouters" and a further issue was that although there  had
    been a relaxation of the laws in relation to  the  number  of  children
    permitted within China, it was still possible that  she  was  at  grave
    risk of  forced  sterilisation  because  she  now  had  more  than  two
    children.  The country guidance was silent as to  whether  someone  who
    gave birth to a third child would  be  at  risk.   She  had  completely
    ignored the Chinese law and acted in breach.  She now had two  foreign-
    born children and AX (family planning scheme) China [2012]  UKUT  00097
    was ambiguous on this point.  Certainly the children would not have the
    SCP certificate and their right to schooling, housing or  free  medical
    care should they return and this was an issue in  relation  to  Section
    55.

11. Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant was not at  risk  for  anything.
    It was on her own evidence she was  not  an  advocate  of  a  Christian
    organisation but attended on behalf  of  her  parents.   There  was  no
    actual evidence provided that she was evangelising or that  the  police
    were  looking  at  anything  other  than  the  male  section   of   the
    congregation.  She did not  belong  to  the  sect  and  just  being  in
    attendance did not automatically lead to her being wanted.  The Chinese
    authorities  disrupted  the  meetings  but  were  not  imprisoning  the
    congregation and there was no objective  evidence  that  just  being  a
    member would constitute a reason under the Refugee Convention.

12. There was nothing to suggest that the posters were anything other in  a
    local area.  Since arriving in the UK she had ten years to claim asylum
    and provide any further evidence and she had failed to do so.   It  was
    thus concluded there was no arrest warrant and she was not on  a  black
    list.  The submissions of an  arrest  warrant  were  just  speculative.
    There was no evidence of her evangelising in the UK or in China or that
    she would re-join "The Shouters" on her return.  The evidence  was  now
    that she was a member of the True Jesus Church in the UK.

13. In regard to the third issue of children the rules were changing on the
    child policy because of the demographic change and it was difficult  to
    see how apart from a financial fine she would face any difficulties  in
    the children having been born.  It was not accepted that children being
    born prior to January 2016 would be at risk.  Internal  relocation  was
    possible as the family planning differed greatly across the country.

14. The appellant would return with her husband who was the father  of  the
    children and who did not have immigration status.  The family would  be
    returned together and I was enjoined to consider Section 117 where  the
    emphasis  was  on  the  burden  to  the  taxpayer.   There  was  little
    integration and the appellant would take the benefit of  schooling  and
    healthcare.

15. In conclusion, as indicated in my previous determination regarding  the
    error of law, there are certain material facts  which  were  preserved.
    The appellant's parents are active  members  of  the  unregistered  and
    banned Fu Yin Pai, The Shouters Church in China and the Chinese  police
    raided a meeting of this church attended by the appellant,  her  mother
    and her father.  In an attempt to prevent the police from arresting her
    father the appellant assaulted a police officer and  escaped  from  the
    meeting and went into hiding.

16. As such she committed a criminal offence and it was accepted that there
    were wanted posters put around the  local  area  showing  her  and  her
    parents' home was visited by the police.

17. I state at the outset that I am not persuaded that she would be at risk
    because of the birth of  two  further  children  being  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She has one child already in China but it was clear that  the
    Chinese one  child  policy  has  now  been  relaxed  and  although  the
    appellants would be subject to discrimination, I am not persuaded  that
    this would prevent them from return to China.  I  return,  however,  to
    this point later in my decision.

18. In QH (Christians - risk) China the following has been set out:

         "Risk to Christians in China


         (1)   In general, the risk of persecution for Christians expressing
             and  living  their  faith  in  China  is  very   low,   indeed
             statistically virtually negligible. The  Chinese  constitution
             specifically protects  religious  freedom  and  the  Religious
             Affairs Regulations 2005 (RRA) set out  the  conditions  under
             which Christian churches and leaders may operate within China.


          (2)  There has been a rapid growth in  numbers  of  Christians  in
             China, both in the three state  registered  churches  and  the
             unregistered or  'house'  churches.  Individuals  move  freely
             between  State-registered  churches   and   the   unregistered
             churches, according to their preferences as to worship.


         (3)   Christians in State-registered churches


             (i)   Worship in State-registered churches  is  supervised  by
                  the  Chinese   government's   State   Administration   for
                  Religious Affairs (SARA) under the RRA.


             (ii)  The measures of control set out in the  RRA,  and  their
                  implementation, whether by the Chinese state  or  by  non-
                  state actors, are not, in general, sufficiently severe  as
                  to amount to persecution, serious harm,  or  ill-treatment
                  engaging international protection.


             (iii)    Exceptionally, certain dissident bishops or prominent
                  individuals who challenge, or are perceived to  challenge,
                  public order and the operation of the RRA may be  at  risk
                  of persecution, serious harm,  or  ill-treatment  engaging
                  international protection, on a fact-specific basis.


         (4)   Christians in unregistered or 'house' churches


             (i)   In general, the evidence is that the  many  millions  of
                  Christians worshipping within  unregistered  churches  are
                  able to meet and express their faith as they wish to do.


             (ii) The evidence does not support a finding that there  is  a
                  consistent pattern of persecution, serious harm, or  other
                  breach  of  fundamental  human  rights  for   unregistered
                  churches or their worshippers.


             (iii)     The  evidence  is  that,  in  general,  any  adverse
                  treatment  of  Christian  communities   by   the   Chinese
                  authorities is confined to closing down  church  buildings
                  where planning permission has not been obtained for use as
                  a church, and/or preventing or  interrupting  unauthorised
                  public worship or demonstrations.


             (iv) There may be a risk of persecution, serious harm, or ill-
                  treatment engaging international  protection  for  certain
                  individual   Christians   who   choose   to   worship   in
                  unregistered churches and who conduct themselves in such a
                  way as to attract the local authorities' attention to them
                  or their political, social or cultural views.


             (v)  However, unless such individual  is  the  subject  of  an
                  arrest warrant, his name is on a black list, or he  has  a
                  pending sentence, such risk will be limited to  the  local
                  area in which the individual lives and has their hukou.


             (vi)  The hukou system of individual registration in rural and
                  city areas, historically a  rigid  family-based  structure
                  from which derives entitlement to most  social  and  other
                  benefits, has been significantly relaxed and many  Chinese
                  internal migrants live and work in cities  where  they  do
                  not have an urban hukou, either without registration or on
                  a temporary residence  permit  (see  AX  (family  planning
                  scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT  00097  (IAC)  and  HC  &  RC
                  (Trafficked women) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027).


              (vii) In the light of the wide variation in local  officials'
                  response to unregistered churches,  individual  Christians
                  at risk in their local areas  will  normally  be  able  to
                  relocate safely elsewhere in China.  Given  the  scale  of
                  internal  migration,  and  the   vast   geographical   and
                  population size of China, the lack of an appropriate hukou
                  alone will not render internal relocation unreasonable  or
                  unduly harsh."

19. I accept that the guidance in QH indicates that generally the  risk  of
    persecution for Christians expressing and living their faith  in  China
    is very low indeed and that there has been a rapid growth of numbers of
    Christians in China both in three  state-registered  churches  and  the
    unregistered house churches.  The evidence in QH did not  suggest  that
    there is a consistent pattern of persecution or serious harm  and  that
    in general adverse treatment of Christian communities  by  the  Chinese
    authorities was confined to closing down buildings.

20. However, as I identified in the error of law decision, there may  be  a
    risk of persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment engaged where  those
    who  choose  to  worship  in  unregistered  churches  and  who  conduct
    themselves  in  such  a  way  as  to  attract  the  local  authorities'
    attention.  The question  also  surrounds  the  subject  of  an  arrest
    warrant.  As stated in QH that unless the appellant is  subject  to  an
    arrest warrant her name is on  a  black  list  or  she  has  a  pending
    sentence such a risk will be limited to the local  area  in  which  she
    lives.

21. The evidence which was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal was that the
    appellant was on the whole found to be a credible and reliable  witness
    and  that  the  appellant's  account  of  her  parents'  religion   and
    involvement with the Fu Yin  Pai  was  accepted.   The  fact  that  she
    attended those meetings not through her  own  conviction,  but  through
    that of her  parents,  does  not  dilute  the  fact  that  the  Chinese
    authorities may well perceive that she is a member of that group.   She
    was certainly present at the meeting and associated with that group.

22. Despite the fact that the authorities may be  interested  in  the  male
    attendees it was the appellant's evidence that she assaulted  a  police
    officer which is a serious offence  and  will  be  seen  as  a  serious
    offence in  China.   Merely  being  a  member  of  an  outlawed  group,
    according to  the  background  evidence,  can  attract  a  sentence  of
    imprisonment. The Country of Origin Information Report on Christians in
    China (March 2016)  at 5.1.2 quoted from the USSD Report

    'Certain religious or spiritual groups are banned by law. The  criminal
    law defines banned groups as "evil cults," and those belonging to  them
    can be sentenced to prison'.

23. As I have set out above the judge of the First-tier Tribunal  found  it
    entirely reasonable [18 of that decision]  that  the  police  would  be
    looking for the appellant following the meeting because she committed a
    criminal offence in that she "assaulted a  police  officer  during  the
    operation of his duties.

24. Although the judge states that  the  police  officer's  acts  could  be
    considered  persecutory  and  unfounded,  the  fact  remains  that  she
    committed assault.  Although the judge found it possible she  would  be
    merely prosecuted for assaulting a police officer the judge also  found
    "the fact that she was at a Fu Yin Pai meeting may exacerbate matters".
     As stated it was accepted that the police were looking for her and the
    appellant's evidence was that there were "wanted posters"  erected  and
    the authorities  visited  her  parents'  home  looking  for  her.   The
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge would suggest  that  she  may
    well be on a black list.

25. On the preserved findings I accept there may well be an arrest  warrant
    and that it is conceivable that her name is on a black list despite the
    fact that she claims that she was not  necessarily,  at  that  time,  a
    member through conviction, of The Shouters.

26. I note that in the light of the wide  variation  and  local  officials'
    responses to unregistered churches individual Christians in their local
    areas will normally be able to relocate but in the light  of  the  fact
    that it is claimed that she is on a black list I am not satisfied  that
    she would  be  able  to  relocate  specifically  with  two  very  young
    children.  They may well need to  be  registered  in  order  to  access
    services. As  stated  in  AX  (the  headnote)  there  is  a  system  of
    registration in operation in China

    'All social benefits  and  obligations  derive  from  hukou,  including
    entitlement to a  birth  permit,  social  security,  contraception  and
    medical care, education, housing, land and pension provision.  Although
    it remains difficult to change hukou, the system has failed to  prevent
    mass internal migration to the  large  cities  in  modern  times,  with
    hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  living  away  from  their   hukou.
    Nevertheless, women of fertile age are obliged  to  send  back  regular
    pregnancy tests to their hukou area,  seek  birth  permits  there,  and
    comply with local family planning regulation'

27. I accept, following QH [4(iv)], that someone who conducts themselves in
    such a way as to attract attention to themselves would be at risk.  She
    has attracted the attention of the authorities as she would  have  been
    perceived to have been part of the 'Fu Yin  Pai'  notwithstanding  that
    she attended because of her parents. I do not  find  that  the  Chinese
    authorities would differentiate those who attended  through  conviction
    and those  attending  to  be  with  their  parents.  That  the  Chinese
    authorities were targeting the men in the congregation ignores the fact
    that it is accepted that she assaulted a police officer to protect  her
    father during the worship.  There was background  documentary  evidence
    indicating that there was the serious violence against those considered
    to be from underground church meetings and that the "The Shouters" were
    considered to be a cult  or  heretical  sect  [Canadian  Refugee  Board
    Report 2015][refugee Review Tribunal Australia 2007].  No firm evidence
    was produced to show that the authorities had relaxed their approach in
    this regard.

28. The extract from the Home Office Country Information and Guidance China
     Christians, March 2016 reported increasing  harassment  and  noted  at
    6.1.13 that in 2014 Christians and practitioners  of  other  faiths  in
    China experienced the 'harshest persecution  seen  in  over  a  decade,
    including draconian measures taken by Xi  Jinping's  administration  to
    eliminate all religious political and social dissent' and at Section  7
    identified reports of more violence  against  Christians  from  various
    sources including CNN and Open Doors World Watch.

29. The is not however to be perceived just as a member of a  banned  sect.
    It was accepted that the appellant had assaulted a police officer and I
    thus conclude that, despite the effluxion of time, the appellant  would
    have been arrested under Chinese law, particularly for assault  against
    a police officer and, it is reasonable to conclude, that she  may  well
    continue to be of interest to the authorities for that offence.  It was
    also accepted that there were posters in  her  local  area  identifying
    that she was wanted at the time and such interest  may  well  continue.
    The authorities were also said by the appellant have visited her family
    home and that she had gone into hiding and as her  evidence  was  found
    credible I would conclude that it would be difficult, on this evidence,
    and in these particular circumstances, to conclude that  there  was  no
    arrest warrant or that she would not be on a wanted  list.   Punishment
    for the assault on a  police  officer  could  be  severe  and  previous
    Operational Guidance  found  that  prison  conditions  were  frequently
    degrading. [China OGN December 2014 3.16.3]   The  refworld  report  on
    'Treatment of Ordinary Christian house church  members  by  the  Public
    Security Bureau (PSB) including treatment of children of  house  church
    members 2009-2014 indicates  that  members  of  unaffiliated  religious
    groups are deemed unpatriotic and unlawful and  subjected  to  coercive
    and punitive treatment.  There is, therefore,  a  likelihood  that  she
    would be arrested and detained and  ill-treated.

30. It was submitted that it would be very difficult for the  appellant  to
    be able to relocate safely or that she would not be subject of a record
    which would be  accessible  throughout  China  and  on  the  background
    evidence I accept that. The UNHCR refworld report dated 23rd  September
    2015 confirmed that individuals detained at underground church meetings
    would have their names placed in PSD databases and

    'that individuals' information is then stored and classified under  one
    of five 'security  and  political'  threat  levels  within  a  national
    'dynamic stability control maintenance database' which is accessible by
    all officers within China's 'security apparatus'.

    As the evidence accepted was that  the  police  had  visited  her  home
    looking for her there is reason to suppose that her identity was  known
    ( and  indeed  the  appellant  stated  that  the  police  obtained  her
    photograph  from  her  ID  card  [w/s  12])   or  that  the  meticulous
    documentation referred to in the refworld report would  not  have  been
    longstanding.

31.  Although I note QH which states that

    'unless such an individual is the subject of  an  arrest  warrant,  his
    name is on a black list, or he has a pending sentence, such  risk  will
    be limited to the local area in which  the  individual  lives  and  has
    their hukou',

    the nature of the offence which she has committed may well have led  to
    her falling into  the  risk  category,  for  a  religiously/politically
    motivated offence even if she did not join the Shouters on her  return.
    Indeed the evidence recorded by Judge Lagunju  at  [22]  was  that  she
    would rejoin the Shouters on her return if the True  Jesus  Church  did
    not exist in China and it was accepted that the appellant was  actively
    involved in a church in the UK and  'would  continue  to  practise  her
    faith openly in an unregistered church regardless of the consequences'.



32. It is the cumulative effect of her offence and the perception that  she
    would  be  associated  with  the  Fu  Pin  Yai  to  which  the  Chinese
    authorities are antipathetic that places her at risk.

33. In total, the appellant now has two foreign-born children and  a  third
    child in China.  It was submitted the appellant was at  grave  risk  of
    forced sterilisation because she now had more  than  two  children  and
    that AX was ambiguous on the point of multiple births and  the  country
    guidance was silent as to whether someone who gave  birth  to  a  third
    child would be at risk.

34. There has been a relaxation  of  the  laws  restricting  children  born
    within China, and the background material (Telegraph Article) indicated
    a substantial relaxation in the laws.  AX identified that  hundreds  of
    thousands of 'unauthorised children' are born each year and their  loss
    of access  to  facilities  does  not  in  general  reach  the  severity
    threshold for persecution.  AX  identified  that  although  there  were
    regular national campaigns to bring down the birth  rate  in  provinces
    and local areas in  general  female  returnees  had  no  real  risk  of
    forcible sterilisation.  AX also  indicated  that  it  is  possible  to
    internally migrate but that women were required to stay in  touch  with
    their hukou area. I note that the appellant does not have contact  with
    her third child whom her ex partner removed in 2000.   She  would  thus
    present with two children on return.

35. AX  paragraph 191 (14) states

    (14) 'Where a real risk exists in the 'hukou' area, it may be  possible
    to avoid the risk by moving to a city.  Millions  of  Chinese  internal
    migrants, male and female, live and work in cities where  they  do  not
    hold an 'urban hukou'.  Internal migrant women are required to stay in
    touch with  their  'hukou'  area  and  either  return  for  tri-monthly
    pregnancy tests or else send back test results.  The  country  evidence
    does not indicate a real risk of effective pursuit of internal  migrant
    women leading to forcible family  planning  actions,  sterilisation  or
    termination,     taking      place      in      their      city      of
    migration. Therefore, internal relocation will, in almost all  cases,
    avert the risk in the hukou area.  However, internal relocation may not
    be safe where there is credible evidence of individual pursuit  of  the
    returnee or her family, outside the 'hukou' area. Whether it is  unduly
    harsh to expect an individual returnee and her family  to  relocate  in
    this way will be a question of fact in each case'

36. By way of contrast, I note from the Country Information Guidance 'China
    Contravention of national population and a family planning  laws,  July
    2015 , stated at

    Paragraph 2.3.6

    'Since the announcement of the policy adjustment in November 2013,  the
    Chinese Communist Party Central Committee  and  State  Council  jointly
    instructed local authorities to 'strictly control noncompliant  births,
    particularly extra births, [and] seriously investigate  and  deal  with
    illegal births.'

37. I do not find, on the evidence before me, that she would be at risk  of
    forced sterilisation as she is not being sought outside her  hukou  for
    unauthorised births. She  is  not  being  sought  for  family  planning
    contraventions and according to the Chinese authorities at  the  moment
    she only has one child.  There  is  background  evidence,  however,  to
    suggest that she may come to the attention of the authorities owing  to
    'multiple births' which would raise her 'profile'.  Further,  as  cited
    above, 'Internal migrant women are required to stay in touch with their
    'hukou' area and either return for tri-monthly pregnancy tests or  else
    send back test results. It is thus likely, to the lower standard, that,
    even if she tried to relocate, as she is wanted in her home  area,  she
    could be traced by the authorities through the requirement to  stay  in
    touch with her home 'hukou' area via the restrictions on birth control,
    and therefore come to the attention and be detained by the  authorities
    through that route.  She would therefore be at risk on return.

38. In this light of the findings of  Judge  Lagunju  and  my  observations
    above I allow the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  (article  3)
    grounds.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on Asylum grounds.

The appeal is allowed on Human Rights grounds (Article 3).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 9th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
