
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/01539/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Date sent                  |
|On 4 July 2013                              |On 10 July 2013            |
|                                            |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                             MR MD ABDUL HANNAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr S Hosein a legal
           representative from E1 Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mrs M Tanner a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on  12  February
      1982. He has been given permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge Kelsey who dismissed his appeal against  the
      respondent's decision of 5 February 2013 to give  directions  for  his
      removal from the UK following the refusal of asylum.


   2. As the judge records in paragraph 2 of his determination the appellant
      applied to come to the UK on a working holiday Visa in May  2006.  His
      application was refused and he appealed. His  appeal  was  allowed  in
      November 2007 and he was issued with a visa  valid  until  1  November
      2009. He entered the UK on about 12  December  2007.  After  his  Visa
      expired on 1 November 2009 he failed to contact the respondent  or  do
      anything to regularise his status. He  was  discovered  working  in  a
      restaurant in Essex in October 2010. He was issued  forms  is  nervous
      stay and given instructions to report on a weekly basis. He failed  to
      do so and was next discovered working in a restaurant in Cumbria on 21
      October 2012. He was using a counterfeit British passport and  claimed
      that his own passport had been stolen. He admitted that  he  had  been
      working illegally the five years as a chef in restaurants where he was
      provided with accommodation. He was detained. He claimed asylum.


   3. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he was a witness to
      a murder and  had  given  evidence  against  the  accused.  Two  other
      witnesses had been killed and he feared that he would be killed if  he
      went back to Bangladesh. Subsequently, in his evidence at the  hearing
      before the judge, he added that there was a political element  because
      those who were threatening him were from the Awami League  whereas  he
      was a supporter of the BNP.


   4. Following the refusal of the appellant's application he  appealed  and
      the judge heard his appeal  on  20  March  2013.  The  respondent  was
      represented but the appellant was not. He attended and  gave  evidence
      together with a man who the appellant claimed was his father.  I  will
      refer to this man as the appellant's father although the judge doubted
      that they were father and son.


   5. The  judge  comprehensively  disbelieved  the  appellant.  Except,  by
      implication, accepting that he was a citizen of Bangladesh  the  judge
      did not believe any of his or his father's evidence which  related  to
      what the appellant claimed happened in Bangladesh or to  his  life  in
      this  country.  He  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,   humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds.


   6. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal. The grounds
      do not clearly identify any alleged error of law. However,  permission
      to appeal was granted in terms which indicate that the judge may  have
      erred in by failing to  address  the  core  asylum  Article  3  and  8
      grounds.


   7.  The  appellant  has  now  obtained  legal   representation.   Further
      documentary evidence has been submitted since the hearing  before  the
      judge. The appellant has  submitted  DNA  report  from  Kings  College
      London which, it is claimed,  indicates  that  his  father  is  almost
      certainly his natural father. At the hearing Mrs Tanner  submitted  an
      extract from the information provided by the father  when  he  applied
      for status in this country. He names his children  and  one  of  them,
      with the same names as the appellant, has been given a different  date
      of birth from that claimed by the appellant. None  of  this  material,
      which was not before the judge, is relevant or can  be  considered  in
      deciding whether the judge erred in law.


   8. Mr Hosein submitted that whilst the judge dealt with  the  credibility
      of the appellant he did not address the Article 3 or  8  human  rights
      grounds or whether it would be safe him to return to  Bangladesh.  The
      judge should have accepted that the  appellant  and  his  father  were
      related as claimed in which case there was an obvious implication that
      they had a family life together in this country and the  judge  should
      have addressed this. He submitted on  what  I  am  told  are  specific
      instructions that at the hearing before the judge the appellant  never
      admitted to having worked illegally in this country. It  was  accepted
      that the appellant had given evidence with the help of an interpreter.
      Also on instructions I was informed that  the  appellant  now  claimed
      that he had lived with his father at all times  since  he  arrived  in
      this country. His application form  to  come  to  this  country  as  a
      working holidaymaker had been completed by a family friend who, whilst
      he was referred to as "uncle" was not in fact a relative.


   9. Whilst Mrs  Tanner  took  me  through  a  number  of  aspects  of  the
      determination, linking them to the reasons  for  refusal  letter,  her
      submissions were, in essence, that the judge did not err in law in any
      way. On the evidence before him it was open to him to conclude that he
      did not believe anything the appellant  said.  In  the  light  of  his
      finding to that effect no argument had been put forward as to how  and
      why the appellant would be at risk on return.


  10. Mr Hosein replied that the judge had not concluded that the  appellant
      and his father were not related as claimed. However, when  Mrs  Tanner
      drew attention to paragraph 72 of the determination  he  withdrew  the
      submission. I reserved my determination.


  11. Some of the submissions made by Mr Hosein, which I accept are made  on
      clear instructions from the appellant, do not assist him. Rather, they
      point to further inconsistencies in his evidence.  The  claim  by  the
      appellant that he did not admit to the judge that he had been  working
      illegally in this country for several years was  made  for  the  first
      time at the hearing before me and without any advance notification. It
      flies in the face of the clear statement by the judge in paragraph  22
      of the determination. The claim by the appellant  that  he  has  lived
      with his father at all time  since  he  arrived  in  this  country  is
      inconsistent with his own claims that he had  been  working  illegally
      for five years as a  chef  in  restaurants  which  provides  him  with
      accommodation. He was  found  working  in  restaurants  in  Essex  and
      Cumbria. The claim that he did not complete the  original  application
      form was made for the first time today.


  12. Neither the grounds nor Mr Hosein's submissions seek to argue that the
      judge erred in law in reaching his wide  ranging  adverse  credibility
      findings against the appellant and his father. That is not  surprising
      because the findings are clear and strongly supported by the  evidence
      which the  judge  sets  out.  The  judge  records  the  basis  of  the
      appellant's claim, the respondent case and  the  evidence  before  his
      findings and reasons in paragraph 22 to 27. There is no error  of  law
      in the adverse credibility findings.


  13. The appellants claim that he  was  the  son  of  his  father  was  not
      supported by any documentary evidence and doubted by the  judge.  More
      importantly, in connection with any Article 8 grounds it was  open  to
      the judge to disbelieve their evidence that they have  lived  together
      in this country.


  14. There is nothing which calls into question the  judge's  statement  in
      paragraph 26 of the determination that; "there is no claim made  under
      the ECHR". However, even if there had  been  Article  8  human  rights
      grounds, the judge's findings were such that  the  appellant  had  not
      established any family life with his father in this country,  had  not
      claimed to have a family life here with anyone  else  or  any  private
      life above and beyond the fact that he had  been  in  the  UK  without
      permission and working illegally since November 2009. On the  evidence
      before the judge and the findings which he was entitled to make I  can
      see no basis on which the appellant could succeed on Article  8  human
      rights grounds.


  15. Whilst it is argued that there is  a  gap  in  the  judge's  reasoning
      between the adverse credibility findings and the conclusions that  the
      appellant failed on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  no
      basis has been put forward on which the appellant might have succeeded
      in the light of these findings. The appellant has not shown any way in
      which he would be at risk on return in the  light  of  these  findings
      either in relation to his claims or for any other reason. There is  no
      material error of law.


  16. I find that the judge reached conclusions clearly open to him  on  the
      evidence. There is no error of law and I uphold his determination.








      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 5 July
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

