
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/01962/2015
      AA/01963/2015
      AA/01964/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2015                 |On 18 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                   (1) RZ
                                   (2) AJ
                                   (3) MJ
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                 Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. S. Iqal, Counsel instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellants are a family unit comprising of a  mother  and  her  two
    children. They are nationals of Bangladesh born  respectively  on  [  ]
    1982; [ ] 2004 and [ ] 2009. They appealed against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State dated 23 January 2015 to remove  them  from  the  UK
    following a refusal to grant them asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    protection under the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

 2. The Appellants entered the UK on 22 December 2013 with entry  clearance
    conferring leave to enter as visitors until 21 May 2014.  They  claimed
    asylum on 11 October  2014  on  the  basis  that  the  First  Appellant
    suffered domestic abuse at the hands of her husband in Bangladesh.

3.    The Appellants appeal was heard before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C
    Chapman on 20 April 2015. He dismissed the appeal on 5 May 2015 on  all
    grounds. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant and a witness  and
    made a number of findings in respect of uncontested background facts at
    [29]. In respect of the First Appellant's claim to be at risk from  her
    husband, the Judge did not find certain aspects of the account credible
    and gave detailed reasons for so finding. He did not  accept  that  the
    First Appellant had an intention to return to Bangladesh  so  that  her
    children could return to school. The Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    First Appellant had formed a relationship with another man and rejected
    her evidence that she intended to remain in the UK on account  of  this
    relationship. He did not accept that the First Appellant's  husband  in
    Bangladesh discovered that she was having such a relationship and, as a
    consequence, made a threatening telephone call to the First  Appellant.
    The judge rejected her account  that  she  had  disappeared  for  three
    months with this man noting that she knew very little  about  him. The
    Judge did accept however that, "there is a real  risk  that  the  First
    Appellant has suffered domestic abuse at the hands of her husband,  and
    that, if she were to return to him, here is a real risk that  it  would
    continue" [47]. Nevertheless, the Judge was satisfied with reference to
    applicable country guidance that the First Appellant  on  return  would
    either be able to seek support from her family or  internally  relocate
    with their support [52].

4.    The Judge considered Article 8 of the  ECHR.  Reference  was  made  to
    Family Court proceedings concerning the Second and Third Appellants who
    were made subject of a Supervision Order under the care  of  the  Local
    Authority for a period of one year on 3 March 2015.  Whilst  the  Judge
    was satisfied that there would  be  an  interference  with  family  and
    private life, he concluded in-line with the findings made by the Family
    Court that, it remained in the best interests of the Appellant children
    to remain with their mother. He noted that the  Supervision  Order  was
    designed to give effect to the best interests of the children which the
    Family Court had concluded laid with them remaining with their  mother.
    Whilst, the  Judge  acknowledged  that  removal  would  mean  that  the
    Supervision Orders could not be enforced, he found that  there  was  no
    real risk of harm to the children [57]. The Judge thus  concluded  that
    removal of the Appellants was proportionate contrary to  Article  8  of
    the ECHR. Accordingly, he dismissed the appeals.

5.     The  Appellants  sought  permission  to  appeal.   The   grounds   of
    application contend, first, that there had been procedural  unfairness,
    in that, the Judge made adverse credibility findings in respect  of  an
    issue that had up until the date of hearing been accepted and,  second,
    the judge failed to apply a "two stage test" in relation to Article  8.
    The Appellants relied on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules  but  the
    Judge made no findings there under and moved straight to an  assessment
    of Article 8 outside of the Rules. Thirdly, the Judge made  a  perverse
    assessment of the best interests  of  the  children  in  light  of  the
    supervision order made by the Family Court.

6.    Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal R C Campbell on 1 June 2015 on  all  three  grounds,  but
    observed that the first and third ground was finely balanced.

7.    In  amplifying  the  grounds  Miss  Iqbal  submitted  that  the  Judge
    misunderstood  the  nature  of  the  Supervision  Order  at  [57].  She
    submitted that the order  required  there  to  be  supervision  of  the
    mother's role in the Appellants lives and to ensure  no  real  risk  of
    harm whilst the children remained with the mother. She referred to  the
    Skeleton Argument and to paragraph 13 of  the  grounds.  She  submitted
    that the Family Court found that there was something that warranted the
    supervision of the children whilst under the mother's  care.  This  she
    submitted was relevant to the  consideration  of  paragraph  276ADE  in
    relation to the significant obstacles test. She referred  to  paragraph
    27 and 32 of the Skeleton Argument and  submitted  that  if  the  First
    Appellant returned as a single  mother  there  would  be  a  cause  for
    stigma, which in turn would cause difficulties with  integration.  This
    she submitted was material to the decision.

8.    Mr Avery reminded the Tribunal that the Judge  disbelieved  the  First
    Appellant's account. He referred to the findings at [52] and  submitted
    that it was not surprising that the Judge  did  not  address  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules, as the First Appellant had family  in  Bangladesh.
    He referred to paragraphs [51 to 53] and submitted that  there  was  no
    material error. He submitted that the Family Court  was  considering  a
    different context and  that  the  First  Appellant  would  have  family
    support in Bangladesh. He submitted that the Judge  was  aware  of  the
    best interests of the children.

9.    Miss Iqbal in reply submitted that it was important  to  consider  the
    background of domestic violence against  whether  there  would  be  any
    significant obstacles even with family support.

Decision on Error of Law

10.   Turning to deal with the first ground, it is contended in the  grounds
    of application that there has been  procedural  unfairness.  The  Judge
    made adverse credibility findings in respect of  issues  that  had,  up
    until the date  of  the  substantive  hearing,  been  accepted  by  the
    Respondent in relation to a claim that  the  First  Appellant  suffered
    domestic abuse in Bangladesh. It was argued that the Presenting Officer
    had introduced credibility into his submissions  in  respect  of  these
    matters and had the Appellants been given notice, an adjournment  would
    have been sought to obtain further evidence of  the  First  Appellant's
    vulnerability and other matters. Miss Iqbal made no oral submissions in
    respect of this ground. She was right not to do so as there is no merit
    in this ground whatsoever.  The  Presenting  Officer  was  entitled  to
    develop his case in light of the evidence which emerged at the hearing.
    The Appellants' Skeleton Argument acknowledged that  the  position  may
    indeed change and contrary submissions were pleaded should that be  the
    case. In any event, those contrary submissions  were  not  relevant  in
    light of the fact  that  the  Judge  found  that  the  First  Appellant
    suffered domestic violence at the hands of her  husband.  I  find  that
    there was no procedural unfairness and thus no  error  in  the  Judge's
    approach. I find that the first ground fails.

11.   I am satisfied, however, that the Judge erred in failing  to  apply  a
    "two stage test" in relation to Article 8.  It  is  apparent  that  the
    Appellants sought  to  rely  on  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  as  this  is
    expressly referred to in the Skeleton Argument at paragraphs 26 to  32.
    The Judge does not refer to paragraph  276ADE  and  makes  no  relevant
    findings that the requirements have either been met or not  met.  I  do
    not accept the submission of Mr Avery that the error was  not  material
    in light of the Judge's findings that the First Appellant had family in
    Bangladesh and could relocate with their support [52].  Those  findings
    were made in the context of determining the Appellants' asylum  appeal,
    which required consideration of  different  matters  to  that  required
    under the Rules. The fact  that  the  First  Appellant  has  family  in
    Bangladesh, whilst relevant to the issues under the  Rules,  is  by  no
    means determinative of it. As Miss Iqbal pointed out, there  are  other
    factors such as the First Appellant's profile as  a  former  victim  of
    domestic abuse and as a single mother that  are  of  relevance  in  any
    enquiry under the applicable Rule. It  is  abundantly  clear  that  the
    Judge failed to conduct an assessment under  the  Rules  which  he  was
    required to do. I find that the second ground is made out.

12.    As  for  ground  three,  whilst  I  agree  with  the  Judge  granting
    permission that this ground is finely balanced,  I  am  just  persuaded
    that the Judge erred in his assessment of proportionality by failing to
    adequately consider the terms and effect of the Supervision Orders, the
    existence of which is material to  the  best  interests  assessment  in
    respect of the children. I am satisfied that the Judge's findings  that
    the Supervision Orders were designed to give effect to  the  conclusion
    of the Family Court that the best interests of the  children  lie  with
    them being with their mother at [57], is not  adequately  justified  by
    reference to the evidence before the Judge, which  indicated  that  the
    appointed guardian acting for the children recommended that  the  Local
    Authority continue to remain involved in order to  support  the  family
    and, in particular, to monitor the children's wellbeing.  The  evidence
    indicates that the Supervision Orders were not solely made in order  to
    secure the children's placement with the mother, but were  designed  to
    put  in  place  a  form  of  protection  for  the  children.  Whilst  I
    acknowledge that the Judge was clearly aware of the Supervision Orders,
    I am not satisfied that their  existence  and  purpose  was  adequately
    considered in  the  context  of  the  evidence  from  various  relevant
    agencies identifying  the  vulnerability  of  the  family.  I  am  thus
    satisfied that the Judge's finding that there would be no real risk  of
    harm to the children notwithstanding that removal would mean  that  the
    Supervision Orders could not be enforced is  not  sustainable.  I  find
    that ground three is made out.

13.   I am thus satisfied that the Judge materially erred in  law  and  that
    his decision on human rights grounds must be set  aside.  Having  found
    that the judge materially erred in law  the  parties  were  invited  to
    address the Tribunal as to their respective position on disposal.  Miss
    Iqbal invited the Tribunal  to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing, whilst Mr Avery was  of  the  view  that  the
    matter could remain  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  As  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to consider the appeal under the Rules, I am  persuaded
    to remit the matter so that further evidence can be filed and heard  in
    respect of outstanding issues, whilst preserving the findings of  fact.
    I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remit  the
    appeal for consideration under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules and
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  errors  of  law,  is  set
aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  by  a
judge other than Judge C M Chapman.

Anonymity

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rule 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity  in  order  to  preserve  the  anonymity  of  the   minor
Appellants. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them or any member of their family. This direction applies both  to
the Appellants and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


