
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02282/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2016                 |On 20th October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     U V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of  Sir  Lanka,  brings  a  challenge  to  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Heynes sent on 31 May  2016
    dismissing her appeal.  The grounds of appeal raised seven  points;  it
    being submitted the judge erred by:

    (i)  failing to take proper account of the medical report by Dr Martin;

    (ii) wrongly treating as adverse to her account that she  was  able  to
         leave Sir Lanka by air using her own passport;

    (iii)    giving incorrect  reasons  for  placing  no  reliance  on  the
    Attorney's letter;

    (iv) wrongly dismissing the psychiatric evidence of Dr Dhumad;

    (v)  failing to put any of the aforementioned concerns to the  claimant
         at the hearing at which there was no HOPO;

    (vi) failing to apply the Court of Appeal analysis in MP  and  NT  (Sri
         Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829;

    (vii)    failing to make any reference to the materials  the  appellant
         had produced to support her claim to be a writer.

2.   I am grateful to both representatives for  their  submissions.   It  is
    unnecessary for me to address all seven grounds because I am  persuaded
    that the first four are made out.  The judge's treatment of Mr Martin's
    report rested on the mistaken understanding that it had simply asserted
    (as in the case of the medical report at issue in MN (Sri Lanka) [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1601) an inconsistency between the appellant's scars  and  the
    claimed ill-treatment at the hands of the Sri Lankan  authorities.   In
    fact Mr Martin's report  included  findings  that  certain  scars  were
    'typical' which under the Istanbul Protocol hierarchy of causes is  the
    strongest level of correlation and not a  level  of  equal  possibility
    described by the judge at [41].

3.   If the judge intended by reference  to  "timescale"  to  say  that  the
    doctor had seen the scars too long after the claimed date of infliction
    to make proper causal findings,  that needed to be made clear;  it  was
    not; and in any event the evidence at least  left  open   that  it  was
    inflicted within the period of two years.  The judge's  observation  at
    [31] (see also [41] and [44]) that the doctor does not explain  whether
    the scars could have been inflicted several years earlier may have been
    a basis for attaching less weight to the report, but  did  not  address
    the doctor's finding that some scars were "typical" of the  appellant's
    account and the appellant's account was of ill-treatment within the two
    year period.

4.   As regards the judge's treatment of the psychiatrist's  report,  it  is
    wholly deficient.  It is stated in [42] that this report  "...is  based
    largely upon the appellant's account of her symptoms  which  cannot  be
    corroborated".  This is not a fair description of  a  report  that  was
    based as well on prior consideration by the psychiatrist of the  asylum
    interview and SEF, a medical letter from GP Dr  Kumar  and  included  a
    finding that the appellant was suffering from PTSD "directly related to
    the incident of torture and rape in Sri Lanka."  The judge's  reference
    to  corroboration  is  also  unfortunate  because   this   report   was
    essentially itself corroborative of the report from Dr Martin.

5.   The  judge's  treatment  of  the  letter  from  the  Attorney  is  also
    problematic.  He states at [26] - [28]:

         "26. The Respondent had obtained an adjournment  earlier  in  these
             proceedings in order to undertake a check  on  this  attorney.
             These enquiries gave rise to an email from  the  British  High
             Commission stating that the attorney had  been  contacted  and
             had confirmed that he had written the letter.

         27.  I place little evidential weight on this letter.  The attorney
             does not  appear  to  have  taken  any  action  personally  to
             substantiate these claims.   His knowledge derives solely from
             the complaint of the Appellant's husband and  the  information
             that the junior attorney gave him.

         28.  I do not in any event find it reliable.   I  do  not  find  it
             credible that the  Appellant's  husband  would  make  repeated
             visits to this attorney who  does  not  appear  to  have  been
             instructed to do, or to have  done,  anything  to  assist  the
             Appellant."

6.   I do not consider that the judge was entitled  to  discard  the  letter
    simply because the Attorney's inquires were stated as being carried out
    by a junior Attorney.  The letter made clear that the  junior  Attorney
    was acting under the Attorney's directions and by  signing  the  letter
    the Attorney was attesting to the validity  of  the  junior  Attorney's
    inquiries.  The evidence  of  the  Attorney  in  question  -  Mr  Anton
    Punathanayagma - was accepted in GJ  &  Others  [2003]  UKUT  00319  as
    "useful and reliable" in relation to criminal processes.

7.   The above errors suffice to establish to my satisfaction that  the  FtT
    Judge materially erred in law and that his decision is to be set aside.
     I see no basis for preserving any of the judge's findings of fact  and
    in such circumstances a  remittal  to  the  First-tier  is  the  proper
    course.  My decision is not in any way to be taken as expressing a view
    one way or the other on the credibility of the appellant's account.

8.   For the above reasons:

    The FtT Judge materially erred in law.

9.   The case is remitted to be heard  by  a  FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Heynes.  The relisting should be in the London area.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

         [pic]
Dr H H Storey 20th October 2016
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

