
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02371/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 March 2015                     |On 25 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between


                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms K Smith counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent: Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. An order was made before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and I am satisfied that it should continue.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Mongolia was born on  6  April  1970.  The
    Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    27 March 2014 to refuse to grant  an  application  for  asylum  and  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom. First-tier Tribunal Judge De  Haney
    dismissed the appeal and the Appellant now appeals with  permission  to
    this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  United
    Kingdom on 27 August 2005 as a student having left  her  [children]  in
    the care of her husband and mother. The Appellant's husband joined  her
    in the United Kingdom in July 2006 and she changed  the  basis  of  her
    stay to that of dependent spouse.  In  December  2010  the  Appellant's
    husband returned to Mongolia and on  23  February  2011  the  Appellant
    claimed asylum with her three children  as  dependents.  The  Appellant
    claimed that she could not return to Mongolia because her husband would
    kill her and her three children.

 4. The Respondent refused the application  because  by  reference  to  the
    background material in relation to victims of domestic  violence  there
    is a fully functioning police force in  Mongolia  who  would  help  the
    Appellant if she had problems with her husband as they had in the  past
    and if dissatisfied with their response the Appellant  could  take  the
    matter to a higher authority; relocation was also  an  option  for  the
    Appellant.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant
    and had before him a bundle of documents from the Respondent and a  117
    page bundle from the Appellant whose contents he set out in  detail  at
    paragraph 8 of his  decision.  The  Judge  took  these  documents  into
    account  and  specifically  noted  those  passages  identified  by  the
    advocates as being directly relevant to the Appellant's case.

 6. The claim was that the Appellant was a teacher in Mongolia who  married
    in 1996 and he adopted her daughter. The  Appellant  was  subjected  to
    domestic violence from 1997 and she left her husband to live  with  her
    grandfather. Her husband found her and apologised for his behaviour and
    they reconciled returning  to  live  in  Ulaan  Bataar.  The  Appellant
    studied for a postgraduate degree in Russia and had a second  child  in
    2001. After returning to Mongolia the  Appellant  was  hospitalised  in
    November 2002 after being beaten by her husband.  The  police  attended
    her at hospital. Her husband was arrested and  detained  overnight  and
    was fined by the police. The violence stopped for 2-3  months  but  the
    Appellant did not report the matter to the police for  fear  of  making
    matters worse. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom as a student in
    2005 leaving her children with her husband  and  mother.  In  2006  her
    husband joined her in the United Kingdom as a student and the Appellant
    became his dependent spouse. They were  joined  by  their  children  in
    2007. A third child was born in 2008. The Appellant  was  assaulted  by
    her husband in February 2010 and in September 2010 one of the  children
    phoned the police following an incident  of  domestic  violence  and  a
    restraining order was made against him and he was also made the subject
    of a Community Order. They  separated  and  on  26  December  2010  her
    husband returned to Mongolia. On 23 February 2011 the Appellant claimed
    asylum with her 3 children as dependents. She claimed that  she  feared
    that if she returned her husband would kill her and her children

 7. The Judge concluded  that  the  issues  before  him  were  whether  the
    Appellant would face persecution for a Convention reason if returned to
    Mongolia;  if  so  would  there  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  or
    alternatively could she relocate. The Judge accepted that the Appellant
    had in the past been the victim of domestic violence. He found that the
    law in Mongolia provides protection for women. He acknowledged that the
    argument advanced by Ms Smith who also appeared in the lower court  and
    the expert witnesses was that the protection provided  was  inadequate.
    He found that the background material stated that  the  sufficiency  of
    protection was  not  equally  available  to  all  women  but  that  the
    Appellant was well educated, forceful  and  able  to  access  what  was
    available. He found that her claimed fear that her husband  would  harm
    her children was inconsistent with her actions in that she had  studied
    in Russia and the United Kingdom leaving her children in  the  care  of
    her husband. He found that the only time  the  Appellant  reported  her
    husband's behaviour to the police they took action and that since  then
    she did not report him to the police or seek to separate from him.  The
    Appellant had not initiated divorce proceedings since she came  to  the
    United Kingdom. He found that the Appellant was  more  concerned  about
    remaining in the United Kingdom as it was in hers  and  the  children's
    best interests educationally and socially rather than through  fear  of
    persecution. He found that there was sufficiency of protection and  she
    could, if she chose to, internally relocate. He found that her  failure
    to divorce her husband added weight to  the  concern  that  they  would
    reconcile again as they had in the past.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Smith sought to argue that  the  Judge  had
    failed to properly engage with the  background  material  provided  and
    gave inadequate reasons for  the  conclusions  he  reached.  The  judge
    failed to engage with the background material that suggested that there
    were systematic failings in the system in Mongolia and  the  protection
    provided to women. He failed to engage with the material that suggested
    that domestic violence was not criminalised and  that  police  and  the
    government were reluctant to get involved. She submitted that the  fact
    that the Appellant was educated and resourceful was irrelevant  as  the
    systems failings applied to everyone.  In  relation  to  ground  2  she
    suggested that the Appellant could not relocate as  her  husband  could
    find her and had given three specific  methods  by  which  her  husband
    could trace her if she relocated. She also  argued  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant to  relocate  as  the  majority  of  the
    country was uninhabitable and her  and  her  eldest  child  ahd  mental
    health issues.

 9. Ms Johnstone pointed to paragraphs 29, 30, 33, 34 and 36 as evidence of
    the fact that the Judge had engaged with the  material before him . The
    Judge had made a finding at paragraph 33 that was unchallenged  in  the
    grounds that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  husband
    intended to harm the children. The Judge had highlighted the fact  that
    the Appellant chose not to divorce her husband.

10. In response said that nowhere was it clear that the Judge had  assessed
    the expert report.

Error of Law

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

13. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal content that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in two respects. It is firstly contended that  the
    Judge failed to engage  with  the  background  material  including  the
    expert report about sufficiency of protection in Mongolia  for  victims
    of domestic violence.

14. The Judge set out in detail at paragraphs 6(1)-(14) and 7 (1) - (9) the
    documentary evidence that was placed  before  him  which  included  the
    experts report. He pointed out that the material ran to some 117  pages
    not all of which was directly relevant to the Appellant's  case  so  he
    sought further clarification  as  to  those  passages  that  were  more
    directly relevant (paragraph 8).  The  Judge  set  out  in  detail  the
    Appellant's claim at paragraph 10(i)-(xxix) and the submissions of  the
    advocates devoting paragraphs 15-18 to the submissions made by Ms Smith
    which relied heavily on the background material.

15. In his findings the Judge pithily summarised the argument  advanced  by
    Ms Smith at paragraph 30:

         "What Ms Smith, and the expert's reports,  claim  however  is  that
         whilst the letter of the law provides a sufficiency of  protection,
         in practice this protection is inadequate."

16. The Judge accepted on the basis of the material before him  that  there
    were shortcomings in the system in Mongolia (paragraph 31) but  he  was
    entitled to  consider  this  against  the  evidence  of  what  actually
    occurred in the Appellant's case. In  determining  whether  there  were
    systematic  failings  in  the  system   in   Mongolia   and   therefore
    insufficiency of protection the Judge was entitled to take into account
    how the authorities had responded on what  was  accepted  as  the  only
    occasion that the Appellant made a complaint to the police that she had
    been assaulted and whether this demonstrated an  unwillingness  by  the
    authorities to act. He found that the police took action and while this
    may have fallen short of what she wanted the fact is that  her  husband
    was detained and fined. (paragraph 34)

17. The Judge in determining whether the protection offered was  sufficient
    was entitled to take into account that  the  Appellant  took  no  other
    steps either to bring her husband to the attention of  the  authorities
    although she had no reason to believe they would not  respond  as  they
    had in her case; she took no steps either in  Mongolia  or  the  United
    Kingdom to divorce her husband and indeed  reconciled  with  him  on  a
    number of occasions in Mongolia, Russia and the United Kingdom.

18. While the Judge accepted that  the  Appellant  had  been  a  victim  of
    domestic violence the Judge, having heard evidence from  the  Appellant
    and considered what was in her witness statements, was entitled to find
    as he did (paragraph 36) that her claims to be in fear for her life had
    to be set against her statements that she would not be able to  achieve
    such a good standard of living in Mongolia as she enjoyed in the United
    Kingdom or indeed find a comparable education system for  her  children
    and that this fact rather than fear  of  her  husband  underpinned  her
    claim for asylum protection (paragraph 36).

19. I am therefore satisfied that the Judges findings when read as a  whole
    deal adequately with the issue of protection.

20. The second ground argues that the Judge failed to deal with  the  issue
    of internal  relocation  adequately.  The  Judge  deals  with  this  at
    paragraph 37 of his decision and while suggesting  that  the  Appellant
    could relocate found that in fact her failure to  divorce  her  husband
    raised concerns in his mind as to whether  she  intended  to  reconcile
    with him again in any event as divorce would afford her the same  level
    of protection as any other Mongolian citizen who was a victim of crime.
    Nevertheless given his finding that there was adequacy of protection in
    Mongolia I am satisfied that any shortcomings in his assessment of  the
    issue of internal relocation in relation to whether her  husband  could
    find her again would have made no material outcome to the decision.

21. I find therefore that the reasons given were adequate and the Appellant
    cannot be in any doubt about why the appeal was dismissed.

CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 24.3.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
