
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02374/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and reasons promulgated     |
|On 10 August 2017                    |On 13 September 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                    [S S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr S Pararajasingam of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appealed against the decision of the  respondent  dated  26
   January 2015 refusing to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection  in
   the  United  Kingdom.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Owens   dismiss   the
   appellant's appeal on both grounds.

2. Permission to appeal  was  at  first  refused  by  designated  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Murray on 11 May 2017 and subsequently  granted  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Grubb on 14 June 2017.

3. At the hearing before me, the senior presenting officer submitted that  I
   have no jurisdiction to hear this appeal because no permission to  appeal
   out of time has been granted to the appellant. He further added that  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  must  decide  on  this  primary  issue  as  to  the
   timeliness of the appeal and in the absence of express  permission  being
   granted to appeal out of time, there is no appeal before me to consider.

4. The decision refusing the appellant's application was made in 26  January
   2015. The appellant's hearing before the first-tier Tribunal Judge was on
   9 June 2015. The appellant's appeal against the decision was not until 28
   April 2017, some two years later.



5. There  is  no  dispute  that  the  appellant  must  ask  and  be  granted
   permission to appeal out of time. This issue has not been  grappled  with
   or decided upon. I agree with the senior presenting officer that it is  a
   preliminary  issue  which  requires  a   decision.   I   find,   in   the
   circumstances, I have no jurisdiction to hear this appeal.  This  dispose
   of this appeal.





DECISION



The appellant's appeal is dismissed as he has no right of appeal





  Signed by

 A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                       Ms                      S                       Chana
Dated this 13th day of September 2017



