

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                               Appeal Numbers: AA/02956/2014
                                                               AA/02957/2014
                                                               AA/02958/2014
                                                               AA/02959/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2014             |On 17 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MRS FJS
                                    MR LS
                                  MASTER AS
                                  MASTER IS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents: Mr Corbon (Corbon Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a decision of First-tier
         Tribunal Judge O R  Williams  dated  30  June  2014  in  which  the
         respondents' appeals were allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.




Background



      2. The background to this case is lengthy but can  be  summarised  for
         the purposes of this appeal.  The third and fourth respondents  are
         the young children of  the  first  and  second  respondents.  Judge
         Williams considered detailed medical evidence about the sickle cell
         anaemia conditions  for  both  the  third  and  fourth  respondents
         together with the treatment available to them  in  the  UK  and  in
         Gambia, their parents' country of origin.  The third appellant came
         to reside in the UK in 2010 but the fourth appellant  was  born  in
         the UK in 2012.




      3.  Judge  Williams  concluded  that  the  removal  of  the   children
         particularly in light of their medical conditions  would  prejudice
         their well-being and private life in a manner sufficiently  serious
         to breach Article 8 of the ECHR and this would be  disproportionate
         to the public interest [30].



      4. The SSHD appealed against that finding and permission  was  granted
         on 23 July 2014 by Judge J M Holmes.  He considered that there  had
         been an arguable error of law because inter alia, the Judge did not
         apply the guidance contained on  health  cases  in  SQ  Pakistan  v
         Pakistan [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 and Akhalu [2013] UKUT 400.


      5. The matter now comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
         determination contains an error of law.


Hearing


      6. At the hearing Ms  Johnstone  refined  her  grounds  of  appeal  in
         accordance with the observations made by Judge Holmes when granting
         permission to  appeal.   She  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  not
         identified and considered the full ambit  of  the  public  interest
         before  concluding  that  the  breach  of  the  third  and   fourth
         respondents' private lives could not be outweighed  by  the  public
         interest.


      7. Mr Corbon helpfully submitted a  bundle  of  relevant  authorities.
         These were mainly authorities that had  been  identified  by  Judge
         Holmes when granting permission.  Mr Corbon submitted that all  the
         relevant aspects of the public interest  must  have  considered  by
         Judge Williams and his determination was sufficiently reasoned  and
         should be upheld.


      8. At the end of submissions I reserved my determination, which I  now
         give with reasons.


Legal framework


      9. In this appeal both parties accepted that the respondents could not
         succeed under the Immigration Rules whether in Appendix FM or  para
         276ADE. Therefore, in order to succeed under Article 8 they  needed
         to establish that there are "compelling"  circumstances  such  that
         her removal would lead to "unjustifiably harsh" consequences.  Both
         parties accept that the Judge directed himself  properly  regarding
         this approach [11, 18 and 19].


     10. Both parties also accepted that the Judge  was  correct  to  solely
         consider Article 8 of the ECHR  and  that  whilst  Zoumbas  v  SSHD
         [2013] UKSC 74 sets out the appropriate approach to best  interests
         it does not address  the  position  of  children  with  significant
         health or welfare concerns.


     11. In Akhalu (supra), the Upper Tribunal, having analysed the relevant
         case law, recognises the potential application of Article  8  in  a
         'health' case but also  acknowledges  that  it  will  be  difficult
         nevertheless to succeed under  Article  8  either  because  of  the
         significant threshold to engage Article 8 or, if it is engaged, for
         the circumstances of the individual to be such as to  outweigh  the
         public interest.  The Tribunal concluded at [43]:


             "The correct approach is not to leave out of account what  is,
             by any view, a material consideration of central importance to
             the individual concerned but to recognise  that  the  counter-
             veiling  public  interest  in  removal   will   outweigh   the
             consequences with the health of  the  claimant  because  of  a
             disparity of healthcare facilities in all but a very few  rare
             cases."


     12. The Tribunal endorsed a holistic approach to proportionality having
         regard to disparity in health resources but concluded that any such
         disparity did "not weigh heavily" in  an  individual's  favour  but
         rather spoke  "cogently  in  support  of  the  public  interest  in
         removal" (see [45]-[46]).


     13. Akhalu did not address the position where removal impacted  on  the
         health of a child, where  its  best  interests  would  have  to  be
         considered.  SQ (Pakistan) concerned a child who suffered from Beta
         Thalassaemia,  a  very  serious  medical  condition  for  which  he
         required treatment. The evidence was that, although healthcare  was
         available in Pakistan, it was of a significantly lower quality than
         that available in the UK. The Court of Appeal was concerned with  a
         judicial review Cart challenge to that  refusal  of  permission  to
         appeal. The Court of Appeal concluded  that  the  FTT  had  wrongly
         excluded "health consideration and the  discontinuance  of  the  UK
         treatment"  in  assessing  the  child's  best  interests.    As   a
         consequence, the Court of Appeal remitted the  case  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal for a rehearing.  SQ (Pakistan) therefore illustrates that
         in a 'health' case, Article 8 may have  greater  purchase  where  a
         child is affected.


     14. That approach was followed in the more recent decision of the Court
         of Appeal in AE (Algeria) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  653.  That  case
         involved an individual who had a six-year-old daughter  with  spina
         bifida, which resulted in her being very  severely  disabled,  with
         severe learning difficulties and  extremely  complex  needs.  There
         also, the Court of Appeal remitted the appeal to the Upper Tribunal
         to consider the application of Article 8  on  the  basis  that  the
         Upper Tribunal had failed properly to  consider  the  child's  best
         interests. At [9], Maurice Kay LJ (with whom Black and Lewison  LJJ
         agreed) said this:


             "What was required was a structured  approach  with  the  best
             interests of [M] and her siblings as a  primary  consideration
             but with careful consideration also of  factors  pointing  the
             other way. Such factors include but are  not  limited  to  the
             over-staying of the children and their mother and the  illegal
             entry and bogus asylum claim  of  the  appellant  father.  The
             latter is no doubt what the UT had in mind when  referring  to
             'the need to maintain immigration control'. Moreover, I do not
             consider that it would be inappropriate for  the  future  cost
             and duration of [M's] treatment and care in  this  country  to
             play a part in the balancing exercise as matters  relating  to
             the economic well being of this country, given the strains  on
             the public finances."


     15. To summarise, whilst the circumstances of a child may  (though  not
         must) more readily engage Article 8.1, in assessing proportionality
         and taking into account as a primary consideration a  child's  best
         interests, the public interest must  be  weighed  bearing  in  mind
         that, even under Article 8 and in  cases  involving  children,  the
         public interest reflected in the economic well-being of the country
         remains a powerful and weighty  factor  in  'health'  or  'welfare'
         cases.


     16. With those principles in mind, I turn  to  consider  whether  Judge
         Williams made an error of law.


Findings


     17. The determination is a clearly written and well-structured one.  As
         both parties accepted the Judge has correctly directed  himself  to
         the need for compelling circumstances in  accordance  with  Gulshan
         (Art 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) [11].


     18.  The  Judge  identified  what  he   regarded   to   be   compelling
         circumstances.  He focused upon the children's  health  conditions.
         He was entitled to accept the medical evidence available from  both
         Gambia and Alder Hey Hospital in Liverpool.  Having  accepted  that
         evidence he was entitled to find that the children will not get the
         particular treatment "that they require" [29].  Although the  Judge
         did not go into detail I have been taken to  the  detailed  medical
         evidence before  him.   It  is  clear  from  the  accepted  medical
         evidence that the third respondent had already experienced frequent
         pain crises since its diagnosis after his  arrival  in  the  UK  in
         2010, that he has had substantive  medical  involvement  since  and
         that in order to prevent this from taking place again  or  minimise
         its risk he required a combination of medication and  medical  care
         including regular blood tests.  The Judge  therefore  endorsed  the
         medical evidence that without the particular treatment available in
         the UK (which would not be available in Gambia) there  was  a  real
         risk that the children would suffer significant pain and suffering.




     19. The SSHD has submitted that this finding is inconsistent  with  the
         evidence that the first respondent has two older children who  have
         sickle cell anaemia living in Gambia.   This  was  referred  to  in
         passing in the SSHD's decision  letter  and  the  first  respondent
         confirmed this fact in her interview.  Ms Johnstone invited  me  to
         find that as there was sufficient treatment available for two other
         children there would be treatment available for these two children.
          This does not appear to have been argued  before  Judge  Williams.
         In any event, on the material available  to  this  Judge  regarding
         these children, they would not be able to obtain the treatment that
         they require in order to avoid pain and suffering.   The  diagnosis
         and impact of sickle cell is not uniform for  all  those  with  the
         condition.


     20. The Judge was entitled to regard the children's health as  relevant
         and important when assessing that their best interests were  served
         by remaining in the UK where they had developed  close  links.   Ms
         Johnstone pointed out that the Judge was mistaken when he said that
         the third appellant arrived in the UK in 2007 [13],  and  therefore
         got  his  length  of  residence  wrong.   The  Judge's   chronology
         clarifies the matter unequivocally [9].  Whilst the third appellant
         arrived with his mother as a visitor in 2007 he did not  reside  in
         the UK until 2010, since when he has resided here continuously.


     21. Having considered the  children's  best  interests  the  Judge  was
         obliged to balance these with the public interest and  the  factors
         going the other way.  Whilst the Judge mentions the public interest
         rather briefly under the heading  'balancing  exercise'  [30],  his
         determination must be read as a whole.  When it is I  am  satisfied
         that  the  Judge  clearly  had  in  mind   the   relevant   factors
         underpinning the public interest.   He  was  well  aware  that  the
         Immigration Rules could not be met [11 and  18]  and  this  was  an
         important consideration as to where the balance ought to be struck.
          The Judge also expressly referred to  the  need  to  consider  the
         economic well-being of the country as well as the Court  of  Appeal
         decision of FK and OK (Botswana) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  238  [19].
         In  this  case  Sir  Stanley  Burnton  made  the  point  about  the
         importance of the economic well-being of the country and the burden
         on the public purse at [11]:


             " ...the maintenance of immigration control is not an aim that
             is implied for the purposes of article 8.2. Its maintenance is
             necessary in order to preserve or to foster the economic well-
             being of the country, in order to protect health  and  morals,
             and for the protection of the rights and freedoms  of  others.
             If there were no  immigration  control,  enormous  numbers  of
             persons would be able to enter  this  country,  and  would  be
             entitled to claim social security benefits,  the  benefits  of
             the National Health Service, to be housed (or to  compete  for
             housing with  those  in  this  country)  and  to  compete  for
             employment with those already here. Their  children  would  be
             entitled to be educated at the taxpayers' expense (as was  the
             second appellant). All such matters (and I do not suggest that
             they are the only matters) go to the  economic  well-being  of
             the country. That the individuals  concerned  in  the  present
             case are law-abiding (other than  in  respect  of  immigration
             controls) does not detract from the fact that the  maintenance
             of  a  generally  applicable  immigration  policy  is,  albeit
             indirectly, a legitimate aim for the purposes of article 8.2."


     22. Whilst I accept the Judge could have been a little clearer  on  the
         public  interest  side  of  the  scales  toward  the  end  of   his
         determination, in my judgment he has sufficiently demonstrated that
         he has weighed the relevant public interest and this  includes  the
         costs of caring for these children on the NHS and  educating  them.
         Whilst the Judge has not referred to Akhalu  and  SQ  Pakistan  his
         approach  is  not  inconsistent  with   those   authorities.    The
         importance of the point regarding the costs to the public purse has
         been set out clearly within FK and OK and this was plainly  in  the
         Judge's mind when considering the public interest.  His approach to
         the balancing exercise might be described as rather generous but in
         my view he has not erred in law.


Decision


     23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error
         of law.  I do not set it aside and I dismiss the SSHD's appeal.




Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
14 November 2014
