
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02221/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2015                  |On 3 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     aB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Lloyd, counsel instructed by Crown & Mehria
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on 11 June 2015
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis which refused the appellant's  asylum
    and human rights claim.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and was born in 1996.

 4. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on 19 May  2012.   He  claimed
    asylum but his application was  refused  on  10  April  2013.   He  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain  until  25  October  2013  as  an
    unaccompanied minor.

 5.  On  25  October  2013  the  appellant  sought  an  extension  of   his
    discretionary leave to remain.  The respondent refused that application
    on 26 January 2015.  The appeal on asylum and human rights grounds came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Alis  on  4  June  2015.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Alis did not find the appellant's account of  his  older
    brother having been killed by associates of an  influential  government
    minister to be credible and did not find that the appellant's situation
    in the UK with his three sisters who have been granted  refugee  status
    amounted to a breach of his Article 8 rights.

 6. The first ground of appeal is at paragraphs 9  to  10  of  the  written
    grounds and maintain that the First-tier Tribunal erred in refusing  to
    grant an adjournment request made on the day of the  hearing  in  order
    for the appellant's older sister, X, to attend to give evidence.

 7. Ms Lloyd argued that the  failure  to  adjourn  for  X's  evidence  was
    material to both the refugee claim and the Article 8 claim. Her  asylum
    claim had been made on the same facts  as  those  put  forward  by  the
    appellant and her  presence  would  have  meant  that  there  were  two
    corroborative witnesses  (another  sister,  Y,  also  giving  the  same
    evidence) in front of the First-tier Tribunal. She was also the  sister
    closest to the appellant after he was  put  into  her  care  by  Social
    Services and had relevant evidence to provide in support of his Article
    8 claim.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with  the  adjournment  request  at
    paragraphs 9 to 10 of the determination. The application to adjourn was
    made because X had to sit an examination on the  same  day.  The  judge
    quite properly queried at [9] why no earlier application had been made.
    As noted by Judge Alis at [10], the document contained at  page  79  of
    the appellant's bundle which was submitted under a cover letter dated 2
    June 2015 contained X's examination schedule so the matter  could  have
    been  raised  earlier,  particularly  where  the  appellant  had  legal
    representation. The judge was entitled to find it relevant that  X  had
    provided a letter in support of the appeal.  The attendance of  another
    sister, Y, who could give similar evidence,  certainly  on  the  asylum
    claim, was a further factor on which  he  was  entitled  to  rely  when
    deciding not to adjourn. For those reasons I did  not  find  that  this
    ground had merit.

 9. The next ground of appeal is at paragraphs 11  to  13  of  the  written
    grounds and is  referred  to  as  ground  1(b).   At  page  A5  of  the
    respondent's bundle, in paragraph 39 of the appellant's  first  refusal
    letter dated 10 April 2013, the respondent stated:

         "Your sisters have been considered as single females and have  been
         given refugee status in the UK as such."

10. At paragraph 34 his determination, Judge Alis recorded  the  submission
    of the Home Office Presenting Officer that:

         "I did not have any information about the sisters' basis  of  claim
         save what was recorded in the  original  refusal  letter  and  this
         confirmed that they had been granted refugee status as  they  would
         be at risk of persecution if returned as single females."

11. At paragraph 35, the submission  of  Ms  Lloyd  for  the  appellant  is
    recorded:

         "His sisters had each been granted asylum and in the absence of any
         further explanation from the respondent it should be inferred  that
         the respondent accepted the basis of their claim that they would be
         at risk on return from the same person the appellant now feared."

12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis considered this issue at  paragraphs  44
    to 45 of his determination.  He stated as follows:

         "44. I do not have the sisters' interview or any  paperwork  to  do
             with their asylum claims but it is clear from  paragraph  [30]
             of the  appellant's   'April  10,  2013'  refusal  letter  the
             respondent  granted  them  asylum  and   because   they   were
             considered as single females.  Such a decision would appear to
             follow AK (Article 15c) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC)
             where the Tribunal held that whilst women with a male  support
             network may be able to relocate internally, '... it  would  be
             unreasonable  to  expect  lone  women  and  female  heads   of
             household to relocate internally'.

         45.  The mere fact that the appellant's sisters were granted asylum
             does not mean this appellant is entitled to asylum because  he
             is of course not a single female but  is  instead  a  fit  and
             intelligent young man who confidently  gave  his  evidence  in
             English.  His case has to be  considered  on  its  own  merits
             having regard to the issues highlighted above."

13. Ground 1(b) argues that where the respondent  sought  to  rely  on  the
    assertion in the April 2013 letter that  the  appellant's  sisters  had
    been granted status as single lone females the  burden  passed  to  the
    respondent to provide documents to support that.

14. I did not find that this ground had merit.  It  is  not  disputed  that
    there were no documents before Judge Alis from the asylum claims of the
    appellants' sisters. If the appellant wished to rely  on  their  asylum
    claims and subsequent grants of refugee status to  support  his  claim,
    those documents could have been provided.  Paragraph 12 of the  grounds
    states  that  "the  judge  was  made   aware   that   the   Appellant's
    representatives had one of the sister's statements". If that was so, it
    is not clear to me why it was not submitted with the appellant's bundle
    with the  other  evidence  and  nothing  in  the  materials  before  me
    suggested that the First-tier Tribunal declined to admit  the  sister's
    witness statement if it was available on the day of the hearing.

15. There was therefore nothing before Judge Alis challenging the statement
    at paragraph 39 of the appellant's refusal letter of  April  2013  that
    they had been given refugee status as lone females.  He had nothing  to
    suggest that the respondent had accepted in  the  sisters'  claims  the
    account now being  put  forward  by  the  appellant.  It  was  for  the
    appellant through his legal advisers to provide  that  evidence  rather
    than  the  burden  passing  to  the  respondent  to  provide  documents
    supporting the statement at paragraph 39 of the refusal  letter  of  10
    April 2013. Judge Alis did not err at [44] and [45], therefore.

16. When making her submissions on the question of the basis of the  grants
    of refugee status to the appellant's sisters, Ms Lloyd sought  to  rely
    on the case of Chicaiza v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 01200.  This  case  is  not
    reported. No application was made for permission to cite  the  case  in
    line with the Senior President's Practice Direction for the Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber first issued on 10 February 2010 and amended  on  13
    November 2014. This states:

        "Citation of unreported determinations

        11.1  A determination of the Tribunal which has  not  been  reported
        may not be cited in proceedings before the Tribunal unless:

            (a)   the person who is or was the appellant before the  First-
            tier Tribunal, or a member of that person's family, was a party
            to the proceedings in  which  the  previous  determination  was
            issued; or

            (b)   the Tribunal gives permission.

        11.2  An application for permission to cite  a  determination  which
        has not been reported must:

            (a)   include a full transcript of the determination;

            (b)   identify the proposition for which the  determination  is
            to be cited; and

            (c)   certify that the proposition is not to be  found  in  any
            reported determination of the Tribunal, the IAT or the AIT  and
            had not been superseded by the decision of a higher authority.

        11.3  Permission under paragraph 11.1 will be given only  where  the
        Tribunal considers that it would be materially assisted by  citation
        of the determination, as distinct from the adoption in  argument  of
        the reasoning to be found in the determination. Such  instances  are
        likely to be rare; in particular,  in  the  case  of  determinations
        which were unreportable (see Practice  Statement  11  (reporting  of
        determinations)). It should be emphasised that the Tribunal will not
        exclude good arguments from consideration but it will  be  rare  for
        such an argument to be capable of being made only by reference to an
        unreported determination.

        11.4  The provisions of paragraph 11.1 to 11.3 apply  to  unreported
        and  unreportable  determinations  of   the   AIT,   the   IAT   and
        adjudicators, as those provisions apply respectively  to  unreported
        and unreportable determinations of the Tribunal.

        11.5  A party citing a determination of the IAT  bearing  a  neutral
        citation number prior to [2003] (including all  series  of  "bracket
        numbers") must be in a  position  to  certify  that  the  matter  or
        proposition for which the determination is cited has  not  been  the
        subject of more recent, reported, determinations of the IAT, the AIT
        or the Tribunal.

        11.6   In  this  Practice  Direction  and  Practice  Direction   12,
        "determination" includes any decision of the AIT or the Tribunal."

17. No formal application for permission was made and no certification that
    the proposition in the case has not been the subject  of  more  recent,
    reported determinations.

18. Be that as it may, the passage on which Ms Lloyd sought to rely  is  at
    paragraph 6 of Chicaiza. This states:

         "It is important in this case where two members of the family  have
         succeeded in being granted asylum status having based their  claims
         on very similar considerations to those raised  by  this  appellant
         that any rejection should be very carefully reasoned and we do  not
         find that care in this determination".

19. As I see it, the difficulty in relying on that principle  is  that  the
    evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  show  that   the
    appellant's  sisters  had  been  granted   asylum   on   very   similar
    considerations  and  that,  further,  the  April  2013  refusal  letter
    suggested that they had succeeded on a different basis.

20. The appellant also challenges  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  credibility
    findings. This challenge was broken down into three parts.   The  first
    is at paragraph 15 of the written  grounds  which  is  referred  to  as
    ground 2(a).  This ground argues that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Alis
    did not make clear findings on the reliability of the evidence  of  the
    appellant's sister, Y, and that this was material  where  her  evidence
    was corroborative.

21. It is quite clear that First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis took into account
    the evidence of the appellant's sister Y.  The judge says that  he  did
    so in clear terms in paragraph 8 of the decision and at  paragraphs  30
    to 32 he sets out the evidence given by Y. At paragraph 46  Judge  Alis
    acknowledges that the appellant's case before him was supported by Y to
    the extent  she  also  gave  evidence  that  it  was  associates  of  a
    government minister who had killed their brother.  The judge refers  to
    this again at paragraph 46(g).  The judge goes  on  to  acknowledge  at
    paragraph 49 that the evidence given  about  the  brother's  death  was
    "consistent".  It is unarguable that Judge Alis took into  account  the
    evidence of Y and appreciated that it was  evidence  capable  of  being
    corroborative but found that the claim was still not made out. A proper
    reading of the decision shows that he did not accept  the  evidence  of
    the appellant's sister and ground 2(a) has no merit.

22. Judge Alis sets out at paragraphs 49 and 50 why he did not  accept  the
    appellant's claim notwithstanding the evidence of  the  sister.   There
    were two main reasons.  The first was that in his first  interview  the
    appellant had stated that his brother was killed  by  robbers.  It  was
    only in his second application on asylum  grounds  that  he  maintained
    that his brother was killed by agents of a government minister. It  was
    clearly open to the judge  to  find  this  undermined  the  appellant's
    credibility, having considered at [49] the appellant's explanation  for
    the change in his evidence. The second reason was  that  the  appellant
    and Y gave different accounts of when he knew the truth about the death
    of  his  brother,  his  sister  maintaining  it  was  before  he   left
    Afghanistan and that he attended his brother's funeral,  the  appellant
    stating it was after he left and that he did not  attend  the  funeral.
    These were not tangential or immaterial issues. They went to  the  core
    of the claim and reliability of the witnesses. Where  paragraph  21  of
    the grounds seeks to argue otherwise and that these were  not  material
    parts of the evidence it has no merit (ground 2(d)).

23. Ground 2(b) is set out at paragraphs 16 and 17  of  the  determination.
    This states that the judge did  not  take  into  account  properly  the
    statement and oral evidence of the appellant's  social  worker,  Mr  N.
    This ground has no merit as it  is  entirely  clear  from  the  written
    statement and oral evidence recorded of the social worker that he could
    only but base his evidence on what he knew of  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim from the information given  to  him  by  the  appellant  and  his
    sisters and had no first hand knowledge of such  a  matter  whatsoever.
    The First-tier  Tribunal  was  therefore  fully  entitled  to  find  at
    paragraph 49 that he could not place weight on what  was  said  by  the
    social worker in support of the appellant's asylum claim.

24. Ground 2(c) is contained in paragraphs 18 to 20 of the written grounds.
     This challenge is put on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    to give proper weight to the fact that the appellant was a  minor  when
    he was interviewed.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  refers  to  the
    appellant's minority in paragraphs 37, 46, 48 and  49.   He  refers  at
    paragraph 37 to the appellant giving been only 16 years of age when  he
    first came to the United Kingdom and  that  he  was  interviewed  as  a
    minor.  The judge then states in terms, "I take that into account  when
    assessing his claim".  The judge refers  again  to  having  taken  into
    account that the appellant was 16 when he was interviewed at  paragraph
    46(a).  The challenge on the basis of the First-tier  Tribunal  failing
    to take into account the appellant's age cannot have merit  where  that
    is so.

25. The remaining grounds address the findings under Article 8  ECHR.   The
    first ground in this regard is at paragraph 22 of the  written  grounds
    and is referred to as ground 3(a).  The grounds  suggest  that  because
    the judge referred to the appellant's future plans of going to study at
    university away  from  his  older  sister,  specifying  Plymouth  as  a
    possible location, that the judge assessed the evidence  at  the  wrong
    date.  The judge should have addressed the  appellant's  situation  and
    circumstances as of the date of decision when he was still living  with
    his sister and was not away at university.

26. I did not find that this ground had any merit.  It was the  appellant's
    evidence that he intended to leave home.  That was an indication of his
    future intentions as of the date of the hearing and that  was  part  of
    the evidence upon which the judge was  entitled  to  rely  when  making
    findings about the nature of his relationship  with  his  sister.   The
    judge was clearly entitled to take into account that the appellant  was
    of an age when he was looking to separate from his siblings and to live
    an independent life as a student.

27. The second ground challenging the Article 8 findings is  at  paragraphs
    23 to 24 of the written grounds and is referred to as ground  3(b).   I
    found no merit in this where it challenged the judge's  application  of
    the provisions of Section 117B(3).  The judge had to apply this section
    concerning financial independence and burden on the  taxpayer.  He  was
    entitled to place weight on the fact that the appellant's education and
    future education incurred public expense. The fact that  the  appellant
    has been working and only partially maintained by  social  services  is
    not a factor  that  could,  in  my  judgement,  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome of the Article 8 assessment.

28. The final ground is set out in paragraphs  25  to  27  of  the  written
    grounds and is referred to as ground 3(c).  Here the challenge is  that
    the  judge  made  irrational  or  perverse  findings  as  to  it  being
    reasonable for the appellant to leave the UK when his sisters were here
    with refugee status and he was living with one  of  his  sisters.   The
    threshold  for  a  challenge  on  rationality  or  perverseness  is   a
    relatively high one and the grounds here do not show that the  decision
    could not have been one open to the First-tier Tribunal.

29. For all of these reasons I did not find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law.

Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]    Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

