
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02340/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th September 2015               |On 23rd October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                YOUSIF RAZVAY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Bhatti of Counsel, instructed by Hasan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal  for  leave  to  appeal,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara gave permission to the appellant  to
    appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pooler
    in which he dismissed the appeal against the decision of the respondent
    to refuse asylum, humanitarian  and  human  rights  protection  to  the
    appellant, an adult citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.

 2. Judge Kamara gave permission on the  basis  that  the  judge  erred  in
    concluding that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  of  persecution
    despite background evidence pointing to the risk of torture  to  a  low
    profile supporter of a Kurdish political party or  of  execution  to  a
    person caught with a weapon.  The judge had found that the  appellant's
    claim to be caught on the Iranian border with weapons destined for  the
    KDPI was implausible on the basis that the group were  not  engaged  in
    arms struggle in Iran.

 3. At the hearing before me I heard submissions from both  representatives
    about whether or not the decision showed an error on  a  point  of  law
    such that it should be set aside  and  re-made  and  then  reserved  my
    decision.

Submissions

 4. Ms Bhatti drew my attention to a consolidated bundle of documents which
    were served on the Tribunal on 15th September 2015 by  representatives.
    She confirmed that the main issue was whether  or  not  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the appellant's claim to have  been  involved
    with his father delivering food, clothing and weapons to  KDPI  members
    was incredible because of objective material which showed that the KDPI
    had stopped military activities during the 1990s.  She emphasised  that
    the judge should have taken into consideration other objective material
    which showed that there was still a risk for KDPI supporters of torture
    and execution, particularly if caught with a weapon.  She  referred  to
    the Danish Refugee Council Report which has been appended to the bundle
    from paragraph 2.1.1 onwards. In particular the statement in  paragraph
    2.1.2 reports an Iranian scholar saying that,  although  the  KDPI  had
    stopped its military activities in the last decades, it  did  not  mean
    that they did not have any weapons anymore.  She contended  that  there
    would  be  consequences  for  the  appellant  simply  because  of   his
    association with the KDPI but this was a matter which had been  ignored
    by the judge.  On this basis the judge's conclusions were flawed.

 5. Ms Johnstone relied upon the response in which it is argued that it was
    open to the judge to find that the appellant's claim was  not  credible
    because the KDPI had not been involved in arms struggle or carrying out
    armed operations for a significant period.   If  the  judge  found  the
    appellant not to be credible on that basis then there was no  need  for
    him to consider any risk to the appellant as a low profile supporter of
    a Kurdish political party.  She also referred me to the Danish  Refugee
    Council Report, particularly on page 10, which  referred  only  to  the
    possibility of the KDPI changing its strategy towards  armed  struggle.
    Further, she said,  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant  being
    involved in any cells of the party.

 6. In conclusion Ms Bhatti emphasised the risk for supporters of the  KDPI
    set out in the objective material.

Conclusions

 7. The issue for me to decide is whether or not the judge was entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant was not  a  credible  witness  because  his
    claim to have been involved with his father in delivering arms  to  the
    KDPI was inconsistent with  objective  evidence.   In  that  respect  I
    follow the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R and Others [2005]  EWCA
    Civ  982  particularly  in  relation  to  the  making  of  perverse  or
    irrational findings on matters material to the outcome  of  the  appeal
    and a failure to resolve conflicts of fact or opinion.  For a  decision
    to be "perverse" requires  a  very  high  hurdle  which  only  embraces
    decisions that are irrational or unreasonable in the  Wednesbury  sense
    when one includes findings of fact that are wholly unsupported  by  the
    evidence.  The Appeal Court  thought  that  it  could  not  overturn  a
    judgment at first instance unless it really could  not  understand  the
    original judge's thought process when he was making material  findings.
    I apply that guidance to my  consideration  of  the  decision  in  this
    appeal.

 8. In this case the  judge  was  evidently  aware  of  both  the  relevant
    background material relating to the withdrawal from armed  struggle  by
    the KDPI and also the risk for low profile supporters.   These  matters
    are specifically referred to in paragraphs 16 to 21, inclusive, of  the
    decision.  Paragraph 22 of the decision shows that the  judge  balanced
    the objective material taking into consideration that the appellant had
    failed to adduce evidence to support his claim that, shortly before  he
    left Iran in August 2013, the KDPI  would  have  had  groups  of  armed
    individuals in the mountainous border area relevant to his claim.   The
    judge was therefore entitled to reject the appellant's  claim  to  have
    been intercepted, along with his father, whilst carrying food, clothing
    and weapons to the KDPI.

 9. It is misleading to suggest that the judge was in error in  failing  to
    take into consideration the background material regarding the  risk  of
    torture or execution  for  a  low  profile  supporter  of  the  Kurdish
    political party, particularly one caught with a weapon, when the  judge
    was not satisfied that the appellant had been involved in  activity  to
    support the party.  The judge was satisfied that the appellant's father
    might have been involved in smuggling but was entitled to  dismiss  the
    claim that the father was involved in supporting the KDPI.  Thus, I  do
    not conclude that the decision shows an error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 nor was an anonymity order requested before me.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
