
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02964/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 26 September 2014                          |On 20 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                     T N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr P Draycott, instructed by Paragon Law
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, born  on  2  January  1994,  who
    came to the United Kingdom in January 2009  and  claimed  asylum  after
    being put  in  the  care  of  Social  Services.   Although  his  asylum
    application was refused, the appellant was granted leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom  until  1  July  2011.   He  appealed  against  that
    decision but absconded in early 2010, which appears to have led to  his
    appeal being withdrawn.  In March 2010 the appellant was assessed as  a
    potential victim of trafficking; although he was later  found  not,  in
    fact, to have been trafficked.  He sought leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on 30 June 2011.  That application was refused on 2 March 2012.

2.   The appellant appealed against  that  refusal.   On  9  July  2012  his
    appeal was heard at Birmingham by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett.
    There were two aspects to the  appellant's  claim  to  be  in  need  of
    international protection.  The first related to his assertion  that  he
    had been subjected to ill-treatment in Vietnam because his  father  had
    worked for the US Army.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the
    appellant had not made good that aspect of his claim; and no  complaint
    is made about that finding.

3.   The second basis upon which the international protection  claim  rested
    was the issue of trafficking.  The judge had before her expert  reports
    from Dr Seddon and Dr Thullesen.   Based  on  that  evidence,  and  the
    appellant's own testimony, the judge concluded that the  appellant  had
    been trafficked from Vietnam for the purposes of economic exploitation.
     In this regard, she noted that the appellant and members of his family
    had been locked up whilst on a boat; physically abused by  the  men  in
    charge of the trafficking;  confined  whilst  in  the  Czech  Republic;
    separated from an aunt when the traffickers  put  them  into  different
    lorries; and used by a Vietnamese woman in the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    unpaid domestic servant,  having  been  enticed  to  leave  his  foster
    family.

4.   At paragraph 14 of her determination, the judge found as follows:-

         "14. The appellant struck me as  an  extremely  diffident  and  shy
             young man.  His evidence to the  various  professionals  shows
             that he did not want to disclose  any  information  about  the
             lady with whom he was living for  fear  of  getting  her  into
             trouble.  Similarly he did not disclose  his  own  address  in
             Vietnam and gave differing accounts of his arrival in the  UK.
             Looking at  his  situation  of  forced  transportation  across
             various countries and then his sudden and unexpected departure
             from his foster home to  work  as  a  domestic  servant  I  am
             satisfied that it is reasonably likely that the appellant  was
             trafficked for the purposes of exploitation.


         ...


         16.  The findings in his cousin's  appeal  concluded  that  it  was
             likely that she  had  been  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of
             prostitution and that she was  probably  still  working  as  a
             prostitute in the United Kingdom.  The Immigration Judge found
             her to be at risk if returned because of her situation.  Those
             findings are not binding on  me  but  there  was  no  evidence
             before me to suggestion that the conclusions of the First-tier
             Tribunal were in any way unreliable".

5.   The reference to the appellant's cousin is  significant,  in  that  the
    appellant  and  his  cousin  were  trafficked  together  from  Vietnam,
    carrying on alone after his aunt had been  separated  from  them.   The
    judge continued:-

         "17. I am satisfied therefore that the appellant has shown that  he
             was trafficked from Vietnam and that he is a vulnerable  young
             man.  Even though he is now over 18 years of age he  is  still
             receiving support from Social Services.  His social worker  Mr
             Singh said that the appellant disappeared from his foster care
             after  being  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  year  and  was
             discovered four months later in  Birmingham.   That  does  not
             suggest as the appellant claimed that  the  Vietnamese  family
             told  him  to  return  to  Leicester  to  find  out  what  his
             immigration status was as he  claimed.   He  was  returned  to
             foster care rather  than  being  placed  in  more  independent
             accommodation as would be normal for a child of his  then  age
             due to his vulnerability.  He was kept in  foster  care  until
             his 18th birthday.  He was then placed in a temporary  council
             flat and had made good progress but was in the social worker's
             view still immature and dependent  on  staff.   They  were  in
             touch with him on a weekly basis to ensure  that  he  did  not
             abscond and also in close contact with  the  college  that  he
             attended.  He had  help  from  an  organisation  called  Youth
             Shelter to ensure that he had practical and emotional support.
              That evidence supports my own view of  the  appellant  as  an
             immature and nervous young man.


         18.  I am satisfied that he  has  been  trafficked  to  the  United
             Kingdom by those seeking to exploit him.  I am  not  satisfied
             that he has shown that he is at risk of persecution because  I
             do not believe he has shown even on the low standard that  his
             father was with the US Army.   I  am  satisfied  however  that
             because he has been trafficked to the United Kingdom and as he
             is still young and clearly immature for his years he would  be
             at risk if returned.  The documents I have seen make it  clear
             that he did not believe that he was  being  exploited  by  the
             Vietnamese family who made him work for them and  that  he  is
             clearly at risk of others who may wish to  take  advantage  of
             him.  The background  evidence  shows  that  there  is  little
             protection from trafficking in Vietnam and no help  for  those
             who are trafficked.


         19.  It is difficult to assess what might occur  if  the  appellant
             were to be returned and for that reason  I  am  not  satisfied
             that he has shown that he is  at  risk  of  a  breach  of  his
             Article 3 rights because of the severity of ill-treatment that
             would be needed for such a claim.  I am satisfied however that
             he is in  need  of  humanitarian  protection  because  of  his
             personal  vulnerability  and  immigration  history  of   being
             trafficked".

6.    Unsurprisingly,  both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent   obtained
    permission to appeal the judge's decision.  On 15 January 2013 the case
    was heard in the Upper Tribunal by Judge Hanson, sitting in Birmingham.
     In his decision, Judge Hanson noted that the respondent did  not  seek
    to challenge the finding that the appellant  had  been  trafficked  for
    exploitation.  For the appellant, it was submitted that, as a victim of
    trafficking,  the  appellant  had  been  ill-treated  for   a   Refugee
    Convention reason; namely, membership of  a  particular  social  group.
    The  judge  concluded  that,  even  if  the  appellant   had   suffered
    persecutory ill-treatment in the past as a result of  his  trafficking,
    there were "good reasons to find that such persecution or serious  harm
    will not be repeated".  In this regard, Judge Hanson pointed to various
    reports, which indicated that progress was being  made  by  Vietnam  in
    combating the trafficking of  persons  within  or  from  that  country.
    Accordingly, although the Upper Tribunal set aside the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal, it  substituted  a  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to vary leave.

7.   The appellant challenged that decision.  On 12 February 2014 the  Court
    of Appeal allowed the appellant's appeal and remitted the matter to the
    Upper Tribunal "for redetermination".  On 9 June  2014  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Pitt held that the effect of the Court of Appeal's order  was  to
    take "the appeal back to the permission  stage,  permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been granted  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Digney on 6 August 2012".


8.     Judge Pitt considered that the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    that the appellant had been trafficked "made  it,  at  the  very  least
    arguable, that those facts gave rise to a refugee claim and that it was
    a material error to fail to address  that  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    refugee claim.  That part of his claim must now be re-made".

9.    Judge Pitt considered that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  rationale  for
    concluding that the appellant was in need  of  humanitarian  protection
    was legally flawed.  The reason for this was that, since the First-tier
    Tribunal had impliedly found that there was no real risk of  Article  3
    harm, that  is  to  say  harm  falling  within  Article  15(b)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, the  only  basis  upon  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  could  have  decided  that  the  appellant  was  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection would have been under Article 15(c).   However,
    that provision was clearly inappropriate, dealing  as  it  did  with  a
    "serious  and  individual  threat  to  life  or  person  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or  internal
    armed conflict".  As a result, Judge  Pitt  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination, concluding that the appeal "will  be  re-made
    as  regards  the  appellant's  refugee,  Article  3  and  8  ECHR   and
    humanitarian protection claims on the basis of his accepted profile  as
    a previously trafficked minor" (paragraph 22).

10.  In reaching a determination in this case, we have  had  regard  to  all
    documentary evidence before us.  This  is  contained  in  two  bundles,
    prepared by the appellant in connection  with  the  26  September  2014
    hearing, running respectively to 209 and 33 pages; the respondent's COI
    Report on Vietnam (9 August 2013); a U.S. State  Department  Report  on
    trafficking (2014); an IOM-Vietnam  counter-trafficking  document;  and
    the IOM-Vietnam report of a workshop held in July 2014 "to discuss  the
    identification of victims of human trafficking,  their  special  health
    needs and the provision of appropriate care and assistance".

11.  Also before us was the determination  of  Immigration  Judge  Frankish,
    sitting at Stoke on 12 April 2010, in which he allowed  the  appeal  of
    the appellant's cousin, who had been  trafficked  with  him.   At  that
    time,  the  appellant  had  disappeared  from  his  foster  home.   The
    appellant's cousin was found credible  by  the  judge.   She  described
    being raped by a Vietnamese man on a boat during  the  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge found her to be  "a  very  vulnerable  young
    woman in the UK, she was so before she came to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities and will remain so on return.  The  difference  is  that  a
    well-developed welfare system is in place to try to help the  appellant
    here.  There will be far from adequate protection for her  on  return".
    The judge accordingly concluded that the cousin, whilst not entitled to
    refugee status (on the basis that she was not a member of a  particular
    social group), nevertheless was entitled to humanitarian protection  by
    reason of the risk of serious harm, if returned to Vietnam.

12.   The findings of Judge Frankish underline those of  Judge  Grimmett  in
    the  present  case,  regarding  the  undoubted  trafficking   of   both
    individuals from Vietnam to the United Kingdom.  The trafficking of the
    cousin plainly had sexual exploitation at its core.  What  plainly  lay
    behind the trafficking of the appellant, on the basis of the  preserved
    findings, was economic exploitation.  It is impossible  to  regard  the
    events surrounding the appellant's disappearance from his  foster  home
    in the Midlands and eventually re-appearance in Birmingham as  anything
    other than the culmination of that process.

13.   We find that, on the facts  of  this  case,  the  trafficking  of  the
    appellant for forced labour constituted serious harm. Paragraph 339K of
    the immigration rules is therefore engaged, with the  result  that  the
    harm "will  be regarded as a serious indication of the appellant's well-
    founded fear of suffering future  such  harm,  unless  there  are  good
    reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will  not  be
    repeated".

14.  With that in mind, we have  carefully  considered  the  background  and
    expert evidence.  We have  taken  account  of  the  submissions  of  Mr
    Jarvis,  regarding  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in   tackling
    trafficking in Vietnam.  This includes the greater willingness  on  the
    part of the authorities to prosecute those responsible for  trafficking
    and the increasing provision that is being made for shelters for  those
    who have been,  or  might  be,  trafficked.   However,  we  accept  the
    submissions of Mr  Draycott,  which  are  that,  notwithstanding  those
    improvements,   serious   difficulties   remain,   particularly    (and
    importantly) so far as concerns trafficking for the purposes of  forced
    labour.  This is made plain by the  U.S.  State  Department  Report  of
    2014, upon which reliance was placed by Mr Jarvis.  There we find:-

         "Many officials lacked an adequate understanding of the  definition
         of  trafficking,  particularly  labour  trafficking,  which   often
         resulted in their failure to identify victims  or  pursue  criminal
         investigations in cases".


         "The government of Vietnam sustained  law  enforcement  efforts  to
         combat the transnational sex trafficking of  Vietnamese  women  and
         girls but made minimal progress in prosecuting  labour  trafficking
         offences".


         "The government of Vietnam  primarily  pursued  labour  trafficking
         cases as administrative violations under the country's labour laws,
         which do not provide criminal penalties".


         ...


         "...   Efforts  to  identify  and  provide  protection  to   labour
         trafficking victims or domestic victims remained inadequate".


         "The government  did  not  provide  adequate  legal  protection  or
         assistance to victims of forced labour in Vietnam or abroad".

15.  Judge  Grimmett  remarked  upon  the  diffidence  and  shyness  of  the
    appellant, a matter also remarked upon  by  the  various  professionals
    with whom he had come into contact.  Whilst  Mr  Jarvis  was  right  to
    point to the fact that the appellant is being encouraged  to  stand  on
    his own feet and assume responsibility  (he  is  currently  engaged  in
    running a nail bar), the picture he presents in September 2014 is  not,
    we find, materially different from that of July 2012.  The  appellant's
    history  of  exploitation  in  Birmingham  is,  we  consider,  strongly
    indicative of what lies in wait for him, upon return  to  Vietnam.   We
    say that despite acknowledging that the respondent would seek to put in
    place mechanisms to secure that, upon arrival, the appellant  would  be
    offered help and support.  In his particular case, we do  not  consider
    that this alleviates the real risk of exploitation of  this  vulnerable
    young person. He is at real risk of being subjected to  forced  labour,
    including  being  re-trafficked  for  that  purpose,  with  the  likely
    potential for additional ill-treatment,  such  as  he  and  his  cousin
    encountered before.

16.   On  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  past  experiences,  his  present
    continuing vulnerability and the absence, in his  case,  of  sufficient
    state protection, we  consider  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  the
    appellant suffering serious harm, contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR and
    Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification  Directive,  following  return  to
    Vietnam.  He is, accordingly,  entitled  to  international  protection.
    Whether that comprises protection under the Refugee Convention  depends
    upon whether the appellant's persecution would  be  by  reason  of  his
    membership of a particular social group.

17.  On this issue, we also find in favour of the  appellant.   Although  no
    longer a child, the appellant's appearance and immaturity mean that  he
    is likely to be regarded as a child, upon return.  In this  regard,  we
    observe that Lloyd LJ in DS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2011] INLR 389 said:-

         "Does membership cease on the day of the  person's  18th  birthday?
         It is not easy to see that risks of the relevant kind  to  a  child
         would continue until the eve of that birthday and cease at once the
         next day".

18.  Similarly, in KA (Afghanistan) and Ors [2012] 1 WLR 615 Maurice Kay  LJ
    found  that  "apparent  or  assumed  age   is   more   important   than
    chronological age",  when  considering  forced  recruitment  or  sexual
    exploitation of vulnerable young males, given that "persecution is  not
    respectful of birthdays".


Decision

19.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on Refugee Convention grounds.



Order under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2005

20.   Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify  the  appellant
    in these proceedings.


                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane 20 October
                                   2014

