

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA025092015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 11th May 2016                      |On: 23rd May 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                   G K + 2
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms G. Patel, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
                       Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female national of Afghanistan whose date  of  birth
    is recorded as the 1st January 1991. Her dependents are her husband and
    child. She has permission[1] to appeal against a determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nicol)[2] to dismiss her  appeal  against  a
    decision to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999.  That  decision  followed  from  the
    rejection of the Appellant's claim for international protection.


 2. The basis of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  she  is  a  Sikh  from
    Afghanistan who fears persecution for reasons of her religious  belief.
    She states that she and her family are from Jalalabad. In a  series  of
    interviews in 2014 the Appellant gave an account of suffering  systemic
    societal discrimination, of being unable  to  go  out  for  a  fear  of
    hostility from the local population and Islamic militants, and having a
    bomb placed outside the Gurdwara where she was staying.  The  Appellant
    claimed that the police  in  Jalalabad  were  unwilling  or  unable  to
    protect her.  She did not believe that she would be able to find safety
    in Kabul.

 3. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant is a Sikh but not  that  she
    is Afghani. A language analysis had found that she  was  from  Northern
    Pakistan. Although the Appellant had  produced  what  purported  to  be
    Afghani documents the Respondent attached no  weight  to  them  because
    they  were  untranslated.  The  entire  account  of   persecution   and
    discrimination in Jalalabad was thereby rejected.

 4. On appeal the Appellant gave oral  evidence  and  was  cross  examined.
    Having heard her evidence,  and  that  of  her  husband,  the  Tribunal
    accepted that she had been  "credible  throughout".  It  was  expressly
    accepted that she was a Sikh from Jalalabad. The Tribunal did not doubt
    any of the Appellant's account, but found that what she  described  was
    not persecution. She had suffered no more than "minimal harassment". It
    was noted that by her own evidence her father and brother were able  to
    engage in commerce. Her evidence that  she  stayed  in  the  house  (or
    Gurdwara) for most of the time was consistent with the  societal  norms
    in Afghanistan: "it  is  not  clear  that  the  Appellant  was  treated
    differently to  any  other  Afghan  woman,  whatever  their  ethnic  or
    religious background".  The Tribunal notes that the Appellant's husband
    would be going back to Afghanistan with her.  He  has  previously  been
    able to travel freely between Jalalabad and Kabul. Although  he  claims
    that when returned to Afghanistan from the UK in November 2012  he  was
    detained and suffered degrading treatment, there  was  no  evidence  to
    support this contention. His account lacked detail and was found not to
    be credible.  The appeal was thereby dismissed.


 5. The Appellant now appeals on the following grounds:

           a) The Tribunal erred in failing to have  regard  to  the  Upper
              Tribunal's country guidance;




           b) The Tribunal misdirected itself to what level of  harm  would
              constitute persecution.  The  Appellant  submits  that  being
              trapped in a house for fear of kidnap, beating and hostility,
              suffering societal discrimination and having  a  bomb  placed
              outside  her  place  of  residence  cumulatively  amounts  to
              persecution;

           c) The determination does not  make  reasoned  findings  on  the
              evidence of the Appellant's husband, who was a dependant upon
              her claim;

           d) Even if the Tribunal did not accept that there was a risk  of
              harm in Jalalabad the Tribunal was still obliged to  consider
              whether there was a risk in  Kabul,  the  place  of  proposed
              return.


 6. The appeal was opposed on all grounds by the Respondent. In respect  of
    the findings on persecution the Tribunal had been entitled to find that
    the  events  narrated  did  not  disclose  a  risk  of  serious   harm,
    particularly where the Appellant's parents and siblings all  remain  in
    Jalalabad to this day.  It is true that very little has  ever  happened
    to her. It is not established on the  facts  that  the  Appellant  felt
    impelled to stay indoors out of fear of persecution rather than because
    she was following the societal norms of Afghanistan where many women do
    not go out unaccompanied.  The fact that the male members of her family
    - her brothers and father - are  still  working  in  the  bazaar  would
    appear to indicate that there is no risk to them there.   There  is  no
    risk in Jalalabad. As  for  Kabul  Mr  McVeety  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant would not be returned  there  alone,  since  her  husband  is
    dependent on her claim. Since they already have a  family  network   in
    the country who allegedly assisted them in paying for  the  journey  to
    the UK it is not speculation to find that they would be able to  assist
    them if they were actually in Afghanistan.   Mr McVeety agreed that the
    First-tier Tribunal has not directed itself  to  any  country  guidance
    case, but submitted that in the  circumstances  that  would  not  be  a
    material error. that is because the decision would have been  the  same
    had reference been made to the then extant  decision  of  SL  &  Others
    (Afghanistan) CG (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) [2005] UKIAT 00137,  even
    if it is read with the subsequent decision  in  DSG  &  Others  (Afghan
    Sikhs: departure from Country Guidance) Afghanistan [2013]  UKUT  00148
    (IAC).


    My Findings

    Country Guidance


 7. The determination makes no reference at all  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    country guidance.  This is a striking omission that would in many cases
    constitute an error of law: see for instance  The  Upper  Tribunal  IAC
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2011.   I agree with Mr McVeety that
    the exception to this rule might be where the determination is in  fact
    consistent with the guidance,  albeit  silent  on  citation,  or  where
    application of the guidance would have otherwise made no difference.


 8. In this case the extant country guidance at the date of decision was SL
    (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan [2005] UKAIT  00137.    It  is
    difficult to see how this case would have assisted the Appellant, since
    its central conclusion was adverse to her claim:

         There is no evidence to support the claim that the Afghan Sikh and
         Hindu minorities in Afghanistan are persecuted or treated in breach
         of their protected human rights under Article 3 of the European
         Convention by the State or that the degree of societal
         discrimination against them is such as to give rise to any such
         persecution or treatment of them as a class.

 9. This is no doubt  why  the  ground  of  appeal  is  more  nuanced.  The
    complaint is that the First-tier Tribunal fails to  recognise  that  it
    could have departed from this country guidance.  Reliance is placed  on
    DSG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs:  Departure  from  Country   Guidance)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC).


10. It might be thought that it would be difficult to conceive  of  a  more
    pointless challenge. The Judge ignored the country  guidance,  and  now
    the Appellant complains that he did not ignore it.  DSG adds nothing to
    the Appellant's case. It turned on its facts and is authority  for  the
    uncontroversial  proposition  that  judges  are  entitled  depart  from
    country guidance where there is substantial  contrary  evidence  before
    them.  It is not itself a country guidance case and creates no  factual
    precedent.  If any party might have cause for complaint about a failure
    to follow CG it should have been the Respondent, who might  justifiably
    have  argued  that  the  failure  rendered  the  credibility   findings
    incomplete and unsafe.  This ground does not disclose an error of law.


    Persecution

11. The Tribunal has found that the Appellant was "credible throughout".  I
    read this as an acceptance that her historical account is  accepted  in
    its entirety. Her evidence,  set  out  in  her  interview  and  witness
    statement was as follows:


        . She had lived in a house in the Gurdwara compound for as long  as
          she had lived in Jalalabad, approximately 20  years.  There  were
          six of seven houses in the compound
        . She did not go out because if she heard that if she  did  Muslims
          "swore at us and beat us up"
        . As an example she said that when  her  brother  went  out  people
          called him a "Hindu"
        . She and her mother did not leave the  Gurdwara  compound  because
          they had heard that "they" take female Sikhs away
        . She would sometimes go out to travel to another Gurdwara
        . She did not personally encounter any problems with 'Talibs'
        . About  a  year  before  she  was  interviewed  [ie  approximately
          November 2013] a bomb went off outside the house  but  it  was  a
          small one and it so no-one was hurt


12. Ms Patel accepted that the Appellant had not  actually  been  insulted,
    taunted, beaten or kidnapped herself. She urged me  to  find  that  the
    Appellant had only managed to avoid such treatment by staying  indoors.
    She  pointed  to  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  her  brothers   had
    experienced harassment whenever they went  to  work,  for  instance  by
    having sticks and stones  thrown  at  them.  She  frequently  witnessed
    bruises on them when they returned to the Gurdwara. Her  fear  was  not
    subjective; it was based on the objective fact that  those  members  of
    her family who did venture out were subject to abuse. I am bound to say
    that I find this latter claim difficult to reconcile with the fact that
    the entire family have remained in Jalalabad. Why they chose to  invest
    money in sending the Appellant to the UK is difficult to understand  if
    she was the only one who was not actually being harmed on a day to  day
    basis.  The evidence would also appear  to  be  inconsistent  with  the
    general conclusions in the country  guidance  (for  which  see  above),
    recently  essentially  reaffirmed  in  TG  and  others  (Afghan   Sikhs
    persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC). Here  the  Tribunal
    once again concluded that the  regular  harassment  and  discrimination
    suffered by Afghan Sikhs does not on the whole  reach  levels  of  such
    severity that it can be classed as persecution.  That said this was the
    account that was accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal.  Those  findings
    have not been challenged by the Respondent and are preserved.


13. I agree with Ms  Patel  that  there  appears  to  be  an  unsustainable
    contradiction between the Tribunal's acceptance of those facts, and its
    finding at 49: "the Appellant's family seems to have managed to conduct
    their day to day affairs with only occasional harassment". The evidence
    was that the men in  the  family  were  regularly  attacked  when  they
    ventured out in public.   I am satisfied that  this  would  be  serious
    harm, and there there would appear to have  been  a  failure  of  state
    protection. This would constitute persecution. It follows that when the
    Tribunal finds, at 53, that the Appellant has  not  suffered  any  more
    than "minimal harassment" it does so without taking into  account  that
    she managed to avoid persecution by staying indoors.   I find that  the
    First-tier Tribunal has erred  in  law  by  failing  to  take  relevant
    evidence into account in its assessment of past persecution.

14. I remake the decision on  the  facts  as  found  by  finding  that  the
    Appellant's brothers were subject to persecution. She managed to  avoid
    it by remaining in the Gurdwara.

15. Mr McVeety raised an interesting point in that it is the social norm in
    Afghanistan  for  women  not  to  go  out   unaccompanied.    This   is
    acknowledged by the Appellant herself who  states:  "an  Afghani  woman
    would never be allowed out on their own" [at �6 of witness  statement].
    The Appellant has shown  that  she  managed  to  avoid  persecution  by
    remaining indoors: ordinarily that would engage the principles set  out
    in HJ (Iran) and  JT  Cameroon  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010]  UKSC  31.  She  should  not  be  expected  to  avoid
    persecution by being 'discreet'.  What,  however,  if  she  would  have
    remained indoors most of the time even absent such a threat? If in fact
    the social convention was that the majority of women in  the  area  are
    keeping  purdah,  and  that  the  Appellant  would  have  obeyed   such
    convention without complaint, it is at least arguable that her HJ claim
    would  be  defeated.    It  might  also  be  argued  that  such  social
    conventions amount to persecution in themselves[3].

16. Unfortunately, those arguments will have to wait for another day. There
    is no comment at all from the Appellant on what her actions might  have
    been, nor any expert anthropological evidence on  the  point.  And  for
    reasons which I set out below the debate would be moot in this case.  I
    proceed on the basis that the Appellant was at risk of  persecution  in
    Jalalabad at the time that she left; in  the  absence  of  any  durable
    change in  circumstances  I  take  this  as  an  indication  that  such
    persecution would be likely to occur in the future.

    The Evidence of the Appellant's Husband & Internal Relocation

17. These two grounds are interconnected to the extent that  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed unless she makes both grounds out. That  is  because  it
    was the evidence of her husband that she depended  upon  to  show  that
    Kabul would not be a safe or reasonable place  of  internal  relocation
    for the family.


18. The gentleman in question, Mr AS, first arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    in September 2011 and claimed asylum.    The Home Office  had  rejected
    his claim as not credible and in a  determination  promulgated  on  the
    12th January 2012 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge RBL Prior) had agreed.
    The Tribunal found numerous discrepancies in the evidence.  The account
    was internally and externally inconsistent and AS had  further  damaged
    his credibility by claiming to be a minor when he was not.  The  appeal
    was dismissed. I am told that he appealed, first to the Upper  Tribunal
    and then to the Court of Appeal. Mr McVeety's record shows  that  prior
    to his removal he lodged a challenge by way of judicial review. All  of
    these attempts to overturn the decision of Judge  Prior  proved  futile
    and he was removed in April of 2012.

19. I am given to understand that AS re-entered the United Kingdom  on  the
    15th August 2014 accompanied by the Appellant. He did not claim  asylum
    in his own right, but rather relied upon the claim made  by  his  wife.
    Of this history the First-tier Tribunal commented  "AS  clearly  has  a
    preference to live in the United Kingdom".   AS  gave  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. He relied on his witness statement dated  14th
    April 2015. He claimed that after he was returned to Afghanistan he was
    detained and ill treated for one week in Kabul.  Upon  his  release  he
    stayed in a Gurdwara in Kabul. He considered the situation there to  be
    worse than that in Jalalabad and so returned there, intending to  marry
    the Appellant.

20. The First-tier Tribunal noted the evidence of AS. At  paragraph  52  it
    makes the following findings:

         "He states that when he was returned before, he was imprisoned  and
         suffered degrading treatment but  there  is  not  any  evidence  to
         support this. He does not indicate any long  term  consequences  or
         that he required any medical treatment. On release,   he  does  not
         state  that  this  was  subject  to  any  conditions   or   ongoing
         restrictions. He was able to travel freely and moved from Kabul  to
         Jalalabad. He does not refer to anything happening to  his  because
         he was a Sikh. For example he does not say whether he attempted  to
         find work but was prevented from doing so because of his  religion.
         I do not find him to be a credible witness  and  there  is  nothing
         before me that persuades me, even to the lower standard  of  proof,
         that the Appellant could not return to Afghanistan with AS".

    At paragraph 57 it adds:


         "I find that his account lacks significant supporting detail and is
         not credible"

21. Ms Patel submits that these findings were cursory and inadequate.  This
    was a witness who had  appeared  before  the  Tribunal  and  had  given
    evidence and there should have been clear findings about that evidence.
    There was no reference to the previous determination and  as  such  the
    determination failed to have regard  to  the  principles  set  down  in
    Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 702.


22. There is no merit in this ground.  The evidence of AS is set out in his
    witness statement.  I find that the Tribunal was perfectly entitled  to
    find it to be lacking in significant detail:

         "I was imprisoned in Kabul on return for one week. When  I  arrived
         in Afghanistan I was detained in a place but I was  transferred  to
         another prison. I do not know the place or  the  location....during
         imprisonment I was beaten and ill treated. The authorities  removed
         my clothes in prison. I found this to be extremely humiliating"


    The Tribunal was also entitled to conclude that AS had not  claimed  to
    have suffered any of this ill treatment because  he  is  Sikh.   It  is
    nowhere stated in his witness statement that his claimed detention  had
    anything to do with his faith. Had this evidence been  given  orally  I
    would have expected this to have been brought to my attention.


23. The Devaseelan  point  is  again  hard  to  fathom.  Had  the  Tribunal
    expressly directed itself to the findings of  Judge  Prior  that  would
    have placed AS at an even greater disadvantage, since  his  credibility
    as a witness was comprehensively rejected in a determination  that  was
    upheld all the way to the Court of Appeal.


24. I am satisfied that in the circumstances the findings are  sustainable.
    The evidence before the Tribunal came from a witness  who  had  already
    been found not to be credible. In those circumstances it was  incumbent
    upon him to produce evidence capable of justifying departure  from  the
    decision of Judge Prior. He chose not to do so. He did not claim asylum
    in his own right (thus avoiding a rigorous  interview)  and  in  giving
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  stated  his  account  in  the
    briefest possible terms, giving no detail about  the  circumstances  of
    his claimed detention and  ill  treatment.  His  assessment  that  "the
    situation is now worse for Sikhs in  Kabul"  is  un-particularised  and
    makes no reference to any objective,  or  indeed  subjective,  evidence
    that this is the case.  There was no error in the manner in  which  the
    Tribunal dealt with the evidence of AS.

25. The final ground concerns whether the Appellant could  safely  navigate
    her way back from Kabul to Jalalabad. The ground is framed in this  way
    because  the  Tribunal  had  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  faced
    persecution in Jalalabad, but before me Ms Patel redrew the  ground  as
    submissions on internal flight.

26. The most recent country guidance,  TG  and  Ors,  upholds  the  general
    conclusions reached in SL:

         Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan  do  not
         face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as to entitle
         them to a grant of international protection on the basis  of  their
         ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be  said  that
         the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by  the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities in general reaches the threshold of persecution.


    The factors to be taken into account in assessing internal  flight  are
    the same as those relevant to consideration of persecution:

         A consideration of whether an individual member  of  the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities is at risk real of  persecution  upon  return  to
         Afghanistan is fact-sensitive.  All the relevant circumstances must
         be  considered  but  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to   the
         following:


      a. women are particularly vulnerable in  the  absence  of  appropriate
         protection from a male member of the family;


      b.  likely  financial  circumstances  and  ability  to  access   basic
         accommodation bearing in mind


       - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member of the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities
       -  such  individuals  may  face  difficulties   (including   threats,
         extortion, seizure of land  and  acts  of  violence)  in  retaining
         property and / or pursuing  their  remaining  traditional  pursuit,
         that of a shopkeeper / trader
       - the  traditional  source  of  support  for  such  individuals,  the
         Gurdwara is much less able to provide adequate support;


      c. the level of religious devotion and the practical accessibility  to
         a suitable place of religious worship in light of declining numbers
         and the evidence that some have been subjected to harm and  threats
         to harm whilst accessing the Gurdwara;


      d.  access  to  appropriate  education  for  children  in   light   of
         discrimination against Sikh and Hindu children and the shortage  of
         adequate education facilities for them.

27. The Tribunal finds that there are functioning schools for Sikh children
    in Kabul [at 94] and that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  individuals
    establishing themselves in business if they have the resources to do so
    [at 110]. The Appellant will be returned to Kabul with her husband  and
    child. It is her evidence that  her  family  remain  in  Jalalabad  and
    remain in employment. The community  in  Jalalabad  are  said  to  have
    contributed to the cost of her flight, and  that  of  her  husband,  to
    Europe. I find that it can be properly  inferred  from  this  that  the
    community would be willing to assist if necessary should the  Appellant
    and her husband resettle closer to home: see finding at paragraph 57 of
    the determination.


28. There is no credible evidence that the Appellant or her husband face  a
    risk of persecution in Kabul. The Appellant is not a  lone  woman.  The
    family will have the benefit of resources  donated  by  family  members
    still in Afghanistan. It is open to them to  seek  employment,  set  up
    their own business or simply to rely on those  funds.  The  Appellant's
    daughter will be able to attend school in Kabul. She will benefit  from
    proximity to her extended family.  On the basis of the evidence  before
    me, it would not be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to  live  with
    her husband in Kabul.


      Conclusion

29. The First-tier Tribunal erred in its assessment  of  what  amounted  to
    persecution. The decision is however maintained. That  is  because  the
    Appellant has not shown that it would be unduly harsh for her  to  live
    in Kabul with her husband.



      Decisions

30. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


31. Having regard to the fact that this is a protection claim I am prepared
    to make the following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                12th May 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Renton (sitting as a
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal) on the 27th August 2015 but granted upon
renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on the 28th September
2015.
[2] Determination promulgated 29th July 2015
[3] See the discussion at paragraph 92 of TG and Others

