
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02871/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th June 2015                     |On 19th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Niroshan Pushparajah
                    (actual name - gunaratnam prabhakar)
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel, instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Camp promulgated following a hearing on 5th June 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a male Sri Lankan citizen born  24th  August  1970  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2008, and  claimed  asylum  on
    9th August 2013.  The claim was based  upon  the  claimant's  political
    opinion, that being his support and membership of the Liberation Tigers
    of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).

 4. The Secretary of State refused  the  application,  giving  reasons  for
    refusal in a letter dated 16th April 2014.   A  Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision dated 17th April 2014 was issued, indicating that  a  decision
    had been made to remove the claimant from the United Kingdom  following
    refusal of his asylum and human rights claim.

 5. The appeal was heard on 5th June 2014, the judge finding  the  core  of
    the claimant's account credible, and therefore the appeal  was  allowed
    on asylum and human rights grounds.

 6. The Secretary of State was subsequently granted permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 7. The appeal came  before  me  on  25th  November  2014.   After  hearing
    submissions from both parties I set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  There had been no challenge to the findings made by the
    judge as to what the claimant claimed had happened to him in Sri Lanka,
    and those findings were preserved, as was the finding that the claimant
    had joined the Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE)  in  2012
    while in the United Kingdom.  I found  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
    failing to adequately explain what activities the claimant had  carried
    out in the United Kingdom that would bring him to the attention of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities.  The judge made no finding that the army in Sri
    Lanka had maintained a continuous adverse interest in the  claimant  by
    visiting his home, and made no finding that the claimant was on a watch
    or a stop list.  There was a conflict between the  claimant's  evidence
    as set out in his witness statement, and a letter from the  TGTE  dated
    6th April 2014 which described the claimant as an organiser of meetings
    and public events.   The  claimant  had  not  claimed  to  be  such  an
    organiser with the TGTE.  The Judge had not made  findings  to  resolve
    the conflicting evidence.

 8. The hearing was adjourned for a continuation hearing to take  place  so
    that further evidence could be heard as to the claimant's activities in
    the United Kingdom and so that  consideration  could  be  given  as  to
    whether a combination  of  the  claimant's  activities  in  Sri  Lanka,
    together with his activities in the United Kingdom placed him  at  risk
    if returned to Sri Lanka.

 9. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission by Judge Molloy, and my full reasons for finding an error of
    law are contained in my decision dated 1st December 2014.

Re-making the Decision

The Law

10. The claimant is entitled to asylum if he  is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality and is recognised as a refugee, as defined in regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on him to prove that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.

11. The claimant is eligible for humanitarian  protection  under  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules if he does not qualify as a refugee,  but
    establishes substantial grounds for believing that if  he  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom, he would face a real risk of suffering serious
    harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail  himself
    of the protection of the country of return.

12. In relation to Articles 2 and 3 of  the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) it is for the claimant to  establish
    that if removed from the United Kingdom there is a  real  risk  of  him
    being killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment.

13. The burden of proof is on the  claimant  and  can  be  described  as  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, which is a  lower  standard  than  the
    normal civil standard of the balance of probabilities.  I must look  at
    the circumstances as at the date of hearing.

Documents

14. In re-making this decision I have taken into account  the  Respondent's
    bundle of documents with Annexes A-K, the claimant's bundle  comprising
    64 pages, the claimant's written submissions dated 5th June 2014, and a
    supplementary bundle submitted on behalf  of  the  claimant  comprising
    thirteen pages.

The Claimant's Claim

15. The claimant's claim as considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    out in his screening interview dated 9th August 2013,  his  substantive
    asylum interview dated 8th April 2014, and his witness statement  dated
    3rd June 2014 and may be briefly summarised as follows.

16. The claimant became an LTTE supporter in April  2002  and  in  February
    2004 started to work for the LTTE as an interpreter.  He also  provided
    tuition to students at his home where he would  teach  them  about  the
    LTTE aims and the problems that Tamils faced.  The claimant is of Tamil
    ethnicity.

17. Some of the students later  joined  the  LTTE.   The  claimant  stopped
    working for the LTTE in 2005.  He was arrested on  22nd  November  2006
    and accused of being involved in LTTE recruitment.  He was told that  a
    student who had subsequently joined the LTTE had  provided  information
    about him.

18. The claimant was detained and tortured.   He  eventually  admitted  his
    involvement with the LTTE.  He was given an army uniform to wear and  a
    mask, and he identified six or seven people involved with the  LTTE  so
    that the army could arrest them.

19. After being detained for approximately four  months  the  claimant  was
    visited by his father-in-law who eventually arranged for a bribe to  be
    paid and the claimant was released.

20. He was placed on a flight to Colombo and from there was taken to Kandy.
     The agent arranged for a passport and visa and  the  claimant  visited
    the visa office in Colombo and had  his  fingerprints  taken  for  visa
    purposes.

21. The claimant travelled from Colombo Airport and arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 15th October 2008.   The  claimant  used  a  false  name  on
    arrival in the United Kingdom as he had been told to  do  this  by  the
    agent.  He used the same name as in his false passport.

22. Having arrived in the United Kingdom he was met by a man called  Suresh
    and he worked part-time in his shop for a year.  In 2009  he  moved  to
    Coventry and stayed with a man called Ahilan.

23. In 2012 the army started to visit his home in Sri  Lanka  and  harassed
    his wife as they had received information that he was still alive.

24. The claimant became a member of the TGTE in January 2012  and  attended
    meetings every two or three months.  He has had photographs of  himself
    taken at meetings and at demonstrations.

25. The claimant appreciates that he should have claimed asylum sooner  and
    should not have burnt his passport, but he did this having been advised
    to do so by the agent.

The Refusal

26. The reasons for refusal are contained in  a  letter  dated  16th  April
    2014.  It was accepted that the claimant is a national  of  Sri  Lanka,
    but the remainder of the claim was not accepted, and the  Secretary  of
    State did not find that the claimant  had  given  a  credible  account.
    Although it was accepted that the claimant is of  Tamil  ethnicity,  it
    was not accepted that he had been involved with the LTTE,  it  was  not
    accepted that he had been detained by the army and ill-treated, and  it
    was not accepted that he entered the UK in the manner that he  claimed,
    nor was it accepted that his wife was being harassed by the army in Sri
    Lanka.

27. The Secretary of State considered risk on return in the light of GJ and
    Others Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319  (IAC)  and  concluded  that  the
    claimant would not be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing - 5th June 2015

Preliminary Issues

28.  Neither  the  Tribunal  nor  Mr  Smart  had  received  the  claimant's
    supplementary bundle comprising thirteen pages.  Mr Paramjorthy applied
    for this to be admitted and Mr Smart objected as  directions  requiring
    any further documentation to be supplied at least fourteen  days  prior
    to the hearing had not been complied with.

29. I decided to admit the bundle which comprised  of  an  updated  witness
    statement and photographs, taking into account rule 2 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, and the overriding objective  to
    deal with cases fairly and justly.  I took into account that the bundle
    was being served late, but also that this was an asylum claim,  and  it
    was therefore important  that  the  Tribunal  considered  all  relevant
    evidence.

30. Having admitted the supplementary bundle in evidence, I  put  the  case
    back to allow Mr Smart time to consider the  documents,  and  indicated
    that if further time was needed it would be granted.

31. When the hearing resumed both representatives indicated that they  were
    ready to proceed and there was no application for an  adjournment.   Mr
    Paramjorthy confirmed that the claimant did not rely upon Article 8  of
    the 1950 Convention.

Oral Evidence

32. The claimant gave evidence with the assistance  of  an  interpreter  in
    Tamil.  There were no difficulties in communication.

33. The claimant adopted his witness statement dated 3rd  June  2015  which
    may be summarised as follows.  The claimant has been involved with pro-
    LTTE Tamil political activity since being in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    became a member of the TGTE in January 2012.  He attended meetings  and
    talked to people about having a  separate  Tamil  state.   He  attended
    meetings  every  two  or  three  months  and  was  also   involved   in
    international meetings which were held in various parts of the UK.

34. The claimant has produced photographic evidence of his involvement in a
    TGTE conference on Tamil genocide and he had obtained a  photograph  of
    this conference on YouTube.

35. The claimant also produced photographs of himself at the TGTE office in
    November 2013, and of himself at the  Mullivaikal  Remembrance  Day  on
    18th May 2014, and on 18th May 2015.

36. The claimant considered that he would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka
    due to his previous record of arrest and detention and due to the  fact
    that the authorities started to search for him in 2012 and  since  then
    had continuously harassed his wife on a monthly basis.

37. On 15th November 2014 the CID visited his home in Sri Lanka  and  asked
    his wife where he was living in the United Kingdom and she stated  that
    she had lost contact with him.   Visits  had  continued  on  a  monthly
    basis, and the last visit was on 30th April 2015.

38. The claimant was questioned by both representatives.  I  have  recorded
    all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings  and  it  is  not
    necessary to reiterate them in full here.

39.  The  claimant  identified  himself  to  Mr  Paramjorthy   in   various
    photographs.  In cross-examination the claimant confirmed that  he  had
    attended TGTE meetings, and Remembrance Day demonstrations but had  not
    organised them.  He did not know the  names  of  the  speakers  at  the
    international conference on accountability for Tamil  genocide  in  Sri
    Lanka.

40. The claimant was asked why he thought the authorities in Sri Lanka  had
    started visiting his home in 2012 when he had ceased  working  for  the
    LTTE in 2005 and  he  said  that  he  assumed  that  it  was  when  the
    authorities realised that he was still  alive.   He  thought  that  Sri
    Lankans in the United Kingdom might have seen  him  and  informed  upon
    him.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

41. Mr Smart submitted that the appeal should be dismissed.  It  was  clear
    that the claimant  had  not  been  involved  in  organising  events  in
    opposition to the Sri Lankan government while in  the  United  Kingdom.
    This conflicted with the contents of the TGTE letter  dated  6th  April
    2014 which  described  him  as  the  organiser  of  public  events  and
    demonstrations.

42. Mr Smart submitted that simply attending  meetings  and  demonstrations
    would not bring him to the adverse attention of the authorities and  he
    relied upon  GJ  Sri  Lanka,  paragraphs  335-352,  and  in  particular
    paragraph 336.  The Court of Appeal in MP and Another [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    829 had approved the decision in GJ.

43. I was asked to place little weight on the  claimant's  contention  that
    the authorities in Sri Lanka had been visiting his home  on  a  monthly
    basis since 2012.  There was no evidence,  other  than  the  claimant's
    assertion that this was the case and it was unlikely that  such  visits
    would be made, if the authorities had been told that the  claimant  was
    in the United Kingdom.  I was asked to find that the claimant would not
    be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka.

The Claimant's Submissions

44. Mr Paramjorthy submitted that the starting point was  the  findings  of
    fact made by the First-tier Tribunal which had  been  preserved,  which
    related to his LTTE  involvement  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  his  subsequent
    detention.  In addition the finding that the claimant  had  joined  the
    TGTE in the United Kingdom in January 2012 had not been challenged  and
    was preserved.

45. I was asked to find the claimant's evidence honest and sincere  and  to
    find that the letter dated 6th April 2014 from the TGTE in  the  United
    Kingdom was not  inconsistent  with  the  claimant's  evidence,  as  it
    referred to his "involvement with our activities in the UK."

46. Mr Paramjorthy pointed out that the TGTE is a proscribed  organisation.
    Although mere attendance at meetings in the United Kingdom without more
    would  be  insufficient  to  attract  the  adverse  interests  of   the
    authorities in Sri Lanka, I was asked to consider that in this case the
    claimant's profile or perceived profile would be  such  as  to  attract
    attention, and put him at risk on return.

47. If questioned upon return to  Sri  Lanka  the  claimant  could  not  be
    expected to lie about his activities.   I  was  reminded  that  it  was
    accepted that the claimant had previously been detained  and  tortured,
    and if he was questioned upon return and he  admitted  his  involvement
    with the TGTE, that together with his activities in  Sri  Lanka,  meant
    that it was reasonably likely that he would be detained, and  therefore
    at risk of ill-treatment.

48. Mr Paramjorthy relied upon paragraph 356(7)(a) of GJ,  submitting  that
    the claimant would be perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities to have a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora.

49. I was asked to allow the appeal on the  basis  that  the  claimant  had
    discharged the burden of proof to show that he  would  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Sri Lanka.

50. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

51. I have taken into account all the evidence both  oral  and  documentary
    placed  before  me,  together  with  the  submissions  made   by   both
    representatives.  I have considered the evidence in the round and taken
    into account the circumstances at the date  of  the  hearing.   I  have
    considered this appeal in the light of the provisions of paragraph 339L
    of the Immigration Rules.  I am conscious of the  need  to  take  great
    care before making adverse findings of credibility in asylum cases.

52. When I found an error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  I
    indicated that because there had been no challenge  to  some  findings,
    those findings would be  preserved.   They  relate  to  the  claimant's
    activities in Sri Lanka.  The preserved findings  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal may therefore be summarised as follows.

53. The claimant was an LTTE supporter in 2002 and worked as an interpreter
    for the LTTE from February  2004  until  2005.   He  also  taught  some
    students about the LTTE.

54. The claimant was detained by the army on 22nd November  2006.   He  was
    tortured during detention and held for just over four months.  He  gave
    some information to the authorities and identified six or seven  people
    as LTTE members.  When  he  carried  out  that  identification  he  was
    wearing an army uniform and a mask.

55. The claimant was released from detention after payment of a bribe,  and
    with the assistance of an agent obtained a  student  visa  and  took  a
    direct flight from Colombo  Airport  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  15th
    October 2008.

56. The claimant gave a false name on arrival in the United Kingdom  as  he
    had a false passport, and did not claim asylum until 9th  August  2013.
    The claimant joined the TGTE in January 2012.

57. I now make findings in relation to the  claimant's  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom.   I find  that  he  has  not  given  any  satisfactory
    explanation as to why he waited until January 2012 to join the TGTE, as
    he had been in the United Kingdom since  October  2008.   In  his  oral
    evidence, the claimant indicated that he believed the TGTE was  founded
    in 2009.  There is no evidence that the claimant undertook any pro-LTTE
    activities, or took part in any anti-Sri Lankan  government  activities
    prior to January 2012.

58. A letter from the TGTE dated 6th April 2014 (page 31 of the  claimant's
    bundle) describes the claimant as organising several public  events  in
    the UK, attending almost all the meetings, and taking an active role in
    organising events and public demonstrations.  He is said to have  taken
    an active role in the project of  "international  conference  on  Tamil
    genocide in Sri Lanka on 28th and 29th September 2013".

59. I do not find that this description of  the  claimant's  activities  is
    accurate.  I note that no further evidence has  been  forthcoming  from
    the TGTE to clarify the claimant's activities.

60. The claimant's evidence is that he has not organised  any  meetings  or
    public events or demonstrations.  That I find is accurate.  He did  not
    state that he took an active role in the  international  conference  on
    Tamil genocide, and was unable to name any  of  the  speakers  at  that
    conference.

61. I find that the claimant has  attended  some  TGTE  meetings  at  their
    offices, and has had photographs of himself taken while attending,  and
    that he has attended Remembrance Day demonstrations in May 2013, and in
    May 2014 and 2015 when he had photographs  of  himself  taken  together
    with others.  He has not been a speaker at any public meeting, nor  has
    he been a leader or an organiser.

62. I do not accept that the authorities in Sri Lanka have been calling  at
    his family home since 2012.  The claimant was unable to  satisfactorily
    explain why, when he had ceased working for the LTTE in 2005, and  left
    Sri Lanka in October 2008, the authorities  would  start  visiting  his
    home address on a monthly basis in 2012.

63. In his oral evidence the claimant stated that he assumed  that  it  may
    have been because a Sri Lankan informer in the United Kingdom had  seen
    him and informed the authorities, but that does  not  explain  why  the
    authorities would call at his home on a monthly basis if they  knew  he
    was in the United Kingdom.  In his most recent  witness  statement  the
    claimant stated that the authorities told his  wife  in  November  2014
    that they knew he was in the United Kingdom.  There is no  satisfactory
    explanation as to why the authorities would start calling at his family
    home in Sri Lanka and harassing his wife and calling on a monthly basis
    if they had information that he was in the United Kingdom.

64. Even taking into account the low standard of proof, I do not accept the
    claimant's evidence that the  authorities  have  been  calling  at  his
    family home as he has claimed.

65. In assessing the risk on return, I take into account paragraph 339K  of
    the Immigration Rules, which I set out below;

         '339K.   The fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
                persecution or serious harm, or to direct  threats  of  such
                persecution or such harm, will  be  regarded  as  a  serious
                indication of the person's well-founded fear of  persecution
                or real risk of suffering serious  harm,  unless  there  are
                good reasons to consider that such  persecution  or  serious
                harm will not be repeated.'

66. I consider paragraph 339K because  the  claimant  has  previously  been
    detained and ill-treated.

67. I assess the risk to the claimant in the light of GJ Sri Lanka, and  MP
    and Another, in which  GJ  was  approved  and  in  which  Lord  Justice
    Underhill stated that there may, untypically, be other cases where  the
    evidence shows particular grounds for concluding that  the  Sri  Lankan
    government might regard an individual as posing a current threat to the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state,  even  in  the  absence  of
    evidence that he or she has been involved in diaspora activism.

68. The risk categories are contained in paragraph 356(7) of GJ and are set
    out below;

         "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.



             (b)  Journalists (whether in print or other  media)  or  human
                  rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the
                  Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
                  record, or who are associated with  publications  critical
                  of the Sri Lankan government.

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution  on  return  as  potential  or  actual  war
                  crimes' witnesses.

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant."

69. The claimant is not a journalist nor  has  he  given  evidence  to  the
    Reconciliation Commission, and there is no evidence that his name is on
    a "stop" list.  There has been no evidence  that  any  court  order  or
    arrest warrant was issued for the claimant in Sri Lanka.  Therefore the
    claimant does not fall within the risk categories set  out  at  (b)-(d)
    above.

70. I have to consider whether the claimant is, or would be perceived to be
    by the Sri Lankan authorities, a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka
    as a single state, because he is, or is perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities to have a significant role  in  relation  to  post-conflict
    Tamil separatism within the diaspora, and/or a renewal  of  hostilities
    within Sri Lanka.

71. I take into account paragraph 356(8) which I set out below;

         "(8) The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government."

72. I also take into account  paragraph  336  of  GJ  in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that attendance at demonstrations in the diaspora  alone
    is not sufficient to create a real  risk  or  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that a person will attract adverse attention  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka.

73. In relation to the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  intelligence,  the  Upper
    Tribunal in GJ set out their conclusions  in  paragraphs  351  and  352
    which are set out below;

         "351.    Our overall conclusion regarding  diaspora  activities  is
             that the GOSL has sophisticated intelligence  enabling  it  to
             distinguish those who are  actively  involved  in  seeking  to
             revive  and  re-fund  the  separatist  movement   within   the
             diaspora, with a view to destabilising the unitary Sri  Lankan
             state.  Attendance at one, or even several  demonstrations  in
             the diaspora is not of itself evidence  that  a  person  is  a
             committed Tamil activist seeking to promote  Tamil  separatism
             within Sri Lanka.  That will be a question  of  fact  in  each
             case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by such
             an individual.

         352.     The evidence before us indicates that any Tamil who  seeks
             a travel document from the SLHC in London or another  diaspora
             hotspot will have a  file  created  in  Colombo  and  will  be
             interviewed in London before a decision is  made  to  issue  a
             TTD.  By the time the DIE in Colombo e-mails a TTD  to  London
             to be issued to such an individual, the Sri Lankan authorities
             will know all they need  to  know  about  what  activities  an
             individual  has  undertaken  outside   Sri   Lanka   and,   in
             particular, whether the returnee poses  a  real  risk  to  the
             unitary Sri Lankan state or the GOSL on return."

74. In my view the authorities, in relation to the claimant, will be  aware
    that he has joined the TGTE which is a proscribed  organisation.   They
    will be aware that having arrived in the United Kingdom,  the  claimant
    carried out no pro-LTTE activities  for  over  three  years.   The  Sri
    Lankan authorities will be aware that the claimant is not a  leader  of
    the TGTE, or an organiser  of  any  meetings  or  demonstrations.   The
    claimant does not play a significant  role  within  that  organisation.
    Although the claimant has attended some TGTE meetings,  which  are  not
    public meetings, and he has attended Remembrance Day demonstrations  in
    May 2013, 2014, and 2015, he does not have and would not  be  perceived
    to  have  a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict   Tamil
    separatism, and would not be perceived to be a threat to the  integrity
    of Sri Lanka as a single state.

75. I therefore conclude that if returned to Sri Lanka, the claimant  would
    not  be  detained,  and  would  not  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities and therefore would not be  at  risk.   With  reference  to
    paragraphs 339Kthe guidance in GJ indicates the Appellant would not  be
    at risk because of his activities in the UK.  There are therefore  good
    reasons to consider the previous ill treatment will not be repeated.

76. I therefore find that he is not  entitled  to  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection, and there would be no breach of Articles 2 or 3 of the 1950
    Convention.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

The claimant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction.   There  has
been no request for anonymity and the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
order.



Signed   Date 9th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed   Date 9th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

