
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02209/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th February 2016                    |On 8th March 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON



                                   Between

                                     Q Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of The People's  Republic  of  China,
    born on 2nd February 1976.  She entered the UK illegally on  10th  June
    2003 and applied for asylum.  As the Appellant  failed  to  attend  her
    asylum  interview,  that  application  was  refused  on  non-compliance
    grounds on  4th  November  2003.   Nothing  more  was  heard  from  the
    Appellant until 1st November 2010 when she made an update request,  and
    on 9th May 2011 she was apprehended by Immigration Officers. Thereafter
    and on 19th February 2014 the Appellant's case was  reviewed  when  was
    instructed to make arrangements to leave the UK without delay.

 2. The Appellant lodged further submissions on 5th  March  2014  and  18th
    November 2014, but on 23rd  January  2015  the  Respondent  decided  to
    refuse the applications for asylum and human  rights  for  the  reasons
    given in her letter of that date.   The  Appellant  appealed,  and  her
    appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 13th April 2015.  He dismissed the appeal  for
    the reasons given in his Decision dated 22nd April 2015.  The Appellant
    sought leave to appeal that decision, and such permission  was  granted
    on 20th May 2015.

Error of Law

 3. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    Appellant.  There was no explanation for her absence.  I was  satisfied
    that the Appellant had been notified of the time, date and place of the
    hearing and decided to proceed to hear the appeal in the absence of the
    Appellant in accordance with the provisions of Rule 38 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   I  found  it  to  be  in  the
    interests of justice to do so.

 4. The Appellant had claimed asylum on the  basis  that  as  a  practising
    Christian she was at risk on return to China. The Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal because he found that the Appellant did not have a  well-founded
    fear of persecution on return applying the decision in QH (Christians -
    risk) China CG [2014] UKUT 86 (IAC).   The  Appellant  had  never  been
    targeted  in  China,  and  her  parents,  who  were   also   practising
    Christians, continued to live there without difficulty.  There  was  no
    evidence that  the  Appellant  was  of  any  interest  to  the  Chinese
    authorities.  The Judge also  dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds but that decision was not challenged in the Appellant's grounds
    of application.

 5. Those grounds argue that the Judge erred in law by neglecting  to  make
    findings in respect of documentary evidence submitted by the Appellant,
    and ignored evidence of discrimination  against  partners  of  a  mixed
    marriage.  Apparently, the Appellant's husband is Malaysian.

 6. It was not necessary for me to hear from Mr Diwnycz.  I find  no  error
    of law in the decision of the judge.  The Judge based his decision upon
    a current Country Guidance case.  The Appellant has not identified  the
    documents  which  she  alleges  the  Judge  failed  to  consider.   The
    Appellant complains that the Judge failed  to  consider  any  potential
    discrimination the Appellant might  suffer  in  China  because  of  her
    marriage to a Malaysian, but such a failure cannot amount to  an  error
    of law because discrimination does not amount to persecution.

Notice of Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

 8. I do not set aside that decision.

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue
    for the same reasons given by Judge Parkes.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


