
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02730/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LA
                              (ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S.L. Wass, counsel instructed by Barnes, Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of  LA,  a  citizen  of
         Albania against the respondent's decision to refuse his application
         for asylum and to remove him from the UK.

      2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the  parties  as  they
         were in the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.

    Background

      4. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 23 August  1996.   He
         entered the United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  28  June  2013  and
         claimed asylum on arrival.  The respondent refused the  appellant's
         asylum claim on 22 August 2013 and granted  him  limited  leave  to
         remain until 23 February 2014.  On 22 February 2014  the  appellant
         applied for further leave to remain and  on  6  February  2015  the
         respondent refused to vary the  appellant's  leave  to  remain  and
         decided to remove the appellant by way of directions under  Section
         47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

      5. The appeal against that decision came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Keane on 30 June 2015.  The judge, in a decision  promulgated
         on 10 August 2015, found the appellant  credible  and  allowed  the
         appeal on the basis that the appellant would be at risk  on  return
         from the gang for whom he had worked in Albania and the authorities
         would be unable to protect him.

      6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  and  granted
         on two  grounds:  firstly  that  the  immigration  judge  had  made
         perverse findings in making contradictory findings about whether or
         not there would be a sufficiency of  protection  available  to  the
         appellant.  The second ground was that the  immigration  judge  had
         failed to correctly apply the test in Horvath [2000] UKHL  37  when
         determining  the  sufficiency  of  protection  available   to   the
         appellant upon return to Albania.

      7. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge had made  inconsistent
         findings.  At paragraph [18] the  judge  found  that  the  Albanian
         authorities  are  able  and  willing  in  general  to   provide   a
         sufficiency of protection.  However the judge then went on to  find
         that there wasn't such protection available to the  appellant.   Ms
         Willocks-Briscoe argued that the judge's decision was not supported
         by  background  evidence.   Whilst  there  was  evidence  of   some
         corruption by some individuals, there  was  no  evidence  that  the
         appellant would have been refused the general protection which  the
         judge had found to be available.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe also referred
         to the sufficiency of protection available as set out in AM and  BM
         Albania CG (Trafficked women) [2010] UKUT 00080 (IAC) and relied on
         in the respondent's refusal letter.

      8. In relation to ground 2 Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  referred  me  to  the
         House of Lords in Horvath which confirmed that:

             'The sufficiency of state protection is not  measured  by  the
             existence of a real risk of an abuse  of  rights  but  by  the
             availability of a system for the protection of the citizen and
             a reasonable willingness by the state to operate it.'

         Given the judge's first finding  it  was  argued  that  the  second
         finding cannot stand and there was an absence of evidence as to how
         the judge came to that finding.   There  was  no  evidence  of  the
         appellant having sought the protection of the authorities  and  the
         findings were based on one group of individuals  and  the  evidence
         did not support that the same would be the case for  the  whole  of
         Albania.

      9. Ms Wass submitted that the findings were not inconsistent.  It  was
         her view that it was open to the judge to look at the case law that
         'in general' a sufficiency of protection was available but then  to
         go on and relying on  his  findings  of  fact,  to  find  that  the
         particular  circumstances  of  this  appellant  meant   that   such
         protection was not available to him.  The case of AM and BM made it
         clear (paragraph [182]) that it was fact specific and that in  each
         case there needed to be an assessment of each individual  based  on
         factual  findings,  as  to  whether  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
         protection for that individual.  It was  submitted  that  this  was
         what the judge had done at paragraphs 18 and 19  of  his  decision.
         Paragraph 18 of the decision made it clear that this finding  would
         not apply, for example to all members of law enforcement and  their
         families, but that the judge's  findings  were  fact-specific.   In
         relation to Horvath Ms Wass contended that the judge had considered
         the unwillingness of the authorities to provide protection to  this
         appellant.

    Ground 1

     10. The judge found that the appellant belonged to a Particular  Social
         Group of a child former victim of trafficking.  Those findings were
         not challenged.  Both the respondent in the refusal letter and  the
         judge relied on the country guidance case of AM and  BM.   Although
         this  related  to  trafficked  women,  many  of  the  findings  are
         applicable to the appellant's case.   It  was  concluded  paragraph
         [182] that:

             'there is considerable corruption in Albania but  we  conclude
             that  the  steps  taken  by  the  Albanian   authorities   are
             sufficient to meet the standard of sufficiency  of  protection
             from re-trafficking from 'new' traffickers as set out  in  the
             judgment of Lord Clyde in Horvath from which  we  have  quoted
             above.  However, when considering the issue of whether or  not
             the victim of trafficking has a sufficiency of protection from
             her former traffickers, should they wish to re-traffic her  or
             harm her we consider  that  that  issue  must  again  be  fact
             specific.'

     11. I am  not  satisfied  therefore  that  the  judge's  findings  were
         inconsistent or contradictory.  Having found  that  there  was,  in
         general, a sufficiency of protection in  Albania,  the  judge  then
         went on, as the guidance in AM and BM required to consider  whether
         the appellant had a sufficiency of protection from his former  gang
         members/traffickers.  In finding that there was no  sufficiency  of
         protection for this appellant, there was therefore no inconsistency
         in the judge's findings, as he was required to go on and make those
         individual findings.  AM and BM is authority for the  view  that  a
         general sufficiency of protection in Albania  does  not  in  itself
         mean that this will be available for each appellant.

     12. I am satisfied therefore that the judge reached a  conclusion  open
         to the judge on the evidence and gave  detailed,  adequate  reasons
         for the findings.  I do not find any merit in this ground.

    Ground 2

     13. In relation to ground 2 I am satisfied  that  the  judge  correctly
         applied the Horvath test.  It is not the  case  that  as  has  been
         suggested the judge confused  the  test  with  a  demand  that  the
         Albanian state ensure that no member of the particular social group
         face any risk. As I have found in ground 1, it was incumbent on the
         judge to make individual findings in relation to this appellant and
         whether there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  from  his  former
         traffickers.  The judge carefully considered that issue  and  found
         it 'difficult to conceive that he could look to  the  local  police
         for protection'.  The judge went  on  in  paragraph  [18]  to  give
         reasons for finding that there would not be  'even  a  measure'  of
         protection available to him, including specifically because many of
         those in the police who had worked for the appellant's father 'were
         in the pay of the gang'.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  did  not
         request protection does not in itself negate those findings and the
         judge gave detailed  reasons  for  making  'exclusively  favourable
         findings' in relation to the facts of  the  case.   These  included
         that the appellant at that time decided to continue to work for the
         gang (paragraph [7] of the appellant's witness statement) prior  to
         being forced to leave Albania  to  traffic  drugs.   He  would  not
         therefore have been in a position to seek protection.

     14. In relation to Ms Willocks-Briscoe's submission that  the  evidence
         did not support that there would not be a sufficiency of protection
         in all of Albania, the judge  found  that  there  would  not  be  a
         sufficiency of protection in the appellant's home  area,  and  then
         went on to find in paragraph 20 that internal relocation was not an
         option open to the appellant.  Those findings were not challenged.

     15.  The findings that the judge made were therefore properly  reasoned
         and dealt with the issue of sufficiency of protection  rather  than
         risk.  The judge made  findings  that  were  open  to  him  on  the
         evidence. The second ground of appeal therefore has no merit in  my
         findings.

    Decision:

     16. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 28 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

