
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02786/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 May 2016                            |On 13 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                            Mr Mahmoud Alidadian
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  He obtained permission by way  of
    a "Cart" judicial review confined to  the  following  ground  only:  "A
    failure to properly assess the risk  upon  return  as  an  undocumented
    failed asylum seeker".  Limited to this ground, the challenge  is  made
    to the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Pickup  sent  on  29
    September 2014 dismissing the appellant's appeal.

2.   As outlined in the grounds and by Mr Brown in submissions,  the  thrust
    of ground 3 was that the judge had fallen in error firstly  because  he
    had failed to consider new country  information  and  new  Home  Office
    guidance on return to Iran; and secondly because the Upper Tribunal and
    courts had made clear in a number  of  cases  their  concern  that  the
    existing country guidance in SB (risk on return-illegal exit)  Iran  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00053 and BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk  on  return)
    Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) merited revisiting.

3.   I am not persuaded that the judge erred in law.  In  the  first  place,
    it is important to note that the judge comprehensively disbelieved  the
    appellant's account (para 61).  That clearly included rejection of  the
    appellant's  claim  to  have  left   Iran   illegally.    The   judge's
    consideration of the illegal exit issue was confined to a consideration
    in the alternative (para 46: "Even  if  he  left  Iran  illegally...").
    Secondly, given that the appellant only stood to  be  considered  as  a
    failed asylum seeker, the ground does not identify any body of  country
    evidence before the FtT Judge demonstrating that the  existing  country
    guidance cases were no longer consistent with  the  background  country
    information.  The only more recent material identified  in  the  ground
    was one specific provision of the Home Office Iran OGN  v  8.0  October
    2012, but that related only  to  conditions  for  those  in  detention.
    Third, the body of background materials before the judge cannot be said
    to comprise cogent evidence demonstrating  that  the  existing  country
    guidance on  Iran  relating  to  failed  asylum  seekers  was  invalid.
    Fourth, the grounds themselves make reference to more recent  decisions
    of the European Court of Human Rights, e.g. K.K.  v.  France  app.  no.
    18913/11, in  which  it  was  held  that  the  situation  in  Iran  was
    insufficiently serious to prevent all returns.  Fifth, as  regards  the
    point that the Tribunal and the courts have expressed concern about the
    risk of harm on return to Iran from the UK as a  failed  asylum  seeker
    irrespective of the credibility of the individual, such  concerns  have
    related to cases in which  relevant  updated  background  material  was
    accepted as being in play.  That was not the position  in  this  appeal
    when it came before Judge Pickup in September 2014.

4.   Mr Brown sought to argue that I should adjourn  the  hearing  to  await
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in a pending country  guidance  case
    dealing, inter alia, with the issue of failed asylum seekers.  However,
    I am obliged to confine myself to the question  of  whether  the  judge
    erred in law in September 2014, on the body  of  evidence  before  him.
    Applying the principles established in SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940, I
    am entirely satisfied the judge did not materially err in law and  that
    in consequence his determination must stand.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 13 July 2016

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
