
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02058/2013
                                                               AA/02060/2013
                                                               AA/02061/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2013                               |On 29 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    L S B
                                     R K
                                     T K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Ali, instructed by Malik & Malik
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  us  to
    rescind the order and we  continue  it  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The appellants are  citizens  of  Afghanistan.  The  first  and  second
    appellants are married and the third appellant is their daughter.  They
    were born on 1  January  1962,  1  January  1967  and  1  January  1997
    respectively.  They entered the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  15
    November 2012.  They claimed asylum on the basis that they had been ill-
    treated as Sikhs in Kabul where they  lived.   In  particular,  it  was
    claimed that the first appellant owned a shop  and,  having  accused  a
    woman of stealing from his shop, was  accused  of  sexually  assaulting
    her.  In a letter dated  21  February  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused  each  of  the  appellants'   applications   for   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection.  The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  the
    first appellant's account and that he and his family would be  at  risk
    on return to Kabul.  On 27 February 2012, the Secretary of  State  made
    decisions to remove each of the appellants to Afghanistan as an illegal
    entrant by way of directions under Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

 3. The appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Following  a
    hearing on  3  April  2013,  Judge  Trevaskis  dismissed  each  of  the
    appellants' appeals.  He found their claims  not  to  be  credible  and
    concluded that the appellants had not established that there was a real
    risk of persecution for a Convention reason on  return  to  Afghanistan
    and that, in any event, they could internally relocate and  live  in  a
    different area of Kabul.  The  judge  also  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal solely
    against  the  decision  to  dismiss  their  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  Although permission was initially refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, on 20 June 2013 the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  P  A  Spencer)
    granted the appellants permission to appeal.  Thus,  the  appeals  came
    before us.

 5. In granting permission  to  appeal,  UTJ  Spencer  gave  the  following
    reasons.

         In paragraph 26 of its determination in DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs:
         departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148 (IAC)  the  Tribunal
         said that the evidence which it referred to  in  paragraph  25  had
         clear implications for other cases involving claimed risk on return
         to Afghanistan for Hindus or Sikhs, in the period between then  and
         such time as further country  guidance  on  the  subject  could  be
         issued.  Although understandably,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         made no reference to this determination because  the  hearing  pre-
         dated  the  determination  in  DSG   &   Others   nonetheless   the
         determination in DSG & Others was reported before the determination
         in the instant appeal was promulgated and arguably  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge made an error on a point of law in the determination
         of the appeal.  I take this point  on  the  appellant's  behalf  as
         Robinson obvious.  All of the grounds may be argued."

 6. Before us, Mr Ali relied upon DSG and Others  and  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in  failing  to  depart  from  the
    relevant country guidance cases of SL and Others (Returning  Sikhs  and
    Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137 and IB and TK (Sikhs  -  risk
    on return - objective evidence) Afghanistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00150.   He
    submitted that there was background material before the  judge,  as  in
    DSG and Others, which demonstrated that the number of Hindus and  Sikhs
    in Afghanistan was much lower than had been  the  evidence  in  SL  and
    Others.  That, Mr Ali submitted, as was accepted  in  DSG  and  Others,
    altered the level of risk  to  individual  Sikhs  from  attacks.  As  a
    consequence, Mr Ali submitted that Afghan Sikhs and Hindus were at real
    risk of persecution on return to Afghanistan and the  judge's  decision
    could not stand.

 7. We begin with DSG and Others.  That  appeal  concerned  a  claim  by  a
    number of Afghan Sikhs that they were at risk of persecution or serious-
    ill treatment on return to Afghanistan.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    that case departed from the country guidance  case  of  SL  and  Others
    relying on expert and background evidence submitted by the  appellants,
    in particular as set out in the UT's determination at [11] that:

         "By the end of 2001 only 50  to  100  families  were  left  of  the
         approximately 2,000 who lived there in 1992."

 8. In DSG and Others, the evidence was that the total number of Sikhs  and
    Hindus in Afghanistan was about 3,700 rather than the 20,000 as was the
    evidence in SL and Others.

 9. At [24], the UT concluded that, on the  basis  of  this  evidence,  the
    First-tier Tribunal had been entitled to depart from SL and Others:

         "24. We consider it was open to the  judge  in  the  light  of  the
             glaring difference in the figures (3,700 as opposed to 20,000)
             to  consider  that  the  Tribunal's   figures   in   SL   were
             significantly wrong and that at the date of the hearing before
             him that remained the case.  He went on to note,  as  we  have
             set out above, what was said by Collins J in Luthra  and  what
             was said in the report of Dr Giustozzi which was  specifically
             prepared for this appeal.  He also noted and bore in mind what
             was said by Dr Ballard.  Of  clear  relevance  also  were  the
             positive credibility findings and the adoption of the  earlier
             finding by the judge in April  2004  that  the  appellant  had
             experienced persecution in the past in Afghanistan."

10. Consequently, at [25] the UT stated:

         "In the circumstances it seems to us entirely clear that the  judge
         was entitled to depart from the country guidance in this case."

11. A failure to follow (without good reasons) a relevant country  guidance
    case is likely to amount to an error of law.  That is recognised in the
    Senior President's Practice Directions: Immigration and Asylum Chambers
    of the First-Tier Tribunal and The Upper Tribunal (2010) at para 12.4:

         "Because of the principle that like cases should be treated in like
         manner, any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently  applicable
         country guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the  case
         in question is likely to be regarded as grounds  for  appeal  on  a
         point of law."

12. The point was made forcibly by the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940 where Stanley Burnton LJ (at [47]) said this:

         "It is for these reasons [efficient use of tribunal resources],  as
         well as the desirability of consistency, that decision  makers  and
         tribunal   judges   are   required   to   take   Country   Guidance
         determinations into account, and to follow them unless very  strong
         grounds supported by cogent evidence, are adduced justifying  their
         not doing so."

13. Although he relied upon it, Mr Ali was unable to tell us when  DSG  and
    Others had  been  reported.   Having  consulted  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    website ourselves, it is  clear  that  DSG  and  Others  had  not  been
    reported at the date of the First-tier Tribunal's hearing  on  3  April
    2013.  The Upper Tribunal's  website  records  that  the  decision  was
    reported on 8 April 2013.  It appears from the Tribunal file that Judge
    Trevaskis' decision was, in fact, sent to the Home Office on  19  April
    2013, in other words after DSG and Others had been reported.   It  was,
    therefore, technically available to Judge Trevaskis before the  appeals
    process in the First-tier Tribunal was concluded.

14. As Ms Martin, who represented the Secretary of State,  pointed  out  in
    her submissions, it is a curious feature of these appeals that  despite
    the reporting of DSG and Others on 8  April  2013,  the  case  was  not
    relied upon by the appellants, either in the grounds seeking permission
    to appeal lodged with the First-tier Tribunal nor in the grounds lodged
    with the renewed application to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds,
    mirroring the submissions made to Judge Trevaskis, argue  instead  that
    the appellants' appeals should be decided  in  line  with  the  country
    guidance cases, in particular SL and Others.  It is only in the reasons
    of UTJ Spencer when granting permission to appeal that DSG  and  Others
    is raised in these appeals.  It was relied upon for the first  time  by
    the appellants in Mr Ali's oral submissions before us.

15. We do not accept that DSG and Others can directly assist the appellants
    in this appeal.  DSG and Others is not a country guidance case and  the
    Judge's failure to take it  into  account  and  follow  it  cannot,  in
    itself, amount to an error of law.  The appellants' case must, instead,
    rest upon an argument that the material in  DSG  and  Others  and  that
    relied on in these appears required the Judge to  depart  from  SL  and
    Others.  We do not consider that it did.  Nothing  in  DSG  and  Others
    persuades us that Judge Trevaskis was required to depart  from  SL  and
    Others and erred in law in dismissing these appellants' appeals.

16. First, as we have already  said,  DSG  and  Others  is  not  a  country
    guidance case.  All, in fact, it decides is that the evidence  in  that
    appeal, entitled the judge to depart from the country guidance case  SL
    and Others (see [25]).

17. Secondly, whilst there was some evidence before  Judge  Trevaskis  that
    the total number of Hindus and Sikhs in Afghanistan was  now  estimated
    to be "around 3,000" (see Operational Guidance Note: Afghanistan  (June
    2012) at 3.9.4), it is far from clear to what extent that evidence  was
    drawn to the judge's  attention  and  directly  relied  upon.   It  was
    certainly not relied upon to justify departing from SL  and  Others  as
    the  appellants  relied  on  that  decision  (see  para   41   of   the
    determination) to support their claims to  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Afghanistan.  We do not consider that it  gave  rise  to  "very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence" for departing from SL and Others.

18. Thirdly, the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in DSL and  Others
    was different and more focussed on the individuals in that case because
    it  included  two  expert  reports  which  supported  those  particular
    appellants' claims to be at risk.  Finally, in upholding the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to depart from SL and Others, the Upper Tribunal in
    DSG and Others  stated at [24] that:

         "Of clear relevance also were the positive credibility findings ...
         that the appellant had  experienced  persecution  in  the  past  in
         Afghanistan".

19.  By  contrast,  in  these  appeals  Judge  Trevaskis  made  an  adverse
    credibility  finding.   That  finding  is   not   challenged.    As   a
    consequence, the appellants could not  establish  that  they  had  been
    subject to any past persecution.  We accept Ms Martin's submission that
    this is an important and significant difference from the factual matrix
    which the UT held entitled the judge in DSG and Others to  depart  from
    the country guidance case.

20. In these appeals, the first appellant had been running a shop in  Kabul
    for 20 to 25 years.  Whatever the evidence was concerning the number of
    Sikhs currently living in Kabul,  and  the  instance  of  any  acts  of
    persecution against that population, these appellants had lived free of
    persecution and, in the case of the first appellant, had  done  so  for
    over 20 years running his shop.  On that evidence, we see no basis  for
    concluding that the judge was not entitled to find that the  appellants
    had failed to establish a real risk of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason or serious ill-treatment.  That finding was consistent with  the
    relevant country guidance cases, in particular SL and Others, and there
    was simply no basis  to  say  that  there  were  "very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence" to depart from it, the case which, as  we
    have already pointed out,  the  appellants  relied  upon  before  Judge
    Trevaskis.

21. For these reasons, the judge did not  err  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appellants' appeals.

22. The First-tier Tribunal's decision stands.

23. These appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.






                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

