
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02260/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 May 2017                               |On 14 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                Godson iwufi
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This appeal comes before the Tribunal to remake  the  decision  in  the
    appeal pursuant to the 'error of law' decision made, and the Directions
    issued consequently, at the hearing on 28 February 2017, and further to
    the adjourned hearing on 20 April 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 30  May  1975.  Although
    this appeal continues to have the title accorded to it at the  time  of
    lodging, whilst the appeal was pending the Appellant signed  a  'change
    of name' deed in which he renounced the use of the  name  Godson  Iwuji
    and adopted the name Biafra Nzeogwu Biafra.


3.   The Appellant seeks protection on  the  basis  of  a  claimed  risk  of
    persecution in Nigeria arising from his  activism  in  respect  of  the
    rights of Biafrans.


4.   The full history and background of the Appellant's  claim  is  set  out
    across the various documents on file, and is a matter  of  record.  The
    Appellant's narrative account of the history of his  activism  was  the
    subject of careful consideration by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett.
    Although the decision of Judge Bartlett was set aside by reason  of  an
    apparent failure to have regard to the contents of an expert report  in
    respect of risk on return, it was common ground before me at the 'error
    of law' hearing that much of the findings of Judge  Bartlett  could  be
    preserved for the purpose of remaking the decision in the appeal.


5.   The relevant findings, which were agreed between the parties,  are  set
    out in the body of the 'error of law' Decision promulgated on 17  March
    2017 at paragraph 13. For ease of reference I reproduce those  passages
    as set out in the 'error of law' decision:

     "From paragraph 22 [of Judge Bartlett's Decision]:

         "My conclusion from reviewing all of the evidence in this  case  is
         that the appellant has a belief in Biafran  independence  and  that
         his life for at least the past 13 years has been focused  on  this.
         Therefore I find that the appellant has established that he  has  a
         Refugee Convention reason which is political opinion.  However  the
         appellant could not be described as a man of action.   He  is  only
         identified attending two pro-Biafran demonstrations in Nigeria.  He
         left Nigeria only a few years after his involvement in  pro-Biafran
         causes started and since then  he  has  managed  to  co-author  one
         report which took five years to compile, attend some demonstrations
         organised by the GSM  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  act  as  their
         director of security.  On the basis of the evidence I find that the
         appellant has an earnest interest in Biafran independence but  that
         a considerable  part  of  his  time  and  energies  is  devoted  to
         disagreements between the numerous pro-Biafran groups.  I find that
         he has surrounded himself with like-minded individuals who  provide
         confirmation to the appellant about his beliefs."


     Then at paragraph 23, which may  be  preserved  in  its  entirety,  the
    following findings are made:

         "I find the appellant's and Mr Amadikwa's claims about the  liaison
         of the British government and  British  security  forces  with  the
         Nigerian security services to  be  fanciful.   It  seems  from  the
         documents that have  been  provided  to  me  that  this  conspiracy
         flavoured theory is a  view  widely  held  in  various  pro-Biafran
         groups.  However I am not persuaded  by  it  as  the  root  of  the
         argument is that the  Nigerian  security  services  and  government
         would not act in the way they did or know  what  they  did  if  the
         British security services were not involved.  I find this far  from
         compelling.  I do not consider that the  appellant's  name  on  the
         2009 report that was sent to Gordon Brown creates  a  risk  to  him
         from the Nigerian authorities.  It is the appellant's own  evidence
         that  this  report  has  not  been  published  beyond  the  British
         government and he has not allowed it to be widely published because
         of fears about the risk it would create.  Therefore I consider that
         this report remains confidential between its authors and  those  to
         whom they have disclosed such as the GSM, some  individual  members
         of the British government and other adjourned hoc individuals."

     From paragraph 24:

         "I accept that the appellant has held pro-Biafran  views  for  many
         years and that between around 2000 and 2003 he  talked  about  this
         cause to some other individuals with similar views.


              ...

         I am prepared to accept that he was head of security of MASSOB from
         2003 to 2004."


     From paragraph 25:

         "I find that the appellant is a member of  the  GSM.   I  find  the
         issues raised by the respondent about his  membership  card  to  be
         irrelevant.  The appellant sent his GSM membership card to the Home
         Office and this is not disputed.  In addition Mr Amadikwa confirmed
         in evidence that the appellant was a member of GSM.   I  accept  Mr
         Amadikwa's evidence that  the  membership  of  GSM  in  the  United
         Kingdom is approximately 200 but that their wider membership online
         runs into the thousands.  I find that the GSM is a small group.  It
         stated aims are pacifists and in the asylum interview the appellant
         states  that  the  GSM  wants  all  the  Nigerian  people  to  live
         peacefully and 'they also don't want war,  want  to  sit  down  and
         discuss how we can all live together and he happy'."


     At paragraph 28:

         "However the appellant has not claimed to be a member of  IPOB  and
         his stated aims of pacifism and nonviolence are at  odds  with  the
         stated aims of Kanu.  Therefore I find that the appellant would not
         participate in IPOB activities or join that organisation due to the
         conflict with his deep held pacifism.  In addition I find  a  clear
         distinction can be drawn between the actions of Mr Kanu who is said
         to have broadcast  highly  provocative  messages  laced  with  hate
         speech and derision and those of the appellant.  The appellant does
         not claim to have acted in this way.  I therefore consider that the
         appellant has a low profile when compared with that of Mr Kanu.   I
         do not accept the appellant's comparison in his  oral  evidence  of
         himself to Mr Kanu."


    I should add in respect of this latter passage  that  after  discussion
    with the representatives  it  is  agreed  that  the  reference  to  not
    participating in IPOB activities  is  in  effect  a  reference  to  not
    willingly and knowingly aligning himself with IPOB  activities  in  the
    event of return to Nigeria.  This however is not to deny  that  he  has
    taken part in demonstrations in the United  Kingdom  organised  jointly
    between the GSM and the IPOB.

    At paragraph 29 the following facts may be preserved:

         "In addition I have not been presented with evidence to  show  that
         he has a high social media profile such  that  he  is  engaging  in
         activities on social media"


    and also


         "I accept that there is evidence of a newspaper extract  from  2009
         from a Nigerian newspaper which includes the appellant's  name  and
         asks for people affected by extrajudicial killing and the  like  to
         contact show me justice.  However this is now seven years old.""



6.   From these  passages  the  following  key  preserved  findings  may  be
extrapolated:

    (i) The Appellant has a belief in Biafran independence and his life for
    at least the past 13 years has been focused on this.

    (ii) He attended two pro-Biafran demonstrations in Nigeria.

    (iii) He was the head of security of the Movement for Actualisation  of
    Sovereign State of Biafra ('MASSOB') from 2003 to 2004.

    (iv) He is the co-author of one report which took 5 years to compile.

    (v) The report has not been published beyond  the  British  government,
    and the Appellant has not allowed it to be widely published because  of
    fears about the risk it would create. The report  remains  confidential
    between its authors and those to whom they have disclosed it,  such  as
    the Good Shepherd Movement ('GSM') - of which  he  is  a  member,  some
    individual members of  the  British  government,  and  other  'ad  hoc'
    individuals.


    (vi) The Appellant's suggestion of liaison of  the  British  government
    and or British security forces with the Nigerian security  services  is
    fanciful.

    (vii) He has attended some demonstrations organised by the GSM  in  the
    United Kingdom and acted as their director of security.


    (viii) The membership of the  GSM  in  the  UK  is  approximately  200,
    although the wider membership online runs into thousands. The GSM is  a
    small group. Its stated aims are pacifist.


    (ix) The Appellant has not claimed to be a  member  of  the  Indigenous
    People of Biafra ('IPOB'), and his stated aims  of  pacifism  and  non-
    violence are at odds with the stated aims of Nnamdi Kanu (the leader of
    IPOB). The Appellant would not  participate  in  IPOB  activities,  and
    would not join that organisation because of the conflict with his  deep
    held pacifism.


7.   The intention of time of the 'error  of  law'  decision  was  that  the
    decision in the appeal would be remade on the basis  of  the  preserved
    findings of fact, and further to submissions to be made by the  parties
    as to the country situation and the risk for the Appellant.  Directions
    were issued accordingly in respect of the filing and service of written
    submissions and supporting country information.


8.   Unfortunately, the appeal was not  ready  to  proceed  at  the  resumed
    hearing on 20 April  2017.  Notwithstanding  the  exchange  of  written
    submissions  and  supporting  documents  pursuant  to  the   Directions
    previously issued, the Appellant produced further documents on the  day
    of the hearing purportedly showing he had been  appointed  on  4  April
    2017 as the GSM-IPOB General Coordinating Director, a role  that  would
    involve him in meeting with Deputy Directors of IPOB and taking part in
    Radio Biafra broadcasts. It was also said that  the  Appellant  was  to
    meet other IPOB leaders later in April in advance of a court appearance
    by Mr Kanu in Nigeria scheduled for  25  April  2017.  Accordingly  the
    appeal was adjourned with Directions. (See in particular paragraphs 5-8
    of the  'Adjournment  Decision  and  Directions',  and  the  Directions
    themselves made pursuant to the hearing on 20 April 2017.)


9.   For completeness I note that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered
    and dismissed the Appellant's appeal based on family and  private  life
    in the United Kingdom with reference to Article 8 of the  ECHR.   There
    was no challenge to that aspect of the Judge's decision,  and  Ms  Head
    acknowledged at the 'error of law' hearing that the Appellant  was  not
    seeking to pursue such a ground of appeal any further.


The Hearing

10.  Both parties have filed documents and written  submissions  at  various
    stages during the appeal process before both  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal. I have had regard to those particular materials
    indicated by the Appellant's  representative  as  relied  upon  at  the
    adjourned hearing on 20 April 2017 (see paragraph 2 of the  Adjournment
    Decision and Directions), and those materials filed since, pursuant  to
    the Directions given on that occasion. I have otherwise had  regard  to
    the Respondent's bundle as filed before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and
    such materials as the Respondent has filed in the Upper  Tribunal.  All
    documents are a matter of record on file, and are known to the parties.
    In the circumstances  I  do  not  list  them  further  here,  but  make
    reference to them as is incidental for the purposes of this Decision.


11.  The Appellant participated in the hearing with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter: I ensured  mutual  understanding  at  the  outset  and  no
    language difficulties became apparent during the course of the hearing.
    I heard evidence from the Appellant and from Mr Enyinna  Amadikwa  (see
    documents at page 22 et seq. of the Appellant's bundle before the First-
    tier Tribunal, and letter at A3 of the bundle filed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal). In light of the history of the proceedings  the  Appellant's
    oral testimony focussed in the 'new' circumstance that  post-dated  the
    agreement to preserve certain findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    then heard submissions from the representatives.  I  then  reserved  my
    decision in the appeal. I have kept a detailed note of the evidence  in
    the record of proceedings. In reaching my decision I  have  taken  into
    account all that was said at the hearing, as well  as  the  documentary
    evidence  and  written  submissions.  (Although  there   has   been   a
    significant passage of time since the hearing I  am  satisfied  that  I
    have detailed notes of the evidence and submissions; further, I made  a
    preliminary note as to  my  decision  and  reasons  shortly  after  the
    completion of the hearing. I am satisfied that the passage of time  has
    not diminished my ability to recall the evidence - which is a matter of
    record - and has not otherwise adversely  impacted  upon  my  decision-
    making.)


Consideration

12.  In light of the decision in EJA v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  10  -  see  at
    paragraph 27, "Decisions of tribunals should not become  formulaic  and
    rarely benefit from copious citation of authority" - I do  not  propose
    to recite at any length the applicable law and principles.  Suffice  to
    say I have had particular regard to  the  applicable  jurisprudence  in
    respect of the Refugee Convention and the 'protection' articles of  the
    ECHR; further, I have had regard to the applicable  standard  of  proof
    with reference to the cases of Sivakumaran and Karanakaran.



13.  After careful consideration of all of the available evidence,  and  for
    the reasons set out below, I  have  ultimately  reached  the  following
    conclusions in respect of the Appellant's claim for protection:

    (i) Whilst the Appellant has a long-standing  involvement  with  groups
    that advocate the rights of Biafrans in Nigeria,  his  activities  over
    the last decade or more have essentially been limited to the expression
    of opinion and have not been matched by any meaningful  or  significant
    political action. For example, it took him, with others,  approximately
    five years to compile a report which -  with  all  due  respect  -  was
    ultimately put to little purpose.

    (ii) I am not satisfied that the Appellant - or even the GSM with which
    he has  been  most  closely  associated  in  recent  years  -  has  any
    particular  sphere  of  influence,  either  internationally  or  within
    Nigeria. There is no evidence that it is an organisation in respect  of
    which the authorities in Nigeria have any specific interest.

    (iii) In his most recent evidence the Appellant has sought to 'play up'
    an association with larger and more influential organisations,  and  in
    particular with IPOB. It is clear  that  IPOB  is  an  organisation  in
    respect of which the authorities in Nigeria have a very clear interest.
    Indeed, I find that it is for this very reason that the  Appellant  has
    now most recently sought to demonstrate a close connection with IPOB.

    (iv) I accept the submission of Mr Norton  that  I  should  reject  the
    Appellant's evidence in respect of his claimed recent  connection  with
    IPOB. I note that this apparent willingness to work alongside IPOB  and
    in support of its leader in the context of criminal proceedings against
    him, runs contrary to the Appellant's opposition to  that  organisation
    by reason of its methods  being  inconsistent  with  his  own  pacifist
    ideals. Even allowing for the possibility that the Appellant  might  be
    prepared to relax his principled stance in support of  a  common  cause
    and in protest about due process in respect of an independence movement
    figurehead, it is to be noted that  the  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    claimed association with IPOB  emanates  with  the  Appellant  and  the
    organisation  of  which  he  is  a  significant  member  (and   company
    director), and is not supported by any documentary  evidence  from  the
    IPOB itself. I find that  this  evidence  is  contrived  and  does  not
    represent an actual association.

    (v) Ms Head, on behalf of the Appellant, has not been able to  identify
    any country information that demonstrates  the  specific  targeting  of
    peaceful activists, or peaceful activist organisations.

    (vi) In such circumstances it seems to me that a peaceful activist will
    only be of risk of adverse state action in the event that he or she  is
    involved in a demonstration which itself becomes the target of  adverse
    police action. Whilst I cannot rule out altogether the possibility that
    if  returned  to  Nigeria  the  Appellant  might   participate   in   a
    demonstration, and that such a demonstration might culminate in adverse
    action by the authorities, and that in such adverse action participants
    - including possibly the Appellant - might become at risk of injury,  I
    am not persuaded that it has been shown that the level of such  a  risk
    is sufficient to give rise to an entitlement to  protection  under  the
    Refugee Convention, the principles of humanitarian protection,  or  the
    ECHR: in my judgement the risk of such an eventuality for the Appellant
    is too remote.


14.  I have noted the 'preserved findings' above. It is  not  disputed  that
    the Appellant has made the issue of Biafran independence the  focus  of
    his life over the past decade or more. He  has  in  the  past  involved
    himself with MASSOB, and more recently has been a member  of  the  Good
    Shepherd's Movement - of which he is a listed director (see Appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, Tab B, page 17 et seq.).


15.  Although there is an abundance of evidence  by  way  of  documents  and
    photographs of the Appellant's  attendance  at  various  meetings,  and
    copies of various leaflets etc, there is a dearth of material as to the
    standing  of  the  GSM  either  internationally  or   within   Nigeria.
    Substantial background documents have been  filed  in  respect  of  the
    politics of Biafra, and the  Biafran  independence  movement:  however,
    beyond those materials emanating from the GSM itself, references in the
    country information to the GSM are not readily identifiable. It is  not
    mentioned in the Appellant's own expert's reports - see further  below.
    There is a reference to it in a  letter  written  in  January  2017  by
    Frederick Forsyth to Mr Amadikwa, but nothing can be inferred from  the
    contents of that letter as to its general status and standing.


16.  In contrast, there is extensive evidence in respect  of  IPOB  and  the
    arrest and detention of its leader Mr Nnamdi  Kanu.  (Mr  Kanu  was  in
    detention at  the  time  of  the  earlier  hearings  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, having been detained in October 2015,  but  was  released  on
    bail on 28 April 2017.) It is clear from the background materials  that
    there has been considerable controversy over Mr Kanu's arrest, and  the
    charges  brought  against  him  in  respect  of  criminal   conspiracy,
    intimidation, and membership of an illegal organisation. His  detention
    has been the focal point of protest and  demonstration  by  pro-Biafran
    supporters. The allegations against Mr  Kanu  include  that  he  is  an
    advocate of violent secession. Footage is  referenced  in  a  Wikipedia
    article produced by the Respondent in which Mr Kanu demanded  for  guns
    and bullets whilst a guest speaker at the world Igbo  Congress  in  Los
    Angeles in September 2015. It is to be recalled that it is  because  of
    the violent methods of IPOB and Mr Kanu, which are  at  odds  with  the
    Appellants pacifism, that the Appellant has hitherto indicated that  he
    would not willingly or knowingly align himself with IPOB activities.


17.  In this latter context I  remind  myself  of  the  observation  in  the
    preserved findings: "a clear  distinction  can  be  drawn  between  the
    actions of Mr Kanu who is said to  have  broadcast  highly  provocative
    messages  laced  with  hate  speech  and  derision  and  those  of  the
    appellant".


18.  What can be gleaned from the country information, in my  judgement,  is
    that  the  GSM  quite  simply  does  not  feature  as   a   significant
    organisation, and is not the subject of any particular adverse interest
    on the part of the authorities. Certainly nothing to the  contrary  has
    been expressly identified to me by or on behalf of the Appellant.


19.  The Appellant was asked under cross-examination  if  he  could  explain
    the absence of any reference to the GSM in any of the news reports etc.
    that were on file. In  my  judgement  the  Appellant  offered  no  such
    explanation. He met the question by replying that the GSM was a  mother
    organisation coordinating other groups, and was not aggressive. This is
    no explanation at all. The Appellant was also asked what infrastructure
    the GSM had in Nigeria - whether the GSM had a presence 'on the ground'
    in Nigeria. He replied by saying that there was one main  body  divided
    into various parts all working for the common cause. When pressed as to
    whether there was an office in Nigeria he claimed that there was one in
    Owerri in Ibo State run by  Mr  Nnandi  Ohiagu.  On  re-examination  he
    confirmed that this was the same Mr Ohiagu who had  signed  the  letter
    that appears at Tab A page 188 of the  Appellant's  bundle  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The letter is dated from December 2006,  is  on  a
    letterhead for the Biafran Liberation  Front,  and  is  signed  in  the
    capacity of 'MASSOB Leader, for an on behalf of MASSOB National Working
    Committee'. Whilst I acknowledge the possibility  that  Mr  Ohiagu  may
    have 'moved on' since 2006, necessarily this letter is not evidence  of
    any sort of GSM infrastructure in Nigeria, and there is nothing else by
    way of supporting documentary evidence as to any such infrastructure in
    Nigeria. In my judgement there  was  a  vagueness  to  the  Appellant's
    answers, which lacked specificity of detail. I am not persuaded that he
    was not simply referring in a general way to the apparent proliferation
    of groups, and I was not remotely persuaded that the GSM had a role  as
    a mother organisation - bearing  in  mind  in  particular,  again,  the
    absence of any reference to  it  in  any  of  the  country  information
    materials.


20.  I have taken into account the expert reports of  Dr  Adure  Uzo-Peters.
    It  seems  to  me  that  Dr  Uzo-Peters  attempts  to  draw  from   the
    authorities'  actions  against  such  organisations  as  IPOB  -  which
    necessarily  are  actions  targeted  against  a  group  that  advocates
    secession by force - an inference that all secessionists will be  dealt
    with in this way. This is overt in the references by way of analogy  to
    the government's attitude towards the Niger  Delta  Avengers  and  Boko
    Haram (e.g. see paragraphs 16, 25, and 35 of Dr Uzo-Peters'  report  of
    27 October 2016). Whilst there may be some approximate  analogy  to  be
    drawn between such organisations and IPOB, I cannot  see,  and  am  not
    persuaded in respect of, any such analogy with the GSM. Indeed, I  note
    that neither the report of 27 October 2016, nor the supplemental report
    of 7  April  2017,  make  mention  of  the  GSM  at  all.  This  latter
    circumstance in itself seems to me to  reinforce  the  absence  of  any
    meaningful profile of the GSM in Nigeria.


21.  In this context and generally I find that I am not  able  to  accept  -
    and indeed outright reject - the analogy  drawn  by  Dr  Uzo-Peters  at
    paragraph 16 of the supplemental report. It is stated: "On the issue of
    comparing the Appellant with Mr Nnamdi Kanu, it should be noted that Mr
    Kanu's protracted incarceration on trial in Nigeria is as a  result  of
    his political beliefs and his activities flowing  from  those  beliefs.
    This is the similarity with the Appellant. Thus,  the  likelihood  that
    similar treatment will be meted out to the Appellant if he exhibits his
    pro-Biafra belief system is high and probable."  In  my  judgement  the
    analogy is wholly false: the Appellant's activities following from  his
    beliefs are in no way comparable with those alleged  against  Mr  Kanu,
    and the suggestion of a similarity is flawed. In my judgement this  not
    only undermines the particular point being made at  paragraph  16,  but
    the value to be accorded to the reports more generally.


22.  It is clear that there  is  a  wide  range  of  political  activism  in
    Nigeria in opposition to government - whether in the context of Biafran
    secession or otherwise - which is not met by violence or oppression.  I
    find that in general there is scope in Nigeria for divergent  political
    opinion, political activism, and political debate. I am  not  persuaded
    that anything  has  been  shown  in  the  background  information  that
    supports the  proposition  that  pacifist  organisations,  or  pacifist
    individuals, who are supporters and advocates of  Biafran  independence
    are  of  such  adverse  concern  to  the  authorities  that  they   are
    deliberately and specifically targeted by oppressive action.  It  seems
    to me clear that the focus of the authorities' actions is in respect of
    the advocates of violent secession - which is  not  to  deny  that  the
    actions of the authorities might then transgress the norms of  what  is
    appropriate whether by reference to the domestic law of Nigeria, or the
    international mechanisms of surrogate protection.


23.  As noted above, the appeal was  previously  adjourned  because  of  the
    Appellant's late production of what was said to be  a  letter  dated  4
    April 2017 confirming his appointment with immediate effect as the GSM-
    IPOB General Coordinating Director. The letter, on a GSM letterhead, is
    signed by the 'Directorate of Public Relation of the GSM',  and  states
    that the Appellant's role will involve meeting with the Deputy Director
    of IPOB and Radio Biafra weekly to update him  on  GSM  activities  and
    strategies, and to work on the campaign to release Mr Kanu; it is  also
    stated that arrangements have been made for the Appellant to meet other
    IPOB leaders "for preparation for Mr Kanu's case in Nigeria on 25 April
    2017".


24.  The Respondent argues that the Appellant's  cooperation  with  IPOB  is
    not readily reconcilable with the preserved finding to the effect  that
    the Appellant would not participate in IPOB activities. In this context
    Ms Head reminds me of the caveat that whilst the  Appellant  would  not
    willingly and knowingly align himself with the IPOB  in  the  event  of
    return to Nigeria, this was not to deny  that  he  had  taken  part  in
    demonstrations in the UK organised jointly  between  the  GSM  and  the
    IPOB. In this context, it was argued on behalf of the  Appellant,  that
    there was a history of cooperation in instances of 'common cause',  and
    irrespective of the disagreement with  the  methods  of  the  IPOB  the
    detention of its leader and concomitant concerns over due process was a
    matter of legitimate focus for GSM given Mr Kanu's status as a  leading
    proponent of independence and Biafran rights.


25.  There is some force to Ms Head's submissions in this  regard.  However,
    what in my judgement is less convincing about the Appellant's claim  as
    to his new role is the absence of any supporting  evidence  as  to  his
    appointment from anywhere other than the GSM (of which he is director),
    combined with  his  unsatisfactory  testimony  as  to  his  duties  and
    activities  in  this  capacity,  and  the  frankly  wholly  unrealistic
    likelihood that anybody in the IPOB - or indeed the GSM  -  would  have
    thought the Appellant had anything of significance to contribute  at  a
    seemingly hastily convened meeting three days prior to the  listing  of
    Mr Kanu's case in Nigeria.


26.  I accept the submission made in the  Respondent's  written  submissions
    of 12 May 2017, and repeated by Mr  Norton,  to  the  effect  that  the
    Appellant's appointment as a coordinator between GSM and  IPOB  was  no
    more than a contrivance for the purpose of the appeal proceedings,  and
    was not reflected in any actual activity on the part of  the  Appellant
    either unilaterally or in association with IPOB.  As  such,  I  do  not
    accept that the Appellant has satisfied me that he has had  any  recent
    close involvement with IPOB. Even  if  it  were  otherwise,  I  am  not
    persuaded  that  such  passing  engagement   with   IPOB   would   have
    significantly raised the profile of either the GSM or the Appellant  in
    the eyes of the Nigerian authorities.


27.  I have noted and taken into account  the  supporting  testimony  of  Mr
    Amadikwa.  Mr  Amadikwa  provided  a  witness  statement  in  which  he
    characterised himself as a "senior figure and expert in respect of  the
    Biafran struggle for independence", and  also  stated  that  he  was  a
    founder of the GSM. I note that various documents on file  support  the
    notion that he has had a significant role in the GSM  -  in  particular
    correspondence replies from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and  10
    Downing Street are addressed to him, as was the letter  from  Frederick
    Forsyth. In  his  statement  Mr  Amadikwa  offers  the  view  that  the
    Appellant's life would be at risk if returned to Nigeria  "as  a  high-
    profile member of the Biafran independence struggle, and  in  light  of
    his political beliefs and activities".


28.  Under cross-examination, and pursuant  to  documents  produced  by  the
    Respondent, Mr Amadikwa acknowledged that he had stood in  an  election
    for Governor of Imo State in 2015. He stated that  he  could  not  have
    stood as a GSM candidate, but stood for the PPA, or Progressive  Party,
    which he said was not a mainstream party but was registered  nationally
    and put candidates up for election mainly in the East. He  acknowledged
    that he went to Nigeria to campaign in the election.


29.  Mr Amadikwa's ability to return to Nigeria and campaign in an  election
    - even if not standing on Biafran issues - without seemingly  being  at
    risk  despite  his  apparently  similar  involvement  in  the   Biafran
    independence movement and the GSM which he had claimed  would  put  the
    Appellant at risk, was the subject of  exploration  re-examination.  He
    suggested that the Appellant engaged people in different activities and
    in different circumstances, and that they took different positions.  He
    also suggested that his British citizenship afforded him  a  degree  of
    protection.


30.  In this latter regard I noted that Mr Kanu is a dual national,  and  is
    also a British citizen. I reject the notion that such citizenship would
    provide any protection against  the  state  authorities  if  they  were
    intent upon harm by way of allegations of treason, arrest and detention
    - as is suggested would be their method against  the  Appellant  in  Mr
    Amadikwa's own witness statement. I do not accept that Mr  Amadikwa  in
    some  way  thought  that  he  might  be  protected  against  any   such
    accusations by reason of his British citizenship, but  rather  that  he
    correctly and realistically perceived that there was no  such  risk  to
    him.  I  also  found  Mr  Amadikwa's  suggestion  that  a   significant
    distinction could be drawn between him and the Appellant to be  without
    foundation and unconvincing as running contrary to the contents of  his
    witness statement. If anything Mr Amadikwa  described  himself  in  his
    statement as the more involved and more politicised.


31.  For completeness I also note  that  Mr  Amadikwa  denied  under  cross-
    examination that the GSM was in any way  a  'mother  organisation'.  To
    this extent his evidence directly contradicted that of  the  Appellant.
    In my judgement this contradiction is to be  resolved  by  drawing  the
    inference that the Appellant was seeking to exaggerate the significance
    of the GSM as a force within Biafran politics in order to  bolster  his
    claim for protection. In this context I note that Mr Amadikwa was  also
    asked about the finances of the  GSM,  the  returns  at  Company  House
    suggesting little financial activity. He replied that the GSM  did  not
    operate as a business, and did not really cost anything to run -  there
    might  be  occasional  expenditure  as  a  matter  of  goodwill  if  an
    individual was in hardship; no subscriptions  were  collected  although
    there might be  voluntary  contributions  made.  In  my  judgement  the
    absence of any significant levels of funding  underscores  the  limited
    nature of the activism of the GSM and its almost invisible profile.


32.  Mr Amadikwa's testimony in respect of Mr  Ohiagu  did  not  corroborate
    the Appellant's claim that he ran the GSM office in  Nigeria.  Instead,
    it was said that Mr Ohiagu, having previously been involved  in  MASSOB
    was fronting the Biafran Central Council in Oweri - and whilst  it  was
    said he was affiliated with GSM it was explained that this simply meant
    that there was inter-communication. When asked directly if the GSM  had
    an office in Nigeria, in contradiction to the  Appellant,  Mr  Amadikwa
    replied no.


33.  I find that in the  circumstances  Mr  Amadikwa's  involvement  in  the
    politics of Nigeria, in particular  in  standing  in  an  election,  is
    indicative of the ability of a  peaceful  activist  advocate  of  anti-
    government causes to be politically active within Nigeria without being
    at risk of  persecution.  In  general  terms  there  is  a  functioning
    political system  which  accommodates  disparate  views  and  opinions;
    whilst, like many such systems, it may be a little  'rough  around  the
    edges', I can identify nothing in the background  material  to  suggest
    that a peaceful activist holding the views of the Appellant  would  not
    be able to organise and participate  in  political  activities  without
    becoming the specific target of the authorities. This is  not  to  deny
    that advocates of methods involving force and violence may be met  with
    disproportionate and/or unlawful oppressive responses - but hat is  not
    the Appellant's situation.


34.  Nor is it to deny that there  are  occasions  when  the  management  of
    demonstrations and protests become  occasions  of  violence,  with  the
    consequence that armed members of the security forces inflict  injuries
    and fatalities upon protesters. Indeed ultimately Ms Head's submissions
    had to resort  to  the  notion  that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    protection on the basis of such an eventuality because of  the  absence
    of any specific evidence that he or the GSM were the type  of  entities
    that attracted adverse attention. However, the extent to which the  use
    of violence against demonstrators is a  matter  of  deliberate  policy,
    and/or the extent to which it is the police  or  other  state  agencies
    that are the initial instigators of such  actions  is  unclear  on  the
    evidence. Those reports of such incidents to which I have been directed
    include allegations on both sides as to who might have started any such
    violence. Necessarily such reports of  demonstrations  that  have  been
    filed are in respect of demonstrations that have been  marred  by  such
    violence; there is no evidence to put such  incidents  in  the  overall
    context of demonstration and protest in Nigeria - and  as  such  it  is
    unclear to me the frequency in which demonstrations and protests end in
    serious violence. In this context I consider that there is considerable
    weight in the Respondent's observations at paragraph 4 of  the  written
    submissions of 27 March 2017 in respect of the nature of  the  protests
    reported  upon,  and  the  value  of  any  information  that  might  be
    extrapolated from such  examples  as  being  indicative  of  the  wider
    picture of political activism in Nigeria.


35.  In such circumstances  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has
    demonstrated that the risk to him as a potential participant in a  pro-
    Biafran  demonstration  is  such  as  to  surpass  the  relatively  low
    threshold  in  order  to  establish  an  entitlement  to  international
    surrogate protection: this is not to  deny  the  possibility  that  the
    Appellant might be caught up in such violence, but rather  to  conclude
    that he has not demonstrated that the risk  of  such  can  be  said  to
    amount to a reasonable likelihood of persecution.


36.  For the avoidance of any doubt, I find that the  Appellant  has  wholly
    failed in his attempt to demonstrate that his involvement with the GSM,
    or anything else in  his  political  past,  is  such  as  to  make  him
    reasonably likely the target of specific interest on the  part  of  the
    authorities. Nor am I satisfied that there is a risk to the  Appellant,
    or any individual,  by  simple  reason  of  being  a  supporter  of  an
    independent Biafra.


37.  Because I do not consider that the Appellant has a profile to  put  him
    at risk, I do not accept that he would be of adverse interest upon  his
    return simply by reason of his change of name.



38.  I have noted the suggestion that the Appellant might be  at  risk  from
    other factions in the Biafran independence movement. Ms  Head  did  not
    pursue such an argument with any vigour. In my  judgement  such  claims
    appear  as  'make-weight'  and  are  unsupported  by  any   independent
    evidence. Given what I have found in respect of the minimal profile and
    significance of the GSM, I do not accept that the  Appellant  would  be
    the subject of any adverse interest on the part of any supposedly rival
    factions, or other third parties.




39.  Finally,  I  note  that  at  the  conclusion  of  submissions  Ms  Head
    requested that an anonymity direction be given in these proceedings.  I
    note that no such direction has previously been  given,  nor  seemingly
    previously sought. Indeed, it seems to me that  his  recent  change  of
    name is in no small part for the very purpose of drawing  attention  to
    his political allegiance. However, given the basis  of  my  conclusion,
    and the nature of my findings herein,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  any
    knowledge in respect of  the  Appellant's  activities  requires  to  be
    concealed from anybody. In all the circumstances I do not consider that
    an anonymity direction is necessary or appropriate.




Notice of Decision

40.  The appeal is dismissed.


41.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                 Date: 12 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis









TO THE RESPONDENT:

FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 12 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua Judge of the First-tier Tribunal )
