
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02288/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2016                    |On 31 March 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     DG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Kadic, Shervins Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, DG, was born in 1985 and is a female citizen of  Turkey.
    She had applied for asylum in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  her
    claimed membership of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) and on account
    of  her  Kurdish  ethnicity.   Her  application  was  refused  by   the
    respondent in a decision dated 23 January 2015.   The  respondent  also
    decided to make directions for removal from the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Clarke) which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22  July  2015
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at [68] et  seq.   The
    judge was not satisfied that the appellant was, as she claimed, at risk
    on account of a blood feud [71].  He, the judge found  that  the  blood
    feud did not exist  at  all.   Further  [75]  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim to have been involved with the  PKK.   The  appellant
    had claimed that she had  been  a  recruiter  for  the  PKK  (screening
    interview) but later denied (witness statement) that she had ever  been
    a recruiter or indeed a member of the PKK.  The appellant also  claimed
    that she had been arrested by the Turkish police,  a  claim  which  the
    judge rejected.  At [81] the judge concluded  that,  even  if  he  were
    wrong and the appellant had been a sympathiser with the  PKK/previously
    arrested/the victim of a blood feud, she would be able to avail herself
    of protection from the Turkish authorities.  The judge found  that  she
    would be able to relocate [82] to larger cities in Turkey  if  she  did
    not wish to return to her own village.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  I shall deal with the  second  ground
    first.  This ground challenges the judge's assessment on the basis that
    the judge had failed to follow the guidance of IK  (Turkey)  CG  [2014]
    UKIAT 00312.  The grounds assert that the appellant would be subject to
    inquiries upon return to her home area which  "will  likely  show  that
    [she] was detained on suspicion of PKK  activities."   This  ground  is
    without merit.  If the judge's findings on credibility are sound (and I
    find that they are - see below) it follows that the appellant will not
    be at risk for the previous PKK activities because  she  has  not  been
    involved  in  any  such  activities.   In  essence,  the  judge   found
    everything that the appellant had told him was untrue.

 4. The first ground of appeal is  a  challenge  to  the  fairness  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant was seven months
    pregnant at the date of the Tribunal hearing on 12 June 2015.  She gave
    birth prematurely to a child on 22 June 2015.   The  appellant  asserts
    the  judge  should  not  have  proceeded  with  the  hearing  in   such
    circumstances (the appellant was not  represented  legally  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal) and that the credibility assessment is unreliable.



 5. There is no medical evidence concerning the appellant's condition on 12
    June 2015, the date of the  hearing.   Ms  Kadic,  for  the  appellant,
    submitted that the judge should have  drawn  a  "reasonable  inference"
    that the appellant was unfit to give evidence at the hearing.  However,
    Ms  Brocklesby-Weller,  for  the  respondent,  pointed  out  that   the
    appellant had not sought help at all at court and yet  the  judge  [67]
    gave the appellant "the opportunity to  make  submissions  on  her  own
    behalf."  The judge notes that those submissions were  "brief".   Prior
    to hearing those submissions, as recorded at [51], the judge noted  the
    appellant's request for an adjournment of the hearing "as she  did  not
    feel well."  The appellant had  attended  the  hearing  with  two  male
    supporters [49].  The hearing began at 3:15 p.m. I  note  that  it  had
    been listed (with the other cases for that day) at 10  a.m.   When  the
    judge questioned the appellant regarding her adjournment application he
    was told that the appellant had not sought "any assistance  from  court
    staff  or  telephoned  her  own  GP  or  sought  medical   advice   for
    assistance."  The judge looked at  the  appellant's  antenatal  records
    which she had brought with her to court.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had attended hospital on 29 May 2015 but  that  the  hospital
    had recorded "nil  concern  noted."   [52].   The  judge  had  directed
    himself to paragraph 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and decided "that it was in
    the interests of justice and fairness to proceed with the hearing."

 6. I make the following observations.  It is  clear  from  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and the  decision  that,  having  refused  the  adjournment
    application the appellant did not exhibit  any  obvious  discomfort  or
    distress  when  she  answered  the  questions  put  to  her  in  cross-
    examination.  She appears to have given detailed answers  to  questions
    put to her.  Secondly, a number of the difficulties the judge found  in
    the appellant's evidence emanated from written  evidence  submitted  by
    the appellant prior to the hearing, for example the screening interview
    [76].   There  were  also  inconsistencies  between   the   appellant's
    screening interview and other written evidence, including  her  witness
    statement (also submitted prior to the  hearing).   Had  the  appellant
    been unable to give answers or had perhaps given confusing  answers  to
    questions put to her at the hearing, it is possible that her  condition
    may have had some impact upon her ability to give  evidence.   However,
    there is no suggestion at all in the Record of Proceedings or  decision
    that her physical condition affected  her  ability  to  give  evidence.
    This fact, coupled with the fact  that  the  judge  did  not  find  the
    appellant credible on account of inconsistencies in items  of  evidence
    submitted prior to the hearing, leads  me  to  reject  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal.  Had the appellant been in  real  distress,  I  find
    that she would have sought the assistance of medical  professionals  at
    court during the time that she was waiting for her  hearing  to  start.
    The fact that the appellant subsequently gave  birth  prematurely  (and
    the fact the birth was accompanied by some medical complications)  does
    not necessarily indicate that she was in such distress at  the  hearing
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  she  could  not  give  coherent
    evidence.  Finally, the judge's findings as regards internal flight and
    the sufficiency of protection in Turkey have not been challenged.  Even
    if the judge had not encountered any difficulties with the  appellant's
    evidence and, indeed, had believed her account,  he  would  still  have
    dismissed the appeal on the  basis  of  the  availability  of  internal
    flight and for the reasons he gives in the decision.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 10 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.






Signed                              Date 10 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

