
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02022/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th March 2014                            |On 3rd April 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                Ataklit Habte

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, Counsel, instructed by Ziadies
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, senior Home Office Presenting officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, born on 26th December 1994.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 22nd September 2008 and claimed asylum
    on arrival.  He was granted limited leave to remain as an unaccompanied
    child.
2.   He seeks now to  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  25th
    December 2012, refusing to grant him asylum or  to  grant  him  further
    leave to remain.

3.   In summary the appellant claims to fear persecution both  as  a  result
    of his religion and as a draft evader.

4.   The appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Flynn  on  4th
    September 2013.  The appellant did not attend on that occasion nor  was
    he represented.  The Judge understandably proceeded  to  determine  the
    matter in his absence.

5.   It was the appellant's claim that he was a  practising  Pentecostal  in
    Eritrea.  He said that his mother had been  arrested  by  the  Eritrean
    Security Forces because of her Pentecostal faith and thus it  was  that
    he travelled with his aunt and uncle who arranged for him to escape  to
    the UK.

6.   It was not accepted in the reasons for refusal that the  appellant  had
    been or was a practising Pentecostal.  He merely has given his religion
    as "Christian" in the screening interview and there were many  Eritrean
    Christians who were orthodox Christians as opposed to Pentecostal.   In
    addition he had displayed little knowledge of the faith.  It was  noted
    indeed that the appellant had not submitted any evidence  that  he  had
    been involved in the Pentecostal Church since arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2008.

7.   The Judge noted that the questioning  of  the  appellant  in  interview
    might have not been as carefully managed as may be, given that  at  the
    time of the interview the appellant was 13 years  of  age.   The  Judge
    noted that certain matters relied upon by the respondent  perhaps  were
    unfairly  taken  against  the  appellant  when  viewed  with  his  age.
    Notwithstanding those comments there seems  to  be  little  by  way  of
    finding as to whether or not that claim  of  the  appellant  was  well-
    founded.

8.   Of more concern, however, was the issue as to whether  or  not  he  had
    left Eritrea illegally.  Once again there  seems  to  be  little  clear
    findings  or  analysis  on  that  matter.   The  Judge  highlighted  in
    paragraph 13 of  the  determination  the  respondent's   unfairness  in
    putting  a  negative  inference  on  the  appellant's  evidence.    The
    appellant's case was that he left in August or September 2008 which was
    of course the time of particular concern  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    limitations on exit were more stringent  than  before.   In  any  event
    there seemed to be no finding whether or not he did leave illegally and
    if so what consequence follows.

9.   The appeal was granted on the basis that it perhaps was unfair for  the
    Judge to hear the matter in the absence of the appellant.

10.  The matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.  For my  part  I
    see nothing wrong with the Judge  proceeding  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant albeit that it was an asylum matter.  What,  however,  is  of
    more concern are that the appellant had been interviewed when he was 13
    and the key elements of his case do not seem to have been analysed with
    particular care nor clear findings made upon them.

11.  It is unnecessary to go into further detail because  both  Mr  Solomon,
    who represented the appellant, and  Mr  Saunders  who  represented  the
    respondent  accepted  that  there  were  such   deficiencies   in   the
    determination that it should not stand.

12.  In those circumstances I set aside the determination  and  direct  that
    it be remade.

13.  As it will of necessity be a  de  novo  hearing  it  should  be  listed
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  accordance   with   the   Senior
    President's practice directions.

14.  A  Tigrinyan  interpreter  will  be  required.  The  appellant  was  in
    attendance and confirmed his address.  I stressed to him the importance
    of keeping in touch both with his solicitors  and  with  the  Tribunal,
    such that he should present himself on the next occasion.

15.  Any further documentation or evidence that is  relied  upon  should  be
    filed with the Tribunal no later than seven days prior to the  hearing.



16.  Any further directions that may be required will be given by the First-
    tier Tribunal.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
