

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02682/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Laganside Courts                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 20th August 2013                         |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                          khalid weli ahmed sharif

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Buster Cox of the Northern Ireland Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs Margaret O'Brien of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant arrived  in  Northern  Ireland  in  June  last  year  and
    subsequently claimed asylum.  It is not disputed that he was  17  years
    old at that time or that he hails from Somalia.  But the respondent did
    not accept that he belongs to  the  Ashraf  minority  or  that  he  was
    brought up in the village of Maduro in the Lower Shabelle region.   The
    claim was rejected on 6th March 2013, but when the appeal  came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 9th May, Judge Grimes did  accept  that  the
    appellant is an Ashraf from the Lower Shabelle.  She  also  accepted  ~
    and it was not specifically disbelieved by the respondent  ~  that  the
    appellant's father had been a religious teacher, giving lessons in  the
    Holy Qur'an from a room adjacent to the family home, from which he  was
    abducted in April 2011 by members of  Al  Shabaab.   They  preferred  a
    different version of Islam to the one which he was expounding.

2.   But the appellant had experienced no problems from Al Shabaab  himself.
     After the abduction, he remained at  home  for  three  months,  during
    which time the family were visited by an aunt from  Mogadishu,  on  the
    occasion of the birth of the appellant's younger sister.  The appellant
    then travelled to Mogadishu and stayed with his aunt for a month, while
    arrangements were put in place for him to  leave  Somalia.   Thereafter
    the appellant went back to the village of Maduro and resumed attendance
    at the local school for three months, until the aunt came to fetch  him
    to Mogadishu, where the arrangements had finally been  completed.   The
    appellant stayed in Mogadishu for two weeks before flying out with  the
    agent.

3.   Far from recruiting the appellant into their ranks, Al Shabaab, by  his
    own account, showed no interest in the appellant while he  was  in  his
    home village.  Judge Grimes was prepared to accept that Al Shabaab were
    still in control of the appellant's village, but because the  appellant
    had continued to live there from when his father was abducted in  April
    2011 until his departure from Mogadishu in June 2012 ~ save for a month
    in Mogadishu in the summer of 2011 and a further two weeks just  before
    his departure ~ the judge was not satisfied that he would  be  at  real
    risk of persecution by Al Shabaab on return to his home village.

4.   As for the appellant's sojourn in Mogadishu, Judge  Grimes  noted  that
    his later description of conditions in that city differed  considerably
    from his earlier one.  The latter described the  area  where  his  aunt
    lived as quiet and peaceful,  under  government  control,  whereas  the
    former described the whole place as wracked by fighting, which made  it
    unsafe for him to leave the house.  Judge Grimes  thought  the  earlier
    description more likely to be true, and that having an aunt and  indeed
    uncles in Mogadishu, the appellant could safely relocate to that  city.
    She took account of the country guidance in AMM & ors [2011]  UKUT  445
    (IAC), distinguishing the appellant from the large class  of  returnees
    for whom there would still be a real risk of Article 15(c) harm in that
    city.

5.   In respect of the appellant's membership of the Ashraf minority,  Judge
    Grimes noted that he had not claimed to have suffered  any  persecution
    at all as a result of this, and that he had travelled twice between his
    home area and Mogadishu, as well as travelling to the airport,  without
    any difficulty.  Despite the country guidance in NM  [2005]  UKAIT  76,
    there was insufficient evidence before her, said the judge, to  support
    the assertion that there was a current risk of persecution for  members
    of the Ashraf minority in the Lower Shabelle or elsewhere.

6.   Turning finally to the  human  rights  consequences  of  return,  Judge
    Grimes noted that while,  according  to  AMM,  the  armed  conflict  in
    Mogadishu did not pose a real risk of Article 3 harm,  there  could  be
    such a risk to vulnerable individuals.  But she did not think that  the
    appellant laboured under any particular vulnerability.  Although he had
    not traced his family members in Somalia through the Red Cross, he  had
    stayed with his aunt on two occasions in Mogadishu, and in any event no
    removal action was to be taken against him until he  reached  his  18th
    birthday, which was not for another two months.  In respect of  Article
    8, Judge Grimes accepted that the appellant had established  a  private
    life  in  Northern  Ireland  through  his  studies  and  his   sporting
    activities, and even family life with the foster carers  with  whom  he
    had been staying since December 2012.  But as he was  not  at  risk  in
    Somalia, where he had close relatives, she concluded that removal there
    would not be disproportionate.

7.    Every  aspect  of  the  judge's  reasoning  was  challenged   in   the
    application made by the Law Centre (NI) for  leave  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, with the addition,  in  reliance  on  KA  (Afghanistan)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 (which was handed down some two months  after  the
    promulgation of the instant case), of failure by the Secretary of State
    to endeavour to trace the appellant's family members in Somalia.   When
    the appeal came before me, leave having been given by Designated  Judge
    French on all the  grounds,  I  had  the  benefit  of  very  lucid  and
    persuasive submissions from Mr Cox, which were  ably  rebutted  by  Mrs
    O'Brien.  As Judge Grimes' determination is very well structured,  with
    each aspect of the case being  clearly  demarcated  and  clear  reasons
    being given, I shall follow the pattern outlined above in addressing Mr
    Cox's criticisms.

8.   Considering first the risk from Al  Shabaab,  I  think  the  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to take the very long  period  which  the  appellant
    spent in his  village  after  the  abduction  of  his  father,  without
    experiencing any problems at all from Al Shabaab, as indicating that he
    was not reasonably likely to be persecuted by them on  return  to  that
    village, on the assumption that they  are  still  in  control  of  that
    district (which the judge was prepared  to  accept).   Mr  Cox  insists
    that, given the appetite of Al Shabaab for  recruiting  young  men,  it
    should not be assumed that they would have no interest in the appellant
    in the future.   But  the  appellant  was  already  old  enough  to  be
    recruited into their ranks while he was living in the village,  and  it
    was not irrational for the judge to infer, from the  lack  of  previous
    interest, the absence of a real risk in the future.

9.   In any event, the judge found that the appellant could relocate  safely
    to Mogadishu.  Mr Cox argues that internal relocation is ruled  out  by
    AMM, but at paragraphs 23-25 of her determination Judge Grimes explains
    why the appellant comes within the class of persons recognised  by  the
    panel as being able to return to Mogadishu  without  an  Article  15(c)
    risk.  I think her reasoning is adequate, but in any event it  must  be
    acknowledged that the situation in Mogadishu  is  very  different  from
    what it was when the  panel  was  considering  the  country  background
    evidence which resulted in the  guidance  given  in  AMM.   As  already
    mentioned at paragraph 6 above, the panel refer to "the armed  conflict
    in Mogadishu."  There is no longer any armed conflict.  Al Shabaab have
    been driven out of the city and its environs, and the Government is  in
    total control.

10.  In finding that the appellant is not at risk on account of  his  Ashraf
    ethnicity, Judge Grimes at first blush came closer to making  an  error
    of law.  She considered there to be "insufficient evidence" before  her
    that the Ashraf folk were currently at risk in Somalia, but she did not
    cite any country background material or expert opinion to support  that
    conclusion, which appears to be based solely  on  the  appellant's  own
    evidence of what befell him in Somalia.  There was nothing, insists  Mr
    Cox, to justify departure  from  the  country  guidance  in  NM,  which
    clearly states that anyone found to be a member of the Ashraf  minority
    is at risk of persecution and therefore entitled to  recognition  as  a
    refugee.

11.  Practice Direction 12.2 requires country  guidance  to  be  treated  as
    authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal  "depends
    upon the same or similar evidence."  The evidence  from  the  appellant
    was very different from that before the AIT in NM.  He  may  have  been
    still a minor when he left Somalia, but he was old enough know  if  his
    family had experienced any problems because of  their  Ashraf  lineage.
    Far from having any problems, the appellant's father  would  appear  to
    have been well-respected in the village, attracting enough students  to
    his divinity classes to provoke the anger of Al Shabaab, who wished  to
    impose their own Salafist/ Wahabi version of Islam on  the  population.
    When the panel in NM was  taking  evidence,  the  problems  in  Somalia
    mostly stemmed from the struggles  between  clan-based  warlords,  with
    minority groups falling prey to the  depredations  of  armed  militias.
    Subsequently,  all  that  changed.   Tired  of  this  internecine  clan
    rivalry, the population largely welcomed the Union of  Islamic  Courts,
    despite their imposition of Sharia law.   Their  dominance  was  short-
    lived, thanks to military intervention  by  Ethiopia,  but  Al  Shabaab
    emerged to carry on a similar programme.  Now, however, the  forces  of
    the legitimate government, with the support of the AMISOM  contingents,
    have established government control over the greater part  of  Somalia.
    All of this is perfectly consistent with the appellant's being  unaware
    of any Ashraf-related problem for his family.  Country guidance is  not
    a straight-jacket, and while Judge Grimes may have expressed herself in
    terms which were too wide-ranging, she was entitled to find that  there
    was no risk to the appellant, either in his home area or in  Mogadishu,
    because he belonged to the Ashraf folk.

12.  The one error of law which I agree  with  Mr  Cox  does  occur  in  the
    determination is where Judge  Grimes  considers  whether  returning  to
    Mogadishu will pose an Article 3, as opposed to an Article 15(c),  risk
    to the appellant.  She takes comfort from the fact that  the  appellant
    will not be removed until after his 18th birthday, which will be in two
    months' time, but Mr Cox rightly points that for Article 3, as well  as
    for asylum, the hypothetical question which must be asked  is  whether,
    as at the date of the hearing, the appellant would be  at  risk  if  he
    were back in his own country.

13.  The error is not a material  one,  however.   The  appellant  had  only
    recently been staying with his aunt in Mogadishu, and there  were  also
    uncles living in the city.  Although he had apparently been  unable  to
    contact them, it was not unreasonable to suppose that he would be  able
    to find them once he was back.  In any  event,  this  error  would  not
    constitute a basis for granting the appellant international  protection
    at the present time, when he  is  no  longer  a  minor.   There  is  no
    'corrective principle' in play, as explained in EU & ors  (Afghanistan)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 32.  That case also provides a complete answer  to  the
    complaint in the grounds, citing KA (Afghanistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1014,
    that the Secretary of State did not carry out her duty to endeavour  to
    trace the appellant's family members.  The appellant  cannot  derive  a
    benefit from that failure now, if he is not at risk on  return  to  his
    own country.

14.  No issue has been taken, quite rightly, with the judge's  treatment  of
    the Article 8 aspect of the appeal.  The upshot  is  that,  although  a
    very persuasive case was advanced by Mr Cox, no material error  of  law
    has been established, and so the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    must stand.



     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                          4th September 2013



