
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02916/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 May 2015                       |On 19 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                              ZELLALEM ABRAHAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Stevens, Duncan Lewis Solicitors, Harrow
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of either Eritrea or  Ethiopia,  born  on  1
    June 1975.  He appealed the decision of the respondent dated  12  April
    2014 refusing to grant him asylum in the United Kingdom.  He  presently
    has limited leave to remain granted until 11 October 2016.  His  appeal
    was heard and was allowed by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Lawrence
    on 9 June 2014.  The respondent appealed against that decision  and  an
    error of law was found in Judge Lawrence's determination such  that  it
    fell to be set aside and the appeal reheard.  The  appeal  was  reheard
    before Designated Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Woodcraft  on  30
    October  2014  and  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,   on   humanitarian
    protection grounds and on  human  rights  grounds  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 13 November 2014.   An  application  for  permission  to
    appeal was lodged and permission was granted by Judge of the First-Tier
    Tribunal Garratt  on  18  December  2014.   The  permission  found  one
    relevant matter which is that the Judge may have  overlooked  the  fact
    that with the forms submitted to the  Ethiopian  Embassy  there  was  a
    letter dated 21 May  2014  which  gave  additional  details  about  the
    appellant's life and history in Ethiopia, including his place of  birth
    and that of his parents, details of  his  schooling  and  his  father's
    Ethiopian Army service,  together  with  the  appellant's  address  and
    employment  details  in  that  country.   The  grounds  state  that  in
    accordance with  guidance  set  out  in  ST  [2011]  UK  UT  00252  the
    determination does not show that the Judge considered this letter which
    was  prepared  for   the   Ethiopian   Embassy   by   the   appellant's
    representatives on 21 May 2014.  They state that if the information  in
    this letter had been taken into account the  Judge's  conclusion  might
    have been different.

 2. On 20 February 2015 the appellant appeared before me and I  found  that
    there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal's
    determination for the reasons stated in  the  grounds.   I  prepared  a
    determination to this effect which is on file.   I  directed  a  second
    stage hearing in the Upper Tribunal on the appellant's  application  to
    the Ethiopian  Embassy,  taking  into  account  the  letter  which  was
    attached to the form, which letter has been stamped  by  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy.  This is the only issue.

 3. This is the adjourned hearing.

 4. The Presenting Officer reminded  me  that  there  had  been  an  asylum
    hearing for this appellant in 2004 which was dismissed.  He  handed  me
    the SEF and witness statement which were produced for that hearing.

 5. The appellant took the stand and asked that his  two  statements  which
    are in the appellant's bundle be used as evidence for the  hearing.   I
    also had the form which was handed in to the Ethiopian Embassy  by  the
    appellant and the covering letter which was attached to  it.   Both  of
    these have been stamped by the Head of the Consulate on 22 May 2014.

 6. The appellant's representative referred me to the Rule 24  response  by
    the respondent dated 19 January 2015.  He asked the appellant what rank
    his father had in the Ethiopian Army and he said he was a Colonel.   It
    was put to the appellant that the respondent states  that  he  did  not
    tell the Ethiopian Embassy his rank.  The appellant said  that  he  did
    tell the Embassy Secretary about this when he went the  first  time  to
    the Embassy in 2012 and the second time in 2014.

 7. The representative then  referred  to  the  completed  form  which  the
    appellant handed to the Ethiopian Embassy.  It was pointed out  to  him
    that his full address when he was in Ethiopia had  not  been  put  onto
    that form.  He said he had told the Embassy Secretary what his  address
    had been and the secretary told him that it had been demolished and  is
    now a military camp.  It had been a camp before but it has  changed  to
    another camp now.  He said he also mentioned two other addresses to the
    Embassy Secretary.  He said the first one was called Saris and  is  now
    occupied by the Red Cross and it had no number or street name.  He said
    the second address is in the Ledeta area near the Balcha  Hospital  and
    he was asked why he did not give a full address for this.  He  said  it
    is known by the area which is called Ledeta and is near that church.

 8. The Presenting Officer cross-examined the witness asking about the form
    which was handed to the Ethiopian Embassy completed by  the  appellant.
    The appellant said he had completed it himself.  He was  asked  why  he
    had only put his first name on the form and he said he put that when he
    was asked to write his name.  He was asked  why  he  had  not  put  his
    father's full name or his grandfather's full name on the form,  and  he
    said the Embassy official had said it was not necessary.  He asked  the
    appellant about his address in Ledeta and why  there  was  not  a  full
    address on the form and he said the Embassy official had  said  it  was
    not necessary.  He said the first army camp built there was demolished.
     It was put to him that that is  what  he  had  said  about  the  first
    address but what he is being asked about now is the address in  Ledeta.
    The appellant said the Embassy official had said it was  not  necessary
    to put this in.

 9. The Presenting Officer then questioned him about the  letter  which  he
    handed in with the form.  His father's rank in the Army  has  not  been
    mentioned.  The appellant said he had told the official his father  was
    a colonel in the Army but the official had said that as he is not still
    a colonel in the Army he did not need to put this in the letter or  the
    form.

10. The appellant was referred to his witness statement at page  6  of  the
    appellant's bundle in which he explains what  happened  on  the  second
    occasion he went to the Ethiopian Embassy in 2014.  He was asked if  it
    was on the second occasion  that  he  had  been  told  by  the  Embassy
    official that he did not need to put his father's rank in the Ethiopian
    Army into the form or the  letter.   He  said  it  was  on  the  second
    occasion as on the first occasion the Embassy official had made  things
    difficult for him.  It was put to him  that  at  paragraph  20  of  his
    statement he said he went to the Embassy and told them that  he  wanted
    to apply for Ethiopian documentation and handed them the letter written
    by the solicitor.  He said the Embassy official had read the letter and
    had asked him if he had any other documents to show his ID.  He said he
    had not and the official had given him an application form which he had
    filled in and given to the official, with a photograph.  It was put  to
    him that in his  statement  he  has  made  no  mention  of  him  asking
    questions about what was required in the form, for example his father's
    address and his rank in the Army and  he  was  asked  why  he  had  not
    mentioned this in his statement.  He said he had  not  thought  it  was
    necessary.  He was asked if he had been at the Embassy on his  own  and
    he said his sister and a friend had gone with him.  He was asked if his
    sister had seen him complete the form  and  he  said  yes  but  he  had
    completed the form himself, she had not helped him.  He  was  asked  if
    the Embassy official had asked his sister any questions but he said  he
    had not.

11. The appellant was referred to his statement at paragraph 1 which refers
    to him being born in Addis Ababa.  In his statement he states that both
    of his parents are of Eritrean origin but it was put  to  him  that  in
    2004, at the asylum appeal hearing, he made a  statement  in  which  he
    said he was an Ethiopian national and he was  asked  why  he  had  said
    that.  He said that before the war he had lived in  Ethiopia.   He  was
    asked why he now states that he is no  longer  Ethiopian  and  he  said
    because he has been told by  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  that  he  is  not
    Ethiopian.  It was put to him that in 2004 in his statement he had said
    his father was Ethiopian and his mother Eritrean and he also said  this
    in his SEF.  The appellant said  that  he  is  half  Ethiopian  on  his
    father's side.  He was asked  why  he  had  said  in  his  most  recent
    statement that  both  his  parents  were  Eritrean  and  he  said  that
    originally Ethiopia and Eritrea were all one country  but  now  he  has
    been told he is not Ethiopian and he has accepted that.

12. It was put to the appellant that the reason he has been unable to get a
    document from the Ethiopian Embassy is because he has not substantiated
    his nationality with supporting documents.  It was put to him that  the
    letter he handed to the Embassy does not state that his  father  was  a
    colonel, does not have addresses on it, the only name  and  address  is
    his sister's in the United Kingdom.  The full names of his  father  and
    grandfather are not on the form and their residential addresses are not
    on the form.  It was put to the appellant that he is not trying to  get
    Ethiopian citizenship.  The appellant said he left Ethiopia because  he
    had to as he was told he was Eritrean.  He said  the  Home  Office  had
    asked him for evidence that he is an Ethiopian national but he had  had
    to leave Ethiopia because he was found to be Eritrean.  He said he  had
    escaped when the Ethiopian government was deporting all the Eritreans.

13. There was no re-examination.

14. A second witness took the  stand  being  the  appellant's  sister  Sara
    Abraham.  She asked that her statement, which  is  in  the  appellant's
    bundle, be used as evidence for the hearing.

15. The Presenting Officer cross-examined this witness.  At paragraph 11 of
    her statement she states that she went with the appellant when he  went
    to the Ethiopian Embassy to apply for Ethiopian  documents  to  confirm
    his nationality and she was asked if that is the only time she went  to
    the Ethiopian Embassy.  She said that was the second time, she had also
    gone with the appellant when he first went to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy.
    She was unable to remember what date that was.  The second visit was in
    2014.  She was asked what had happened the first time and she said  the
    Embassy official had spoken to her and the appellant  together  and  he
    gave them nothing and was quite nasty to them.  She was asked what  had
    happened the second time and she said the second time the official  was
    more approachable and he spoke to her.  She said that she had stayed in
    the reception area and she had not seen the appellant  filling  in  the
    form.  She said he had gone inside with the Embassy  official  and  she
    had stayed outside.  She said the official had not allowed  her  to  go
    in.

16. The witness was asked if she is now British and she said she  is.   She
    said she is a refugee.  It was put to her that the letter handed by the
    appellant to the Ethiopian Embassy mentions her and she  was  asked  if
    she has ever considered writing a letter to support her brother to help
    him obtain Ethiopian nationality.  She said she has not.

17. There was no re-examination.

18. The Presenting Officer made his submissions referring me to the Country
    Guidance case of ST Ethiopia [2011]  UKUT  252.   He  referred  to  the
    findings in this case at paragraphs 128 and 129  submitting  that  they
    mirror the head note of the case.  I was therefore referred to the head
    note under the heading "Law" at (B) and (C).   He  submitted  that  the
    situation in that case is the same as in the appellant's case and  what
    has to be considered is whether the  appellant  has  been  lawfully  or
    unlawfully deprived of the nationality of a particular state,  in  this
    case Ethiopia, and that this has to be  decided  when  the  appellant's
    entitlement to international protection is dealt with.

19. I was then referred to that case under the heading "Country  Guidance",
    in particular sections (4) and (5).  At section (4) it is stated  "Each
    claimant must demonstrate that he has done all that could be reasonably
    expected  to  facilitate  return  as  a  national  of  Ethiopia".   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant has not  complied  with
    this.

20. With regard to section (50, this states  "Judicial  fact  finders  will
    expect  a  person  asserting   arbitrary   deprivation   of   Ethiopian
    nationality to approach the Embassy in London  with  all  documentation
    emanating  from  Ethiopia  that  the  person  may  have,  relevant   to
    establishing nationality, including ID card, address, place  of  birth,
    identity and place of birth of parents, identity and whereabouts of any
    relatives  in  Ethiopia  and  details  of  the  person's  schooling  in
    Ethiopia.  Failing production of Ethiopian documentation in respect  of
    such matters the person should put in writing all relevant  details  to
    be handed to the Embassy".  The Presenting Officer submitted that  when
    that is considered the appellant has not complied with its terms in the
    form and the letter presented to the Ethiopian Embassy.   He  submitted
    that there is not sufficient detail in the appellant's form and letter.
     His father was a colonel in the Army in the war and he submitted  that
    this could help clear up the  appellant's  nationality.   None  of  the
    addresses were put into the form and he submitted  that  there  was  no
    reason for this, in particular the address in the Ledeta area which  is
    actually in his SEF in full.  There is no additional information  given
    about the appellant's sister who lives with him in the  United  Kingdom
    and he submitted that she has given no visible support to the appellant
    which  might  help  him  to  clarify  his  Ethiopian  nationality.   He
    submitted that she is clearly not afraid to do this as she went to  the
    Ethiopian Embassy with him on both occasions.

21. The Presenting Officer submitted that this appellant had  no  intention
    of getting Ethiopian nationality.  He has filled in the minimum in  the
    boxes on the form.  The Presenting Officer submitted that  he  has  not
    done all he could reasonably be expected  to  do  in  submitting  these
    documents.  Not only did he not put addresses onto the  form,  he  only
    gave first names for himself, his father and his grandfather.

22. The appellant has said that he gave information  orally  and  that  his
    sister saw him complete the form, but there is  no  suggestion  in  his
    statement or anywhere on file that he asked any questions  or  received
    any advice from the Embassy official.  He submitted that  his  evidence
    about what the Embassy  official  said  to  him  when  he  asked  about
    inserting addresses is not credible.  He submitted  that  there  is  no
    demonstrable evidence that the  appellant  had  gone  through  all  the
    reasonable steps required to establish his Ethiopian  nationality.   He
    submitted that if indeed the appellant did  ask  the  Embassy  official
    questions and the official gave him answers, this would have  been  put
    into his statement.  He submitted that although  the  appellant  states
    that his sister was with him when he completed  the  form,  his  sister
    states that she was asked to wait outside.

23. The Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant is now stating that
    he is Eritrean.  In the letter presented to the Embassy  the  appellant
    has not claimed to be Ethiopian.  He submitted that the  form  and  the
    letter do not stand up to anxious  scrutiny.   He  submitted  that  the
    letter pays lip service to the requirements in the case of ST and based
    on what is before me  the  appellant  cannot  show  that  he  has  been
    deprived of his Ethiopian nationality.

24. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no documentary  evidence
    to show that the appellant is Ethiopian but that is different from  him
    being deprived of his nationality.  He submitted that  the  application
    is an empty application and I was asked to dismiss the appeal.

25. The Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant  has  discretionary
    leave until October 2016 so there are no human rights  issues  in  this
    case.

26. The appellant's representative made  his  submissions  relying  on  the
    skeleton argument which is on file.  The representative submitted  that
    the appellant has provided information in every box  on  the  form  and
    that is what is required in terms of the Country Guidance case  of  ST.
    He submitted that he also submitted a letter  which  has  clearly  been
    seen by the Ethiopian Embassy official and I was asked to find that  he
    asked questions about how to complete the boxes on  the  form  and  was
    told that  much  of  the  information  he  could  have  given  was  not
    necessary.

27. I was referred to the head  note  of  ST  under  the  heading  "Country
    Guidance"  number  (5)  and  the  representative  submitted  that   the
    appellant has complied with  the  requirements.   He  has  given  three
    addresses and stated that Ledeta is near the hospital.   He  has  given
    his place of birth as Addis Ababa.  He has given both his parents names
    and where they were born and when they died.  He has  no  relatives  in
    Ethiopia and he has given his sister's and  brothers'  names.   He  has
    told the Embassy what his  jobs  were  in  the  Red  Cross  shelter  in
    Ethiopia and has told the Embassy that his father was in the  Army.   I
    was asked to find that the appellant was told that he did  not  require
    to put his father's rank in to the form and the appellant's evidence is
    that he asked this and that was the answer he was given.

28. The representative submitted that when the appellant's father fought in
    the Ethiopian Army it was under the communist regime which has now been
    overthrown.  He submitted that there is a new government, the  Tigrayan
    Liberation Front, and he submitted that the appellant's  father's  rank
    in the Army is not relevant as this relates to his position  under  the
    previous regime.

29. The representative referred to the appellant's  sister  being  born  in
    Ethiopia but only being three years old when she left to go to  Eritrea
    and she has not been back since.  He submitted that his sister went  to
    Sudan with the appellant and her mother and became separated  from  her
    brothers when they went back to  Ethiopia.   He  submitted  that  there
    would be no reason for her to contact the Ethiopian Embassy.  She is  a
    refugee in the United Kingdom and was found to be Eritrean.

30. The representative submitted that the appellant has  supplied  all  the
    required details and the Embassy has stamped both the  letter  and  the
    form.  On the letter, the Head  of  the  Consulate  refers  to  further
    questions asked to the applicant in relation to his family  background,
    which makes it clear that the appellant has been telling the truth when
    he referred to the questions he asked and the answers he received.   He
    submitted that the appellant has been refused Ethiopian nationality  on
    two occasions and that is a deprivation of his nationality.

31. I was referred to the 2004 determination  and  it  was  submitted  that
    everything said by the appellant was accepted by  the  Tribunal  except
    his nationality.  He submitted that the  situation  in  2004  was  very
    different to what it is now and the appellant  has  complied  with  the
    requirements of the Country Guidance case law of ST.  He submitted that
    the appellant has explained why he first stated he  was  Ethiopian  but
    now states that he is Eritrean.

32. I was referred to the appellant's SEF  in  which  he  states  that  his
    father was Ethiopian and his mother Eritrean, but it was submitted that
    when they were born it was all one  country  called  Ethiopia.   I  was
    asked to find the appellant's evidence to be consistent.

33. The representative referred me to paragraphs 42 and 43 in the  case  of
    ST.  These refer to people being forced to leave  Ethiopia  because  of
    persecution and he submitted that this was the  appellant's  situation.
    He submitted that because of the lack of evidence  of  the  appellant's
    nationality he  is  suffering  ongoing  deprivation  of  his  Ethiopian
    nationality.  He originally thought he was  Ethiopian,  was  sent  away
    from Ethiopia, and has again been rebuffed by  the  Ethiopian  Embassy.
    He submitted that there is ongoing persecution in this case because  of
    the deprivation of his nationality.  I was referred to paragraph 80  of
    the case of ST which states "The person who is found to  have  suffered
    arbitrary deprivation of citizenship may find  it  relatively  easy  to
    show that present bureaucratic  problems  are  in  reality  part  of  a
    continuing pattern of  hostility  towards  that  person  and  that  the
    deprivation of nationality for Convention  reasons  is  thus  ongoing."
    The representative submitted that that is the case here.  The appellant
    was persecuted because of  his  race  and  is  still  being  persecuted
    because of his race.  The appellant therefore  has  no  choice  but  to
    claim his nationality as Eritrean.

34. I was again referred to the letter which was handed  to  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy.  The representative submitted that this is  an  appellant  who
    cannot return to Eritrea as he will be persecuted there as he  will  be
    seen as being Ethiopian because his father  fought  for  the  Ethiopian
    Army.  I was asked to note that his language is  Amharic  which  is  an
    Ethiopian language, and I was asked to consider the background evidence
    on Eritrea and the risk he will be at if he goes back there.

35. I was asked to allow the appeal.

Determination and Reasons

36. The burden of proof is on the appellant.  The  appeal  is  taken  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act  2002.   The
    available grounds are specified in Section 84(1).

37.  The  Refugee  or  Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 apply.  A refugee means a  person  who
    falls within Article 1A of the Geneva Convention.

38. The appellant has to show under the Geneva Convention a  real  risk  on
    return  of  persecution  because  of   race,   religion,   nationality,
    membership of a particular social group or political opinion.

39. If the appellant does not qualify as a refugee it has to be  considered
    whether he is eligible for humanitarian protection as  defined  in  the
    Immigration Rules at paragraph 339C.  The same low  standard  of  proof
    applies.  The appellant has to show substantial grounds  for  believing
    that if returned he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm.

40. Apart from refugee or humanitarian  protection  status  it  has  to  be
    considered whether the appellant is otherwise  protected  from  removal
    under the European Convention on Human Rights.  Article 3  is  subsumed
    into the humanitarian protection issue.   Reliance  on  other  Articles
    demands presentation of a very strong case.   Article  8  protects  the
    right to private and family life but is subject  to  the  proportionate
    requirements of immigration control.  An Article  8  case  can  succeed
    only if the facts are  such  that  the  imperative  of  proportionality
    demands such an outcome notwithstanding that the case could not succeed
    under the Immigration Rules.

41. This appellant's asylum claim failed in 2004 and again  in  2014.   For
    the appeal to succeed I have to find that the appellant can demonstrate
    that he has been deprived of Ethiopian nationality.  If  he  cannot  do
    this, he has to show a prospective risk.   I  find  that  he  has  been
    unable to do that.

42. If I find the appellant to  be  Eritrean,  he  cannot  be  returned  to
    Eritrea as this would potentially expose him to a significant  risk  of
    ill treatment.  That has been  accepted  by  the  respondent.   It  was
    accepted by the adjudicator in 2004 that he was expelled  from  Eritrea
    because the Eritrean  authorities  thought  him  to  be  Ethiopian.   I
    therefore have to decide whether he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Ethiopia and whether he has been  deprived  of  Ethiopian  nationality.
    The 2004 determination is my starting point.

43. Since that determination I  have  now  to  consider  the  said  Country
    Guidance case of ST.  Based on the evidence before  me  this  appellant
    was not arbitrarily expelled to Eritrea.  I find therefore that he  was
    not subject to the process of deprivation of citizenship at that point.

44. The Ethiopian authorities will not allow him to return as  a  foreigner
    and so the appellant approached the Ethiopian Embassy  in  London  with
    his documentation, asking for Ethiopian nationality.  The Secretary  of
    State finds that he has not given all the evidence he could have to the
    Ethiopian Embassy and that is why it has rejected his application.

45. I have noted the form which he handed to the Embassy and I  have  noted
    the letter from his solicitor, Duncan Lewis, dated 21  May  2014  which
    was attached to that form, both of  which  have  been  stamped  by  the
    Embassy.

46. The head note under "Country Guidance" at  number  (4)  of  ST,  (which
    quotes the findings at paragraphs 128 and 129 of that case) states that
    an appellant must demonstrate that  he  has  done  all  that  could  be
    reasonably expected to facilitate return as a national of Ethiopia.  At
    number (5) under the same heading it is stated that  if  the  appellant
    cannot produce  documentation  establishing  his  nationality  and  his
    identity, he has to put in writing all the relevant  details  and  hand
    this to the Embassy.  I have noted the letter sent by his solicitor  to
    the Embassy.  Although this letter mentions his father serving  in  the
    Ethiopian Army, the letter  does  not  state  that  his  father  was  a
    colonel.  The appellant said that he asked the Embassy official if  his
    father's rank had to be put on to the form and he was told that was not
    necessary.  The letter had already been prepared by his  solicitor  and
    his father's rank was not mentioned therein.  I find that  there  is  a
    lack of credibility in the appellant's oral evidence about  asking  the
    Embassy official for advice and being told that much of the information
    he could have entered on the form  was  not  required.   The  appellant
    states his sister saw him filling in the form  but she denies this  and
    states that she was in a different room.  He has given his father's and
    grandfather's name and his own name as  Abraham.   No  full  names  are
    entered on this form.  He has left blanks  for  their  addresses.   The
    reasons given by the appellant for not entering these addresses are not
    credible.  Additional pieces of information could have  been  given  to
    the Embassy eg where he stayed, in particular  the  address  in  Ledeta
    which is actually on his SEF.  On the form the Embassy has  stated  the
    appellant has not attached supportive documents  with  his  application
    for an Ethiopian passport, therefore there is no valid reason  for  the
    Embassy to issue him with an Ethiopian passport.  Although he has given
    his father's and mother's names and his sister's name in the letter, no
    addresses have been given for them.  For the appellant's representative
    to state that because his father fought for a different regime  in  the
    Ethiopian Army, he did not need to mention his  father's  rank  is  not
    credible.  I find that he should have completed the form  to  show  his
    addresses in Ethiopia, in particular the one in Ledeta and the  address
    of the Army camp even if it no longer exists as this could  be  checked
    by the Ethiopian authorities.  He omitted his,  his  father's  and  his
    grandfather's addresses,  and  their  full  names,  in  particular  his
    grandfather's  address  which  was  where  he  was  living   when   the
    deportations took place, and where he remained  to  nurse  his  mother.
    This is a significant omission.

47. The appellant's sister said she went to the Embassy with the  appellant
    in 2012 and 2014.  He appears to have  seen  two  different  people  at
    these meetings.  If he asked  questions  on  the  first  occasion,  the
    second official would not have known this and so he would have  had  to
    ask the same questions to him.  I do not find it credible that he asked
    questions about important information and was told it was not required.
     I find that he has deliberately left out key pieces of information  in
    the letter and on the form.  Based on what he has given the  Embassy  I
    am not surprised that he was not granted Ethiopian nationality.

48. The burden of proof of establishing that the appellant was deprived  of
    Ethiopian citizenship rests on the appellant.  He  has  not  discharged
    that burden to the appropriate standard.  He has  failed  to  cooperate
    with the Ethiopian authorities in the documentation process.  He should
    have made a genuine effort to substantiate his asylum claim.

49. Because of this I find that the appellant cannot  demonstrate  that  he
    has been deprived  of  Ethiopian  nationality.   He  was  found  to  be
    Ethiopian in the appeal in 2004.

50.  The  appellant's  representative  has  referred  to  past  persecution
    resulting in future persecution but this  appellant  has  not  shown  a
    prospective risk on return.  The appellant's representative has  stated
    that the appellant is suffering ongoing  persecution  as  he  has  been
    refused Ethiopian nationality over a number of years but I find that if
    he had cooperated with the Ethiopian Embassy as required by the Country
    Guidance case, the  Ethiopian  Embassy  might  well  have  granted  him
    nationality.

51. There is nothing to suggest that this appellant would  be  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection if he is returned to Ethiopia.

52. Articles 2 and 3 of ECHR stand or fall with the asylum claim.

53. This appellant has discretionary leave  in  the  United  Kingdom  until
    October 2016.  I am therefore not considering Article 8 of ECHR.

54. I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

55. I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

56. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Judge Murray
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

