
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02010/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 25 November 2015                 |On: 3 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                               Ashkan Chegeni
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appeal brought in a determination promulgated on
    29  June  2015.  Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   was
    subsequently granted.

 2. By way of letters dated 16 November and 24 November 2015  respectively,
    the Secretary of  State  indicated  that  she  intended  to  grant  the
    appellant Refugee Status and  the  appellant  indicated  that  in  such
    circumstances  he  wishes  to  withdraw  his  appeal  before  he  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a  whole,
    I give such consent to the appellant to withdraw his case.

 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal  are  at  an
    end.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

Date: 25 November 2015
