
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02980/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |     Determination Promulgated|
|On 4th January 2016                          |     On 4th February 2016     |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     rP
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tom Gaisford, Counsel, instructed by Sriharans
Sols
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 6  February  2015  refusing  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain and to remove him to India.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1962. He claims that he was
    arrested in November 2011 in India, accused of killing  another  person
    and potentially faced a murder  charge.  He  was  taken  to  Thiruvonam
    police station where he was beaten and tortured but managed  to  escape
    after two days. He was falsely accused  of  murder  because  he  was  a
    member of the DMK party which was out of favour with the  ruling  party
    in Tamil Nadu. He was innocent but is wanted for murder.  He  travelled
    by lorry to Chennai where he stayed  at  a  friend's  house  for  three
    months before leaving India with the assistance of an agent.

 4. The appellant entered the  UK  illegally  on  11  March  2012  and  was
    arrested on 14 March 2012. He made his asylum claim on  14  June  2012.
    The respondent rejected the appellant's claim  that  the  ADIAMK  party
    tried to implicate him in the murder or that the police were  going  to
    frame him and arrest him. The account of  arrest  and  escape  was  not
    accepted. A criminal conviction was not a bar to a political career  in
    India.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 19 August 2015. He  was  represented  by  Mr
    Gaisford. The appellant attended the hearing complaining  of  shortness
    of breath, dizziness and  lack  of  sleep.  He  had  recently  attended
    hospital with atrial fibrillation and  had  an  outpatient  appointment
    booked for 25 August 2015. Mr Gaisford sought an adjournment which  was
    refused. The appellant adopted his witness statement but  continued  to
    complain of breathlessness and chest problems. The judge rose to  allow
    the appellant to  see  a  first-aider  who  called  an  ambulance.  The
    paramedics confirmed that the appellant's heartbeat was  irregular  and
    took him to hospital. The hearing then continued on the basis  of  oral
    submissions.

 6. The judge found that the appellant chose to give no particulars of  the
    alleged torture either in written  evidence  or  interview.  The  judge
    would have expected a reasonably  detailed  account  and  rejected  the
    torture claim. The  judge  rejected  the  appellant's  explanation  for
    delaying his asylum claim i.e. that he was told to wait until the agent
    advised him to make an asylum claim. The judge was prepared to  proceed
    on the basis that  the  Indian  authorities  had  an  interest  in  the
    appellant in relation to an allegation of murder.  The  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant would not have a fair  trial;  the  appellant
    would have a public trial and would be entitled to a reasoned  verdict.
    The appellant claimed that he  was  miles  away  when  the  murder  was
    committed and therefore would have  an  obvious  alibi  defence.  As  a
    political figure of some importance it was even less likely that  other
    would seek to suborn the judicial process and  the  appellant  had  not
    suggested that he could not procure the services of competent lawyers.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 13 September 2015  on  the
    grounds that the  judge  erred  in  law  by  refusing  the  adjournment
    request, wrongly criticised counsel for failing to  elicit  details  of
    the ill-treatment suffered in custody, failed to consider the fact that
    the appellant had provided a specific description of abuse  during  his
    asylum interview, wrongly suggested that because the  appellant  was  a
    political figure it was less likely that others would  seek  to  suborn
    the judicial  process  and  made  a  further  misdirection  of  law  at
    paragraphs 30-33 of the  decision  because  the  respondent  had  never
    raised exclusion under the  Refugee  Convention  and  no  evidence  was
    advanced in support of the judge's hypothesis that the appellant  could
    be wanted by police in relation to a genuine murder charge.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    30 September 2015 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    erred by finding that the appellant had failed to prove torture because
    he had not given a detailed account. The other grounds were not  highly
    regarded in the grant of permission but all grounds were arguable.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 9 October 2015, the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the  adjournment  request
    was fully and properly considered and counsel chose to proceed  by  way
    of oral submissions. The judge fully considered the  claim  as  to  the
    false allegation but found that the appellant would have a  fair  trial
    in India. That finding was open to the Tribunal.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

11. Mr Gaisford submitted that there is an error of fact in paragraph 28 of
    the decision. The appellant was in no condition to  give  evidence  and
    was not cross examined. It  is  clear  that  the  judge  had  not  read
    everything because of his  comments  on  the  torture  issues.  If  the
    appellant is believed then he has a case that he  would  be  persecuted
    rather than prosecute. A part heard hearing would not have been a  fair
    hearing. Judicial corruption is widespread in India.

12. Mr Staunton conceded that he struggled to take the rule 24 response any
    further. That was particularly in relation to  the  way  in  which  the
    adjournment request was handled. The appeal should be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal if I found a material error of law.

13. I find that there was a material  error  of  law  in  relation  to  the
    adjournment application.  The  appellant  was  clearly  unfit  to  give
    evidence and Mr Gaisford was not in a position to ask any supplementary
    questions. The appellant was denied  any  opportunity  to  meaningfully
    participate in the proceedings. That was particularly significant given
    the judge's concerns regarding the lack of detail in  relation  to  the
    allegation of torture whilst in police custody in India.

14. I have not found it necessary to make findings in relation to the other
    grounds  of  appeal.  The  issues  raised  will  be  addressed  at  the
    rehearing. There are a number  of  significant  factual  issues  to  be
    resolved including whether the appellant was detained  and  escaped  as
    claimed, whether he is wanted for murder as  claimed  and  whether  the
    criminal process in India would amount to prosecution or persecution.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

16. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the error of law infects  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.






Signed   [pic]                      Date 31 January 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


