

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA025352015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2016                           |On 25 May 2016                |
|and 5 May 2016                               |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                                    J R H
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra (counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
(January
      hearing)
      Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer) (May
      hearing)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of JFH, a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  [  ]  1984,
       against the decision of the Secretary of State of 30 January 2015  to
       refuse his asylum claim; the appeal  having  been  dismissed  by  the
       First-tier tribunal, he  now  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
       permission.


    2. His claim can be summarised as follows. He grew up in a village in  a
       Tamil part of the country and after finishing school  worked  for  an
       NGO relieving the hardship caused by the  tsunami  of  2004.  He  was
       kidnapped by the  LTTE  and  forcibly  recruited  into  their  ranks,
       receiving weapons training and a LTTE name and number. He trained and
       served alongside one Mr T, from Killinochchi, who knew the nature  of
       the work that he did with the LTTE.


    3. He took the first safe opportunity that arose to escape from the LTTE
       on 25 December 2008, when he was assigned to the Salai Centre  Point,
       and travelled through the jungle before swimming for some  two  hours
       to reach his cousin's home in [M]; he  was  then  reunited  with  his
       mother and spent some months in [P], over the period in which the Sri
       Lankan army were rounding up the civilian population and ordering all
       LTTE cadres to surrender and register with the authorities.


    4. Fearful of being informed on if he did not answer this order, he  too
       surrendered on 20  April  2009.  He  was  taken  to  Omanthai  police
       station, finger  printed  and  interrogated,  tied  to  a  table  and
       tortured, receiving injuries. He told the  authorities  that  he  had
       been forcibly recruited but that he had never seen active service. He
       was taken to a court in Vavuniya on 29 April 2009 and told  he  would
       be released after a year of rehabilitation; he duly  went  through  a
       year of forced labour for the army, though at the end of that period,
       rather than be released, he was taken to a number  of  rehabilitation
       centres, repeatedly interrogated about his activities for  the  LTTE,
       and ill treated. He was taken to Boossa  Detention  Centre,  spending
       his time in an  overcrowded  cell  with  no  toilet  facilities,  and
       repeatedly beaten. After about nine months there he was  moved  to  a
       further place  of  rehabilitation,  Maruthamadu,  though  again  this
       comprised forced labour. He spent some four years in total imprisoned
       or conducting forced labour, before being released  with  around  130
       other detainees on 14 January 2014.


    5. He went to live with his mother in [V], returning to his studies and
       starting an accountancy course; he  was  regularly  visited  by  the
       police and the Criminal Investigation Department over  this  period:
       they questioned both him and his neighbours. His mother and  brother
       remain in Sri Lanka: the family received occasional visits from  the
       security forces after he had left the country.


    6. Mr T had never revealed his own LTTE activities to  the  authorities,
       having failed to surrender at the end of the war. He was concerned by
       news from Mr T's mother that her son had been recently arrested: Mr T
       knew of the Appellant's LTTE training and that he had  compiled  maps
       and plans for the group using advanced information  technology,  this
       being a matter that the Appellant had not revealed to them during his
       past interrogations.


    7. His case was supported by his GP, Dr Kugapala, who had  referred  him
       for mental health assessment believing him to be suffering from PTSD:
       she stated that deportation to Sri Lanka might lead to his death.


    8. The First-tier Tribunal accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  past
       events (as had the Home Office) as true  given  its  consistency  and
       detail, and plausible when read with the  country  evidence  and  the
       ample supporting documents.


    9. The First-tier tribunal set out numerous extracts  from  the  Country
       Guidelines GJ and others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
       [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC), of which the most relevant given the ambit  of
       the appeal are these. From the headnote:



           "(4)  If a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
           services there remains a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm
           requiring international protection.

           (5)   Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka  for
           a person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
           government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka  and  Tamils  are
           required to return to a named address after passing through  the
           airport.

           (7)    The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
           persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in
           detention or otherwise, are:

                (a)    Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they
                are, or are perceived to have a significant role in relation
                to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or
                a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

                (b)    Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                human rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised
                the Sri Lankan government, in particular  its  human  rights
                record, or who are associated with publications critical  of
                the Sri Lankan government.

                (c)    Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                Learned and Reconciliation Commission  implicating  the  Sri
                Lankan security forces,  armed  forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                authorities in alleged war crimes. Among those who may  have
                witnessed war crimes during the  conflict,  particularly  in
                the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those who  have  already
                identified themselves by giving such evidence would be known
                to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at
                real risk of adverse attention or persecution on  return  as
                potential or actual war crimes witnesses.

                (d)    A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"
                list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of  those
                against whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                warrant. Individuals whose name appears  on  a  "stop"  list
                will be stopped at  the  airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                appropriate Sri Lankan authorities,  in  pursuance  of  such
                order or warrant."


   10. And from the text of GJ:



           "306. The evidence before us indicates that any Tamil who  seeks
           a travel document from the SLHC in London  or  another  diaspora
           hotspot will  have  a  file  created  in  Colombo  and  will  be
           interviewed in London before a decision is made to issue a  TTD.
           By the time the DIE in Colombo emails a  TTD  to  London  to  be
           issued to such an individual, the Sri  Lankan  authorities  will
           know all they need to know about what activities  an  individual
           has undertaken outside Sri Lanka and, in particular, whether the
           returnee poses a real risk to the unitary Sri  Lankan  state  or
           the GOSL on return.

           307.  Sri Lankans returning without a Sri Lankan  passport  will
           require an Emergency Travel Document  for  which  they  need  to
           apply at the SLHC in London. Full  disclosure  of  all  relevant
           identity information is given in the process of obtaining a TTD.
           An applicant completes a lengthy disclosure  form  and  is  then
           interviewed at the Sri Lankan High  Commission  in  London;  the
           information received is sent to the Ministry of External Affairs
           and the Department of Immigration  and  Emigration  in  Colombo.
           Files are created and records verified; if the authorities agree
           to issue a TTD, the MEA in Colombo emails the  document  to  the
           Sri Lankan High Commission in London where the TTD is stamped, a
           photograph added, and issued to the applicant.

           308.  During the re-documentation process in the United Kingdom,
           or at the airport on return, a forced returnee can expect to  be
           asked about his  own  and  his  family's  LTTE  connections  and
           sympathies.

           309.  Those with Sri Lankan  passports  returning  on  scheduled
           flights will be able to walk  through  Colombo  airport  without
           difficulty, unless their names are on a "stop" list,  by  reason
           of an outstanding Court order or  arrest  warrant.  Those  on  a
           "watch" list  are  not  stopped  at  the  airport  but  will  be
           monitored and if considered to be a destabilisation risk, may be
           picked up from their home area.

           310.  There are no detention facilities at the airport. Although
           individuals may be interviewed at the airport  by  the  security
           forces, the Sri Lankan authorities now  aim  to  move  returnees
           relatively quickly out of the airport and on their way to  their
           home areas and to verify whether they have  arrived  there  soon
           afterward. If the authorities have an  adverse  interest  in  an
           individual, he will be picked up at home, not  at  the  airport,
           unless there is a "stop" notice on the airport computer  system.
           There is no evidence that strip searches occur at  the  airport;
           the GOSL's approach is intelligence-led rather than being driven
           by roundups and checkpoints as it was during the civil war. ..."


   11. It also set out extracts from GJ directly addressing the question  of
       rehabilitation, finding that there was limited information  available
       about the programme's operation, although detention of typically  two
       years was common without judicial oversight; the  nuisance  value  of
       post-rehabilitation monitoring varied with the attitude of the  local
       commander, and it did not amount to persecution, and at the  time  of
       that decision it appeared that  the  ongoing  programme  focussed  on
       those seeking to establish contact with the leaders or  activists  in
       diaspora hotspots ([316]-[318]).


   12. Evaluating the Appellant's claim in the light of those extracts,  the
       First-tier tribunal found that the arrest of Mr T  should  not  cause
       any significant difficulties for  him  on  a  return.  There  was  no
       information available as to whether or not Mr T had in fact  revealed
       his true  activities  to  the  authorities,  and  in  any  event  the
       Appellant had been forced to  admit  (falsely)  to  being  an  active
       fighter during his interrogations, and had nevertheless been released
       from detention, the receipt of new information as to his  involvement
       in map compilation using GPS was  unlikely  to  lead  to  his  future
       detention. The double contingency, of a relevant revelation by  Mr  T
       and of its leading to detention, was thought to be too remote a  risk
       to reach the real risk standard: any dangers  to  him  were  "a  very
       remote  possibility",  particularly  given  his  lack  of   political
       activities in the diaspora.


   13. The Tribunal nevertheless expressed its concern at the ongoing  close
       monitoring of the Appellant, but considered itself bound by  GJ  that
       post-arrest monitoring would not in itself amount to persecution.  It
       observed that he had been subjected to longer detention than the norm
       (GJ having styled two year spells as not unusual) but  noted  he  was
       released together with a large batch of other detainees.


   14. The Appellant's mental health problems would not themselves mean that
       the monitoring to which he would continue to be subject  amounted  to
       persecution:  the  GP's  letter  contained  neither   diagnosis   nor
       prognosis, and the evidence did not suggest any real risk of  suicide
       on removal or arrival.


   15.  Grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision  argued  that  material
       considerations had been overlooked by  the  First-tier  Tribunal:  in
       particular that  his  vulnerable  mental  state  might  threaten  his
       ability to withstand questioning  and  impact  on  how  he  presented
       himself to the authorities, that diaspora activity was not  the  sole
       matter that concerned the Sri Lankan authorities (as recognised in MP
       [2014] EWCA Civ 829 at [43], [50]) and that  the  likelihood  of  the
       Appellant's  circumstances  coming  to   light   following   Mr   T's
       interrogation  was  significant   given  the  known  methods  of  the
       security  forces  and  the  fact  that  information  from  him  would
       potentially demonstrate that the Appellant had not revealed the  full
       scope of his own activities.


   16. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  5
       November 2015 because it  was  considered  arguable  that  inadequate
       reasons had been given for the  conclusion  that  there  was  only  a
       remote possibility that Mr T's arrest would lead to  the  Appellant's
       re-detention.


Findings and reasons - Error of law hearing

   17. The First-tier Tribunal made a fully reasoned decision with which  it
       plainly took care. Nevertheless  even  a  thorough  decision  is  not
       necessarily  immune  from  legal  error:  asylum  appeals   must   be
       approached applying the appropriate anxious scrutiny, and as Carnwath
       LJ explained in YH  [2010] EWCA Civ  116  that  term  "has  by  usage
       acquired special significance as underlining the very  special  human
       context in which such cases are brought, and the need  for  decisions
       to show by their reasoning that every  factor  which  might  tell  in
       favour of an applicant has been properly taken into account."


   18. I ruled that there were in fact material errors of  law,  essentially
       because  there  were  factors  present  that   necessitated   express
       treatment before the claim could safely be discounted, but which  did
       not receive the necessary consideration. In particular the First-tier
       Tribunal had failed to adequately consider the possibility  that  the
       Appellant had been mistreated in detention after the authorities  had
       received information leading them to believe him  to  be  a  fighter,
       which  would  accordingly  indicate  that  the  receipt  of   further
       information showing his  involvement  with  the  LTTE  to  have  been
       greater than that previously appreciated might very well  lead  to  a
       repeated risk of serious harm. Furthermore there was no consideration
       of the likelihood that Mr T would be  ill-treated  in  detention  and
       that in consequence would give the authorities information  regarding
       the Appellant's true activities. Given these considerations, I  found
       that the decision was flawed by material errors of  law,  because  of
       the failure to take account of the material considerations identified
       by the Country Guidelines decision as set out above.


Findings and reasons - Continuation hearing


   19. The proceedings before me were conducted with the greatest efficiency
       for which I am grateful to both Ms Seehra and Mr Wilding, the  latter
       agreeing that the Secretary of State could not seriously  resist  the
       inference that, given the findings of primary fact made by the First-
       tier Tribunal, the Appellant was in truth at real risk of persecution
       for reasons of attributed political opinion. In those circumstances I
       shall express my  reasons  for  considering  that  concession  to  be
       properly made relatively concisely.


   20. Firstly, given the acceptance  below  that  the  Appellant  had  been
       seriously mistreated in detention over an extended period, there must
       be a real risk that at least some of  that  mistreatment  took  place
       after the authorities began to believe him to have  played  down  his
       true involvement with the LTTE. Given that possibility, there must be
       a real risk that the  receipt  of  further  intelligence  to  similar
       effect would put him  in  danger  again.  That  of  course  seriously
       undermines the First-tier Tribunal's central thesis, which was  that,
       had he been thought to have had a greater role than he had  admitted,
       he  would  have  suffered  ongoing  mistreatment  rather  than  being
       released. On the contrary, there is a  real  risk  that  he  suffered
       serious harm after having revealed information that gave him more  of
       a profile than he had originally admitted, precisely the  possibility
       that he now faces again.


   21. Secondly, given the country evidence and Country Guidelines, there is
       a likelihood that Mr T would be ill-treated in detention once in  the
       hands of the security forces: that, after all, is the starting  point
       of risk assessment in GJ. It is very difficult to conclude that there
       is no real chance of him revealing the names of close colleagues such
       as the Appellant in  those  circumstances.  GJ  expressly  notes  the
       existence of "watch lists", beyond  the  "stop  lists"  held  at  the
       airport for those already subject to outstanding arrest warrants. The
       continued  attention  paid  to  the  Appellant's  family  since   his
       departure for this country shows that a watch has been kept on him.


   22. Again, given that intelligence-based investigations  might  link  the
       activities of LTTE operatives known to have served in the same  area,
       it must be recognised that there is a real risk  of  the  Appellant's
       name coming up in the course of Mr T's interrogation. At  that  point
       there must be at least some  possibility  that  his  true  activities
       would come to light and  that  it  would  be  noted  that  they  were
       inconsistent with the information he had proffered to the authorities
       and indeed with the assumption they had  made  as  to  his  being  an
       active fighter: rather his was a role that involved  mapping  skills,
       the very kind of talent that might be of interest to those minded  to
       ensure the LTTE remains a spent force. As  identified  in  the  UNHCR
       Guidelines cited in GJ at [290], factors that might give  rise  to  a
       need for international refugee protection, depending on the specifics
       of the  individual  case,  include  former  LTTE  cadres  "conducting
       functions within the administration, intelligence, "computer  branch"
       or media (newspaper and radio)". The possibility of such  individuals
       being at risk sits squarely alongside the observation of Underhill LJ
       in MP & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
       Civ 829 that on a fair reading of GJ there may "be  other  cases  ...
       where the evidence shows particular grounds for concluding  that  the
       Government might regard the applicant as posing a current  threat  to
       the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state."


   23. Beyond this the Appellant's past experiences must  be  recognised  as
       amounting to an individualised history of persecution, and  paragraph
       339K of the Immigration Rules states that "The fact that a person has
       already been subject to persecution or serious  harm,  or  to  direct
       threats of such persecution or such  harm,  will  be  regarded  as  a
       serious indication of the person's well-founded fear  of  persecution
       or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons
       to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be
       repeated." Given that his abuse occurred after the end of  the  civil
       war, and in the context of a detention  significantly  exceeding  the
       two-year norm noted in GJ for the rehabilitation process, one  cannot
       be confident that his past experiences will not recur.


          Decision:

    The appeal is allowed because the immigration decision was contrary  to
    the obligations of the United Kingdom under the Refugee Convention.

ANONYMITY ORDER

The Appellant has been accepted as a credible witness  of  past  events  and
his claim to be a Convention refugee remains unresolved, and he  has  family
members remaining in Sri  Lanka.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.



Signed:                                            Date: 24 May 2016


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
