
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|9 September 2015                     |11 September 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                             Mr Azardeen Thassen
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a Decision dated 8 July 2015, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Murray
    gave her reasons for setting aside the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V A Osborne which was promulgated on  25  November  2014  with  a
    Direction that the second stage hearing be before her or another  Upper
    Tribunal Judge.

 2. Pursuant to a Transfer Order  dated  18  August  2015  the  appeal  was
    transferred to a differently constituted Tribunal and directions in the
    following terms were sent out to the parties:




                                 DIRECTIONS

          1. In a Decision sent to the parties on 14  August  2015,  Deputy
             Upper Tribunal Judge Murray set aside the decision  of  First-
             tier Tribunal Judge V Osborne and gave her reasons  for  doing
             so.

          2. Pursuant to an Order dated 18 August 2015, the Appeal has been
             transferred to a differently constituted Tribunal.

          3. The Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber
             of the Upper Tribunal provide at paragraph 7  that  the  upper
             Tribunal is likely to proceed to re-make a decision  where  an
             error on a point of law has been found, instead  of  remitting
             the case to the First-tier Tribunal unless the Upper  Tribunal
             is satisfied that:

               a) The effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

               b) The nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
                  necessary in order for the decision in the  appeal  to  be
                  remade is  such  that  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

          4. In my view the extent of judicial fact finding  that  will  be
             necessary makes it appropriate for the case to be remitted  to
             the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly, unless  within  7  days
             from the date of  the  sending  out  of  this  memorandum  and
             Directions by the parties provides reasoned objection to  this
             course, I will remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  and
             allow the appeal in the Upper Tribunal on this basis.

 3. There has been no response to the above Directions which were sent  out
    on 25 August 2015.  Accordingly, I remit the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal's, Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 for its reconsideration.  The member of the First-
    tier Tribunal to hear the case is not to be the same as the  judge  who
    made the Decision that has been set aside.  None of the findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal is preserved.


Signed   Date 9 September 2015

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
