
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02195/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 December 2015                   |On 15 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A K G
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The respondent is a citizen of Libya.  I  have  made  an  anonymity
         order as this decision refers  to  details  concerning  his  asylum
         claim.

      2. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal (FTT)  to  allow  the  respondent's  appeal  on
         humanitarian protection grounds.   Mr  Harrison  clarified  at  the
         hearing that the sole ground of appeal relied upon was the  alleged
         failure on the part of the FTT to provide adequate reasons for  not
         following  the  guidance  in  AT  and  others  (Article  15c:  risk
         categories) CG [2014] UKUT 318 IAC (14 July 2014).  Mr Harrison was
         content to say  no  more  in  support  of  the  appeal  than  this.
         Although  the  respondent  was  present  at  the  hearing,   albeit
         unrepresented, I did not need to hear from him and pronounced  that
         the FTT decision did not contain a material error of law.

      3. In my judgment the FTT has correctly directed itself to the correct
         approach to country guidance at [58] and has decided not to  follow
         AT for reasons that were open to it.   The  FTT  properly  reminded
         itself that great care must be taken before  being  satisfied  that
         significant changes had taken place such as to justify a  departure
         from country guidance.  The FTT correctly noted that the respondent
         came from Derna and there was cogent evidence  that  this  part  of
         Libya  was  now  under  the  control  of  ISIS  [60].    In   those
         circumstances the FTT was entitled to  find  that  there  had  been
         significant changes such that ordinary civilians were now  at  real
         risk of suffering serious harm in Derna.

      4. The FTT properly went on to consider whether the respondent and his
         family (a wife and three young children aged  5  and  under)  could
         reasonably relocate to another part of Libya.  The FTT specifically
         considered the deterioration in the conditions in Tripoli [62], the
         place identified by the SSHD in the reasons for refusal letter,  as
         appropriate for the family to return to and decided that  it  would
         be unduly harsh to expect the family  to  relocate  there.   It  is
         important to note that AT did not address internal  relocation  for
         families  with  young  children.   AT  at  [93-103]  focussed   its
         attention on single males and single females.   In any event  there
         was adequate evidence available to the FTT to support  its  finding
         that it would be unduly harsh to expect a family with  three  young
         children and  no  real  connections  outside  their  home  area  to
         relocate in June 2015 in light of the  deterioration  in  security,
         health  and  education  provision  in  Libya.   AT  considered  the
         position in Libya in November 2013.  As noted by the FTT the SSHD's
         own response to country of information request dated 3 October 2014
         described the "political chaos and unrest in Libya taking a serious
         toll on health services" such that thousands of people  in  Tripoli
         have fled their homes and large hospitals and  health  centres  are
         overwhelmed or inaccessible.

Decision

      5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
4 December 2015
