
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02250/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th September 2016                         |On 14th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                              MR Nay Win Myint
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Johnrose
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 30th September 1989 is a citizen of  Burma.   The
    Appellant had made application for asylum and this was refused  by  the
    Respondent on 25th January  2015.   The  Appellant  had  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Tobin
    sitting at Manchester on 15th October 2015.  The judge had refused  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. Application for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  That application was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Adio on 25th November 2015.   Application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and on 8th December 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Norton-
    Taylor gave permission.  Although it was said that there was some merit
    in all the grounds in particular the judge noted that the Tribunal  may
    have imposed a higher threshold as regards the profile required  to  be
    shown by the Appellant and was justified in the country  guidance  case
    of TS and that a  particular  paragraph  which  had  some  significance
    within the decision was unclear.

 3. Directions were issued for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  firstly  consider
    whether an error of law had been made in this case and the matter comes
    before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Miss Johnrose submitted in terms  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  already
    issued.  She said the judge had erred in isolating events in Burma  and
    not looking at matters in the round when considering  risk  on  return.
    She further submitted and this was central to the submissions that  the
    judge appeared to indicate the Appellant needed to have a high  profile
    to be at risk on return which she  said  was  not  the  position  on  a
    reading of the country guidance case of TS.  In  particular  she  noted
    that the judge may only have looked at headnote 7 of TS and potentially
    ignored other headnotes that may have been of relevance in  this  case.
    She referred to the lack of clarity in paragraph 26 of the decision.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Harrison submitted the importance  of  considering  TS  the  country
    guidance case in terms of the decisions reached by the judge.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. For ease of reference, the Appellant's  activities  broadly  fell  into
    three categories.  Firstly there were the demonstrations the  Appellant
    claimed to have attended whilst living in Burma.  Secondly  there  were
    demonstrations the Appellant claimed to have participated in whilst  in
    the  UK  and  thirdly  there  were  "journalistic"  activities  he  had
    undertaken whilst in the UK.

 8. It was necessary for the judge  to  have  made  findings  on  fact  and
    credibility in respect of those areas of claimed activities and then to
    have applied the totality of the Appellant's credible activities to the
    question of risk on return having regard to the country  guidance  case
    of TS.

 9. The judge had made findings in respect  of  the  Appellant's  political
    activities in Burma principally at paragraphs 23 to 24.  He appeared to
    accept the Appellant's account that he had attended four demonstrations
    in Burma between June 2007 and March 2013.  He did not make any adverse
    findings regarding the Appellant's account of those demonstrations.  By
    reference back to the  judge's  summary  of  the  Appellant's  case  at
    paragraph 5 that indicates the judge accepted:

      a)  The  Appellant  had  been  stopped  by  security  at   the   first
         demonstration in 2006 and his name and ID number taken.

      b) In 2007 he  had  taken  part  in  the  Saffron  demonstration,  was
         arrested and detained for five days.  He signed a form and a  bribe
         was paid for his release.

      c) Although he demonstrated in 2008 and 2013 he did not  come  to  the
         attention of the authorities.

10. The judge had further  noted  at  paragraph  23  that  specifically  in
    respect of demonstrations the Appellant  accepted  that  he  played  no
    formal role in the opposition movement, was not a member of a political
    party and did  not  do  anything  to  organise  or  promote  opposition
    demonstrations.

11. The judge concluded at paragraph 24 that even by  the  Appellant's  own
    account his political engagement against the regime was fairly minimal.
     He had also considered the  Appellant's  evidence  of  his  "blogging"
    whilst in  Burma.   He  concluded  at  paragraph  24  that  those  were
    unsubstantiated assertions, the Appellant had acknowledged that none of
    the blogs were traceable to him and that he  had  been  able  to  leave
    Burma on a passport issued by the Burmese  authorities  in  2012.   The
    judge  had  concluded  therefore  when  looking  at   the   Appellant's
    activities whilst in Burma that "it is just not credible  to  say  that
    the Appellant's political activities in Burma  were  at  such  a  level
    before he left that his return would bring him to the attention of  the
    authorities".  That was a finding based upon the evidence and  findings
    of credibility made and were findings open to the judge.

12. The judge dealt with the Appellant's history of demonstrating whilst in
    the UK briefly at paragraph 25.  He accepted the Appellant's account of
    attendance at those demonstrations and does not seek to  challenge  the
    number of demonstrations attended or circumstances as described by  the
    Appellant.  He concluded at paragraph 25 by finding the Appellant never
    led or organised a demonstration and that mere participation  does  not
    indicate a sufficiently high profile  as  to  be  of  interest  to  the
    Burmese authorities.  That is taken from one of the  headnotes  in  the
    case of TS.

13. Finally in terms of the Appellant's claimed  "journalistic"  activities
    in the UK the judge dealt with that matter at paragraph 26.   On  first
    reading that paragraph is not the clearest of  paragraphs.   However  a
    sensible reading of it makes clear the position adopted by  the  judge.
    He was dealing with the evidence emanating from a  particular  website.
    The Appellant's own evidence regarding this matter is at  paragraph  23
    of the Appellant's witness  statement.   It  is  clear  the  judge  had
    considered the Appellant's evidence when viewed  against  the  website.
    He found that the website was quite prolific, particularly in terms  of
    political cartoons.  He found no evidence the Appellant was a political
    cartoonist.  He found that the Appellant's name was  discernable  on  a
    small number of entries but they appear to be uncharacteristic of other
    entries or the content generally.  The judge appeared to conclude  that
    the curator of the website was more likely to be a leading or prominent
    anti-regime agitator who, by inference, used the  medium  of  political
    cartoons as a central theme.  He found no claim from the Appellant that
    the Appellant worked in that medium  and  also  found  the  Appellant's
    limited  political  activity  and  level   of   involvement   generally
    incompatible with the person one would expect to be the curator of such
    a  site.   For  those  reasons  he  by  clear  inference  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim to be the curator of that site.  In summary  he  made
    an adverse credibility finding in respect of  the  Appellant's  claimed
    journalistic activities as described at paragraph 23 of his own witness
    statement.

14. Finally the judge had also not found credible the  Appellant's  account
    of the authorities making enquiries at his family home (paragraph  27).



15. The judge gave an adequacy of reasons for reaching the findings that he
    did.  In summary the following were found to be the case:

      a) The Appellant had attended four  demonstrations  in  Burma  between
         2007 and 2013 and on one demonstration in 2008 he had been detained
         for five days and then released.

      b) He had attended a number of demonstrations in the  UK  but  neither
         led nor organised any of them.

      c) He had put an occasional entry on a prolific website where his name
         was discernable but the entries  were  not  characteristic  of  the
         mainstream of entries on that website.  It is against that  summary
         of findings the judge needed to consider whether the Appellant fell
         within the categories of risk outlined in TS.

16. TS suggests that any risk of detention brings with it a  real  risk  of
    serious ill-treatment.  Risk of detention exists where the  authorities
    regard the individual to be a threat to the stability of the regime  or
    Burmese Union.  It depends upon a person's past  and  future  political
    behaviour.   TS  suggests  that  a  profile  gained  through  being  at
    demonstrations or political meetings will not for that reason alone  be
    of sufficient concern to warrant detention, however a person who has  a
    profile of voicing opposition can expect to be monitored.

17. The crucial part of TS in terms of the headlines  in  respect  of  this
    case is headnote 7 because that assesses whether monitoring would  lead
    to detention and looks at the factors that  could  lead  to  that  step
    being taken.  The judge had specifically quoted from this aspect of TS.



18. Criticism was made of the judge's reference to  profile  and  seemingly
    his belief that a high profile  was  needed.   However  TS  clearly  is
    referring to the level of profile of  an  individual  when  looking  at
    risk.  Ironically  as  TS  notes  at  headnote  9  a  highly  prominent
    international profile reduces the risk  of  persecution  significantly.
    Other headnotes in TS suggest the need  to  firstly  distinguish  if  a
    person is of sufficient interest to warrant  monitoring  and  then  are
    they at risk of detention.  The answer to those questions  is  case  or
    fact sensitive and does require an assessment of what an individual has
    done and what of that is known to the  authorities  i.e.  what  profile
    does an individual have.

19. The judge at paragraph 28 made an assessment that the Appellant was not
    at particular  risk  of  post-return  monitoring.   In  terms,  and  by
    inference he rejects the notion the Appellant is at risk of  detention.
    He does acknowledge at paragraph 30 that any detention can  lead  to  a
    breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

20. In conclusion the judge had adequately considered each  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's case and made findings on fact  and  credibility.   He  had
    looked at matters in the round and he was clearly aware of the  country
    guidance case of TS.  He had specifically referenced the  key  headnote
    of TS at headnote 7 that was applicable in this case  and  had  reached
    the conclusion upon risk on return that was open to  him  in  a  manner
    that does not disclose he erred in law.

Notice of Decision

21. There was no material error of law made by the judge and I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

22. Anonymity not retained.


Signed   Date 14th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 14th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

