
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02569/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 October 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|and 13 November 2015                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                     B Y
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou (for Sentinel and Co
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe (Presenting Officer) (error of
law hearing)
      Mr S Kandola (Presenting Officer) (continuation hearing)


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                            ERROR OF LAW HEARING

    1. This is the appeal of BY, a citizen of Turkey  born  8  August  1993,
       against the  immigration  decision  arising  from  the  Secretary  of
       State's refusal of his asylum claim of 6 February 2015.

    2. His claim was based on being a person of  Kurdish  ethnicity  of  the
       Alevi faith, who had worked as a shepherd, and who had been  detained
       on 21 March 2013 by the police following his attendance at  a  Newroz
       celebration in Golbasi: he was held for a day at the Gendarme Station
       and beaten, his family were insulted and he was accused  of  being  a
       terrorist. He was released without charge with  a  warning  that  the
       authorities would keep an eye on him and the threat  that  in  future
       they would do whatever was necessary to serve  their  purposes;  they
       took his fingerprints and forced him to sign a blank page.  On 6 June
       2013 police and gendarmes came to the mountain whilst  he  cared  for
       his livestock, again accused him of being a terrorist, and asked  him
       to reveal the whereabouts of any local  guerrillas:  they  beat  him,
       broke three of his teeth, shot at his feet, and killed  his  dog.  He
       was taken to the Yahdarli Village Gendarme  Station,  held  for  four
       days, where they beat him, insulted him and  issued  him  with  death
       threats. He was released  after  four  days  because  of  a  lack  of
       evidence, in return for undertaking to provide information about  the
       guerrillas to the authorities in future:  he  again  signed  a  blank
       piece of paper. Upon his release he escaped to Gaziantep  and  stayed
       there for three  months  before  leaving  the  country  by  lorry  to
       Bulgaria on 1 September 2013, arriving in the  United  Kingdom  on  6
       September 2013.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal. Whilst he was  accepted
       as being a generally credible witness [38], it  was  noted  that  his
       failure to claim asylum  upon  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
       without  claiming  asylum  in  Bulgaria  had  some  impact   on   his
       credibility. What concerned the  First-tier  Tribunal,  however,  was
       that applying the guidance in IK (Returnees - Records -  IFA)  Turkey
       CG [2004] UKIAT 00312, the Appellant had not established  himself  as
       at risk. The relevant part of the Country Guidelines is as follows:
           "46.  The following are  the  factors  which  inexhaustively  we
           consider to be material in giving rise to potential suspicion in
           the minds of the authorities concerning a particular claimant.
                a)      The  level  if  any  of  the  appellant's  known  or
                suspected  involvement  with  a   separatist   organisation.
                Together with this must be assessed the basis upon which  it
                is contended that the authorities knew of or  might  suspect
                such involvement.
                b)     Whether the  appellant  has  ever  been  arrested  or
                detained and if so in what circumstances. In this context it
                may be relevant  to  note  how  long  ago  such  arrests  or
                detentions took place, if it is the case that there  appears
                to be no causal connection between them and  the  claimant's
                departure from Turkey, but otherwise it may be a  factor  of
                no particular significance.
                c)     Whether the circumstances  of  the  appellant's  past
                arrest(s)  and  detention(s)  (if  any)  indicate  that  the
                authorities did in fact view  him  or  her  as  a  suspected
                separatist.
                d)     Whether  the  appellant  was  charged  or  placed  on
                reporting conditions or now faces charges.
                e)     The degree of ill treatment to  which  the  appellant
                was subjected in the past.
                f)     Whether the appellant has family connections  with  a
                separatist organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.
                g)     How long a period  elapsed  between  the  appellant's
                last arrest and detention and  his  or  her  departure  from
                Turkey. In this regard it  may  of  course  be  relevant  to
                consider the evidence if any concerning what  the  appellant
                was in fact doing between the time of the  last  arrest  and
                detention and departure from Turkey. It is a factor that  is
                only likely to be of any particular relevance if there is  a
                reasonably lengthy period between the two events without any
                ongoing problems  being  experienced  on  the  part  of  the
                appellant from the authorities.
                h)     Whether in the  period  after  the  appellant's  last
                arrest there is any evidence that he or she was  kept  under
                surveillance or monitored by the authorities.
                i)     Kurdish ethnicity.
                j)     Alevi faith.
                k)     Lack of a current up-to-date Turkish passport.
                l)     Whether there is any evidence  that  the  authorities
                have been pursuing or otherwise expressing  an  interest  in
                the appellant since he or she left Turkey.
                m)     Whether the appellant became an informer or was asked
                to become one.
                n)      Actual  perceived  political  activities  abroad  in
                connection with a separatist organisation.
                o)     If the returnee is a military draft evader there will
                be some logical impact on his profile to those assessing him
                on his immediate return.  Following  Sepet  of  course  this
                alone is not a basis for a refugee or human rights claim.
           47.    We  cannot  emphasise  too  strongly  the  importance  of
           avoiding treating these  factors  as  some  kind  of  checklist.
           Assessment of the claim must be in the round bearing in mind the
           matters set out above as a consequence of a careful scrutiny and
           assessment of the evidence. The central issue as always  is  the
           question of the real risk on return of ill  treatment  amounting
           to persecution or breach of a person's  Article  3  rights.  The
           existing political and human rights context overall  is  also  a
           matter of significance as will be seen from  our  assessment  of
           the particular appeals in our determinations of those below. The
           particular circumstances  that  prevail  today  may  not  be  in
           existence in 6 months time for all we know."

    4. Faced with this Guidance, the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
       Appellant was most likely truthful as to the basic facts of  his  two
       detentions, and that he may well have been subject to  ill  treatment
       during  those  detentions;  whilst  not  seeking  to   minimise   the
       discomfort and distress he may have suffered, it was not  "equivalent
       to torture or inhuman treatment." The Appellant had not shown he  was
       viewed by the authorities as a suspected separatist and  he  was  not
       charged following  either  detention.  He  had  not  shown  that  the
       authorities had shown interest in him since he left Turkey,  and  had
       not involved himself in separatist activities  here.  His  faith  and
       ethnicity, whilst accepted, would not themselves cause  him  to  face
       any risk of serious harm.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  Tribunal  had
       unduly relied on relatively old Country Guidelines without regard  to
       up-to-date human rights  reports,  given  the  current  situation  in
       southeast Turkey. There was no restriction on the grounds of  appeal,
       which had  also  challenged  the  approach  to  the  Appellant's  ill
       treatment and the overlooking of his witness statement evidence  that
       the authorities had sought him at his family home since he  left  the
       country, and his evidence that relatives of his had fled the  country
       due to persecution.

    6. At the error of law hearing I found that the decision was  flawed  by
       material errors of law, because
       (a)  The First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself as  to  the  relevant
           legal test for "persecution"  which  is  set  out  in  the  2006
           Protection Regulations, and in any event made  a  decision  that
           was contrary to authority, given that the Appellant's account of
           being shot  at,  threatened,  abused  and  beaten  in  detention
           because of his ethnic origin or presumed  political  affiliation
           satisfies the definition  of  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment
           given in Selmouni v France - 25803/94 [1999] ECHR 66: and  given
           that Immigration Rule 339K requires that  special  attention  be
           given to an asylum claim where there is an accepted  history  of
           persecution, or threats of the same, this may have had an impact
           on risk assessment;
       (b)  Several  relevant  factors  from  the  Country  Guidelines  were
           overlooked, given that  there  was  witness  statement  evidence
           before the First-tier Tribunal which it did  not  reject,  in  a
           context  where  the  Appellant's   credibility   was   generally
           accepted, that "the Turkish authorities  are  still  raiding  my
           house  and  seeking  to  ascertain  my  whereabouts"  and   that
           relatives of his had been granted asylum in the United  Kingdom:
           these factors, particularly the former, had a  real  bearing  in
           assessing the dangers the  Appellant  might  face  on  a  return
           applying IA Turkey as they potentially relate to "whether  there
           is any evidence that  the  authorities  have  been  pursuing  or
           otherwise expressing an interest in the Appellant  since  he  or
           she left Turkey" (factor (x))  and  to  whether  he  had  family
           connections with a separatist organisation.

    7. Further evidence was supplied for the continuation hearing by way  of
       refugee status grants to his aunts Fatima Yurdsuz on 15 January  2001
       and Turkan Kop on 24  October  2002;  various  other  passport  pages
       recorded that other relatives were British citizens, manuscript notes
       in the bundle asserting that  this  was  predicated  on  their  prior
       residence here as recognised refugees.

    8. At the continuation hearing, it was agreed between the  parties  that
       the historical facts advanced  by  the  Appellant  had  been  largely
       accepted by the First-tier Tribunal.  Nevertheless,  given  that  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  had  overlooked  material  evidence  of   post-
       departure interest, it would be appropriate to permit  the  Appellant
       to give further evidence about that subject if he wished, and for  Mr
       Kandola  to  cross  examine  him  on  the  issue  in  any  event.  Ms
       Panagiotopoulou stressed  that  as  well  as  his  witness  statement
       evidence, at interview he had stated that "[t]hey  occasionally  come
       and threaten and verbally abuse my parents and asking my  whereabouts
       and my parents are not  disclosing  any  information  to  them":  the
       interviewer then asked him whether he could not relocate elsewhere to
       avoid problems, to which he replied that  upon  registration  with  a
       Mukhtar he would be detected once again.

    9. No further evidence in  chief  being  led  from  him,  the  Appellant
       offered himself for cross examination. He said that  the  authorities
       were looking for him after he had left Turkey and repeatedly went  to
       his home, as he learned  from  relatives  in  Gaziantep  and  in  his
       village. He was accused of being a terrorist on  those  visits.  They
       sought information about where the guerrillas were. He did not  speak
       very much to his family as they were worried that their 'phones might
       be tapped, so he was not sure of the frequency of the visits. He  had
       family by way of siblings and parents who all lived together  in  the
       village. They had not been arrested in the last  two  years  but  had
       been under constant pressure from  the  visits;  they  had  told  the
       security forces that  they  did  not  know  the  Appellant's  present
       location.

   10. Various passages from the country  evidence  reports  that  had  been
       filed for the hearing have been drawn to my  attention,  particularly
       from the Respondent's Country of Origin Information Report of  August
       2010 (which seems to be the last comprehensive report produced by the
       Secretary of State: both  advocates  based  their  submissions  on  a
       starting point that the prevailing country  situation  would  not  be
       very different from the picture painted by  the  Country  Guidelines,
       whilst recognising that recent events would if anything bring about a
       heightened state of security) though also from  some  other  sources,
       and I accordingly determine the appeal against the following backdrop
       gleaned from those reports  (from  the  2010  COIR  unless  otherwise
       stated):
        a) The security forces committed unlawful killings; the  number  of
           arrests and prosecutions in these cases was  low  compared  with
           the number of incidents,  and  convictions  remained  rare,  and
           torture, beatings, and abuse by security forces continued;
        b) Arbitrary arrest and detention,  and  unfair  trials  continued,
           especially under anti-terrorism legislation;
        c) The  police  routinely  detained  demonstrators  and  to  detain
           persons on suspicion of 'membership in an illegal  organization'
           and for 'promoting terrorist propaganda';
        d) Notwithstanding the government  having  professed  a  policy  of
           'zero  tolerance   towards   torture',   that   claim   appeared
           inconsistent with several other sources  such  as  the  European
           Commission Progress Report 2009 which considered that efforts to
           implement that policy had been limited, and that allegations  of
           torture  and  ill-treatment,  and  impunity  for   perpetrators,
           remained a great concern;
        e) The village guards, Jandarma, and  police  special  forces  were
           viewed as most responsible for abuses; corruption  and  impunity
           remained serious problems: those arrested  for  ordinary  crimes
           were as likely to suffer torture and mistreatment  in  detention
           as those arrested for political offenses such  as  speaking  out
           against the government, although they were less likely to report
           abuse); police ill-treatment  occurred  during  arrest,  outside
           places of official detention, and during demonstrations, as well
           as in places of detention;
        f) Those known to have or suspected of having one  or  more  family
           members  in  the  PKK  can  expect  some  attention   from   the
           authorities. Depending, among other things,  on  the  degree  of
           kinship and the (suspected) position of their relative(s) within
           the PKK, family members may be subjected to varying  degrees  of
           intimidation, harassment, official obstruction, questioning  and
           similar problems. It is perfectly conceivable, even probable  in
           many cases, for the families of (suspected) PKK  members  to  be
           kept under observation by  the  authorities  or  questioned  and
           interrogated, also  because  they  could  as  often  as  not  be
           potential suspects themselves (COIR 2009);
        g) In  October  2014  security  forces  responded  aggressively  to
           protests,  predominantly  by   Kurdish   citizens   of   Turkey,
           throughout  the  Southeast  in  response  to  the   government's
           perceived inaction to an ISIL attack on the largely Kurdish town
           of Kobani, Syria: human rights organizations continued to report
           allegations of torture and abuse, especially of persons who were
           in police custody but not in a place of  detention,  and  during
           demonstrations and transfers to  prison,  where  such  practices
           were more difficult to  document  and  prosecutors  investigated
           allegations of abuse and torture by security forces  during  the
           year but rarely indicted accused offenders (the most  recent  US
           State Dept reports on Human Rights Practices:  Turkey  (25  June
           2015));
        h) Clashes between the security forces and the  Kurdish  insurgents
           (PKK) worsened in the east and south east - Ankara has  reported
           135 security officials killed and 278 injured, and 75  civilians
           killed in PKK attacks as of 28 Sept; PKK's armed  wing  People's
           Defense Force (HPG)  reported  112  insurgents  killed  in  same
           period, while govt has declared  some  131  "temporary  military
           secure zones" in over fifteen  eastern  provinces,  and  imposed
           curfews in Mu?, Van, ??rnak  and  Diyarbak?r  provinces  (Crisis
           watch database in its entry for Turkey of 1 October 2015);
        i) Following  Turkish  airstrikes  against  PKK  targets,  highways
           between provincial centers in the eastern part  of  Turkey  were
           frequently  closed,  and  the  situation   was   worrisome   and
           reminiscent of the bloody years of the  1990s,  when  more  than
           40,000 lives were lost  (Cengiz Candar writing in Al-Monitor,  a
           news and commentary site launched in the aftermath of  the  Arab
           Spring that brands itself as "the pulse of the Middle East"  and
           which has won the International Press Institute (IPI) Free Media
           Pioneer Award in his article Is Ankara headed toward all-out war
           with Turkey's Kurds?).

   11. For the Respondent it was submitted that, even acknowledging that the
       clampdown on the PKK had increased in the south east and  noting  the
       Appellant's statement that his relatives'  'phones  might  have  been
       tapped, the Appellant was too low level to warrant ongoing  attention
       from the authorities. In any event he could relocate to a main  city,
       he was safe over the period that he lived away  from  his  home  area
       before for some two or three months.

   12. For the Appellant it  was  submitted  that  he  would  face  problems
       throughout Turkey as anti-Kurdish sentiment rose,  and  that  it  was
       clear from IK Turkey that he would be at risk on return:  his  family
       associations should not be overlooked, as the evidence suggested  the
       security forces operated on the basis of  assumption  and  suspicion,
       and his original detention arose not simply as part of a mass  round-
       up but rather due to his individual activities distributing leaflets.



   13. Ms Panagiotopoulou also relied on the skeleton argument provided  for
       the continued hearing which set out the  Appellant's  case  in  full,
       emphasising that at interview  he  had  explained  how  he  had  been
       interrogated, beaten and eventually released without charge and  made
       to sign a blank document; on 6 June 2013 he had been violently beaten
       when the gendarmes approached him in the mountains. His  details  had
       been recorded and his fingerprints taken, and on  both  occasions  he
       was forced  to  sign  a  blank  document,  and  required  to  provide
       information to the gendarmes required on  the  second  occasion.  The
       Tribunal in IK had noted at [126] that  there  would  be  an  obvious
       concern when a young man disappeared for many years without trace was
       whether he had joined the PKK  over  that  period,  and  the  airport
       security forces would be likely to raise  the  possibility  with  the
       authorities of his local area on a return.

  Decision:

   14. As was stated in Mukarkar [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at [44]
           "If a discrete element of the first determination is faulty,  it
           is that alone which needs to be reconsidered.  It  seems  to  me
           wrong in principle for an entire  edifice  of  reasoning  to  be
           dismantled if the defect  in  it  can  be  remedied  by  limited
           intervention, and correspondingly right in principle for the AIT
           to  be  cautious  and  explicit  about  what   it   remits   for
           redetermination."

       There is no reason to differ from the credibility  findings  made  by
       the First-tier Tribunal and indeed no  suggestion  was  made  at  the
       continuation hearing that I should depart from them.

   15. This leaves the question of how to approach the additional aspects of
       the Appellant's evidence which were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       but overlooked. I have had the advantage  of  hearing  the  Appellant
       cross examined on the enquiries into his whereabouts by the  security
       forces of which he has been told by  his  family.  Given  that  those
       enquiries were mentioned both in his Home Office  interview  and  his
       witness statement, and that his oral evidence before me was perfectly
       consistent which that previously supplied,  I  consider  that  it  is
       appropriate to  accept  this  further  element  of  his  case  to  be
       established.

   16. As  to  the  asserted  recognition  of  numerous  family  members  as
       refugees, only  two  of  the  numerous  relatives  (his  aunts)  have
       provided documents attesting  to  their  receipt  of  refugee  status
       rather than simply providing grants of  British  citizenship.  It  is
       very  likely  that  those  grants  were   related   to   difficulties
       experienced by the Kurdish community in Turkey, given the  prevalence
       of asylum claims of that nature and rarity of claims on other grounds
       amongst  Turkish  nationals.  This  does  not  add  greatly  to   the
       Appellant's claim, but does demonstrate that he is from a family with
       many expatriates including at least two who  have  been  accepted  as
       possessing a well founded  fear  of  persecution  by  this  country's
       authorities.

   17. Given that factual  background,  it  can  be  seen  that  whilst  the
       Appellant's original interaction with the security forces arose  from
       a  modest  level  of  political  involvement  at   a   demonstration,
       nevertheless it seems clear  that  from  that  moment  he  became  of
       interest to the authorities, and in turn at risk of serious  violence
       (undoubtedly equating to serious harm,  given  that  he  was  abused,
       threatened with  death,  and  repeatedly  beaten,  suffering  smashed
       teeth) at the hands of the  security  forces.  His  arrests  and  ill
       treatment were relatively recent, in the last two and a  half  years,
       and whilst he did not subsequently come to adverse  attention  before
       leaving the country,  it  must  be  recalled  that  by  then  he  had
       relocated to Gaziantep, where he lived for some three  months,  which
       is approximately the same period over which he  had  previously  been
       free from official attention until  being  ill-treated  on  a  second
       occasion following his original arrest and detention.

   18. There is clear evidence that his family has subsequently been subject
       to surveillance, and specific enquiries have  been  made  as  to  his
       whereabouts, and as shown by the country evidence cited above, it  is
       perfectly credible that the  family  of  a  suspected  activist  will
       receive  some  level  of  attention  themselves  albeit  it  is   not
       necessarily the case that they will be persecuted.

   19. So there are numerous material risk factors present in his case,  and
       of course the danger he now faces must be assessed in  the  light  of
       the  deteriorating  security  situation  in  Turkey,  where   it   is
       inevitable that the authorities will be especially interested in  the
       activities  of young men who have been absent  from  the  country  in
       recent years. Given the enjoinder in Immigration Rule  339K  to  give
       particular attention to threats and indeed the eventuation of serious
       harm where there has been no material change of  country  conditions,
       both his past problems with  the  security  forces  and  the  current
       country conditions render this  guidance  of  particular  importance.
       Given the fact that he has repeatedly been required to sign documents
       whilst in detention, and that his home has been the subject of visits
       from the  security  forces  and  his  family  questioned  as  to  his
       whereabouts, it seems to me that there is a real risk  that  he  will
       feature on official records,  including  those  computerised  records
       held at the airport.

   20. I therefore accept that  the  claimant  would  be  at  real  risk  of
       persecution or  a  breach  of  Article  3  in  his  home  area  as  a
       consequence of his material history there, adopting the words  as  to
       the critical enquiry used in IK Turkey at [78]. That then leaves  the
       question of whether he  would  be  able  to  live  elsewhere  in  the
       country, which in itself presupposes that he  can  pass  through  the
       airport controls without coming to adverse attention. As was found in
       IK at [82],
           "... if a returnee is travelling on a one-way  emergency  travel
           document (and no failed asylum seeker will be returned to Turkey
           by   the   British   government   without   appropriate   travel
           documentation), or if there is no border  control  record  of  a
           legal  departure  from  Turkey,  then  there  is  a   reasonable
           likelihood that he will  be  identifiable  as  a  failed  asylum
           seeker and could be sent  to  the  airport  police  station  for
           further investigation."

   21. As was accepted in A Turkey "the computer system exists  as  recorded
       and that interrogations at the border take place  ...  if  there  was
       reason for a person to get into the hands of the  Anti-Terror  Branch
       then there was a risk of torture...." Subsequently the Tribunal in IK
       concluded that "The present evidence does not in our  view  establish
       either that there is no longer any real risk of torture in  detention
       at all, or that there are now "torture free" areas in Turkey".  So  I
       accept that the Appellant, being a person of whom it can be  expected
       there will be records on the GTBS computer system, would face a  real
       risk of mistreatment by the Anti-Terror Branch at the airport.

   22. Even if that risk did not eventuate, then he would be unable to  live
       in his home area, given the official interest to which  he  has  been
       subject in recent times, and he would face a real risk  of  detection
       upon registration in another part of the country: as was stated in IK
       Turkey: "given the range of basic activities for which a  certificate
       of residence is needed, we conclude that  it  would  in  most  normal
       circumstances be unduly harsh to expect  a  person  to  live  without
       appropriate registration for any material time as a  requirement  for
       avoiding persecution." I do not consider that the short  spell  which
       he spent in Gaziantep before leaving the country can be equated  with
       having found a durable safe haven, given  that  he  would  eventually
       need to register himself with the relevant authorities at which point
       there would be a real chance of his background coming to light.

       The appeal is allowed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

I have found the Appellant to be a Convention refugee  with  family  members
remaining  in  Turkey.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court   directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed      Date: 13 November 2015
[pic]
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:     Date: 13 November 2015
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
