

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02257/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 23rd July 2013                             |on 30th July 2013            |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                KAZEM DEGHANI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Blum instructed by J D Spicer Zeb Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Bramble Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Cohen promulgated on 10th May 2013 in which he dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal against the direction for his  removal  to  Iran
        following the refusal of his claim for asylum or any other form  of
        international protection.


     2. The appellant was born on 22nd January 1974 and  is  a  citizen  of
        Iran. The success or otherwise of his claim that  he  will  face  a
        real risk of persecution or ill-treatment on  return  to  his  home
        state was dependent solely upon the assessment of  the  credibility
        of his account.


     3. Judge Cohen did not find the appellant to be a credible witness for
        the reasons he sets out from paragraph 21 of the determination.


     4. The grounds on  which  permission  to  appeal  was  sought  allege:
        procedural unfairness in refusing to grant an adjournment;  failure
        to give adequate reasons for the adverse credibility  decision  and
        errors of fact in the reasons that were given, such as to amount to
        irrelevant   considerations   being   taken   into   consideration.
        Cumulatively it is stated that these reasons amounted  to  material
        errors of law.

     5. The hearing before us was short; the parties were agreed  that  the
        judge had misdirected himself; and we indicated we found  merit  in
        the grounds and we  would  set  aside  the  determination  with  no
        preserved findings for re hearing afresh by a  First-tier  Tribunal
        judge other than Judge Cohen. We now give our reasons.



Discussion



     6. The following factors when taken  cumulatively,  and  ignoring  the
        various typographical and other minor errors, are the basis for our
        decision:


           i. Judge Cohen refused a late  application  for  an  adjournment
              which was to allow a specified Iranian lawyer to be contacted
              to provide evidence relating to  efforts  undertaken  by  the
              appellant in  order  to  attempt  to  trace  his  friends  in
              detention. The reasons for refusing the adjournment  are  set
              out in paragraph 11 of the determination. Whilst it  is  true
              that the fact that the application was made late  might  well
              have justified  its  refusal,  the  judge  did  not  consider
              whether refusing the application would have adverse impact on
              the effect of the proceedings.


          ii. A little later in the decision the  Judge  then  proceeds  to
              hold against the appellant the fact that  he  had  failed  to
              submit any evidence  in  support  of  his  claim,  which  was
              precisely the nature of the evidence the appellant wished  to
              obtain and which necessitated  the  adjournment  application.
              Having  refused  the  adjournment  the  adverse  comment  was
              inappropriate.


         iii. Further the judge thought that the claim to have contacted  a
              lawyer in Iran during the events giving rise to the claim was
              a recent invention that had not formed  part  of  the  asylum
              interview and his witness statement. He was wrong about  that
              as contact  with  a  lawyer  was  mentioned  in  response  to
              questions 14 and 51 of his interview and in  the  penultimate
              paragraph of his witness statement dated 17th  December  2012
              [A's bundle P 17].


          iv. In paragraph 26 Judge Cohen records:


                  "Despite this, the appellant claims that  he  was  charged
                  together with the brother of one of his  friends  who  was
                  arrested soon approached the authorities, attempt to trace
                  the for individuals and instruct a lawyer."


              The appellant did not claim that he had been charged.


           v. In paragraph 40 of the determination Judge Cohen states:


                  'In view of the significant discrepancies and  implausible
   nature                           of the appellant's accounts, I find that
   I am unable to accept,                        even to the lower  standard
   of proof that  he  has  been  truthful  in                            his
   account   of   being   accused    of    political    activity,    beaten,
          detained and wanted as claimed. I  find  that  the  appellant  was
                  not wanted by the security forces and that his father  was
   not                           detained  as  claimed.  I  find  that   the
   appellant is totally lacking                           in credibility'.

             Nowhere in the evidence did the appellant claim  that  he  had
         been          beaten and detained or that his father was  detained.
         The Judge's       conclusion appears to be based upon a failure  to
         understand the         evidence, or a fundamental mistake  of  fact
         sufficient to amount to a       material error of law.


     7. Throughout his decision, the judge comments on  an  aspect  of  the
        claim and then repeatedly uses the phrase "I find this to be highly
        damaging to his credibility and the credibility of this appeal as a
        whole" at the end of various paragraphs  of  the  determination  in
        which adverse findings are made.  This gives the  impression  early
        on in the process that the judge had made his mind up to refuse the
        claim and spent the rest of the judgment finding reasons to support
        that conclusion, a number of which have on analysis been  shown  to
        be flawed.  In any event  it  will  normally  be  inappropriate  to
        structure decision making in this way.  This  was  not  a  case  of
        admitted use of lies or a false document to advance a claim, or  an
        admission that the claim  originally  presented  was  fundamentally
        false in some important way. The claim on its face is  a  perfectly
        plausible account of a person without a  high  level  of  political
        commitment being caught up in protests that lead  to  problems  for
        him and  his  friends.  Any  assessment  of  whether  there  was  a
        reasonable degree of likelihood that the account was reliable  fell
        to be reached at the end  of  the  process  in  the  light  of  any
        legitimate concerns arising from  the  narrative  and  how  it  was
        tested.


     8. We have no doubt the  decision  on  credibility  was  fundamentally
        flawed and that for the reasons given above the  decision  must  be
        set aside in totality and the process  of  judicial  assessment  of
        this claim must start again. Asylum decisions must be reached  with
        meticulous  care,  and  cannot  be  left  to  stand  if  there  are
        significant flaws in the assessment of credibility.  For  authority
        we can do no better than  refer  to  the  recent  Court  of  Appeal
        decision of  ML  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2013] EWCA Civ 844 in which Moses LJ, at  paragraphs  1
        and 2, states:


             'Of all the  hackneyed  phrases  in  the  law,  few  are  more
             frequently deployed in the field  of  immigration  and  asylum
             claims than the  requirement  to  use  what  is  described  as
             "anxious scrutiny". Indeed,  so  familiar  and  of  so  little
             illumination has the phrase become that Carnwath LJ in R(YH) v
             SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 116, between paragraphs 22  and  24,  was
             driven to     explain that which he had previously  explained,
             namely what it really means. He said that it  underlines  "the
             very special human context in which such  cases  are  brought,
             and the need for decisions to show  by  their  reasoning  that
             every factor which might tell in favour of  an  applicant  has
             been properly taken into account". It follows that  there  can
             be no confidence that that approach has  been  taken  where  a
             tribunal of fact plainly appears to have  taken  into  account
             those matters which out not to  have been taken into  account.
             To similar effect, our attention was drawn to    a recent case
             of the European Court of Human Rights, the case of Singh & Ors
             v Belgium (Application no. 33210/11) (the  second  section  of
             the court)  on  2 October  2012  in  which  the  court  again
             reaffirmed the importance of    decisions in this field and in
             the field of human rights. In that case  it  was    Article  3
             and, as it put it:
                       "...the irreversible nature of the harm likely to  be
      caused in case of the                  realisation of the risk of  ill
      treatment,    [in    the    light    of    which]    it     is     the
      responsibility of the national authorities to show that  they  are  as
              rigorous as possible, and carry out a careful investigation of
      the                       grounds  of  appeal  drawn  from  Article  3
      without which the appeals                   lose  their  efficiency...
      Such     an     investigation     must     remove      all      doubt,
      legitimate as it may be,  as  to  the  invalidity  of  a  request  for
      protection                 regardless  of  the  competences   of   the
      authority responsible for the                   control."
              The instant appeal is yet another  unfortunate  example  where
   the First-tier                   Tribunal displayed an absence  of  care,
   both as to the recitation of the facts                 and the  arguments
   that were advanced in relation to a claim for asylum....'
     9. Where a hearing of such a claim is fundamentally flawed the  Senior
        President of Tribunal's direction of September 2012 makes it  clear
        that the re-making must be in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  this
        remains the case even if this results in delay in  future  listing.
        We express the hope that judges will not make  the  serious  errors
        committed in this case and that the  appeal  can  be  properly  and
        fairly considered first time.


    10. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  it
        shall be heard by a judge other than Judge Cohen sitting at  Taylor
        House on the 16th November 2013 with a time estimate  of  3  hours.
        The necessary listing arrangements have been made.


   Decision


    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. We  remit  the  appeal  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a judge other than  Judge
        Cohen.


   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          No application was made for such an order before  us.  No  grounds
   for making          such an order have been established at this stage  in
   the proceedings.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26th July 2013












