
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02692/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between


                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
Greenwood.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Mace,  promulgated  on  30
    June 2015.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 23 July 2015 by FTTJ McDade.

Background


 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom unlawfully  on  or  around  18
    October 2013 while a minor. He applied for asylum on  22  October  2013
    after being encountered by officers from Norfolk Police Service.

 4. The basis of the appellant's asylum  claim  is  that  he  is  of  Tajik
    ethnicity. His father transported goods for British and American forces
    in Afghanistan as well as working for  the  Taliban.  When  his  father
    refused a request from  the  Taliban,  the  family  was  attacked.  The
    appellant's father and brother (who was an opium  grower)  were  killed
    and the appellant beaten and left for dead. The appellant  required  an
    operation to repair a ruptured bladder and remained in hospital for six
    months. He left Afghanistan after learning that the Taliban were  aware
    that he had survived and were expecting him to work for them.

 5. During the course of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant gave evidence and expert medical,  psychiatric  and  document
    reports were available to the FTTJ. The  asylum  aspect  was  dismissed
    solely because the FTTJ considered that the appellant would not  be  at
    risk from the Taliban in Kabul. The appeal was allowed under Article  3
    on the basis that  the  appellant  would  be  subject  to  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment on account of his mental  state  and  the  risk  of
    suicide.

Error of law


 6. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the  FTTJ  failed  to
    properly consider the internal flight alternative and had therefore not
    considered whether it would unduly harsh to expect him to move to Kabul
    for safety. Particularly, in  view  of  the  FTTJ's  finding  that  the
    appellant's Article 3 rights would be breached owing to the risk of him
    committing suicide.

 7. The FTTJ granting permission did so for the following reasons;

         "It is arguable that the judge, given her findings in  relation  to
         past persecution  and  the  Appellant's  mental  health  condition,
         failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that  there  would  be
         sufficiency of protection and/or  that  such  previous  persecution
         would not be repeated."

 8. The Secretary of State's response  of  4  August  2015  said  that  the
    respondent opposed the appeal  as  it  was  considered  that  the  FTTJ
    appropriately directed himself. It was  said  that  the  FTTJ  properly
    considered whether the appellant could return to Kabul at [30] and [32]
    of the decision and reasons and it would be unlikely that the appellant
    would be persecuted. It was said that the appellant did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 339K of the Rules. There was no cross  appeal
    in relation to the allowed elements of the appeal.

The hearing


 9. Mr Nicholson mainly relied upon his grounds of  appeal.  The  FTTJ  had
    erred by failing to decide a basic principle; that is  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to  Kabul  in  order  to
    avoid persecution. The FTTJ had found that the appellant faced a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in his home area  and  but  not  in  Kabul,
    however there was no indication on the face of the decision to indicate
    that she had applied this test. The FTTJ had found that  the  appellant
    was at risk of Article 3 mistreatment throughout Afghanistan and  there
    was no challenge to these findings by the respondent. Given the limited
    psychiatric support in Kabul along with the finding that the  appellant
    was highly vulnerable, it followed that the appellant was a refugee.

10. Mr Bramble confirmed that there  was  no  cross  appeal  and  that  the
    appellant's credibility was not in question. He accepted that there was
    "potentially" an error of law relating to the issue of internal flight,
    however he considered that it was not a material error.  The  FTTJ  had
    looked at all the circumstances and made clear distinctions in  finding
    that there was no risk of persecution in Kabul but considered that  the
    appellant's circumstances meant that he must succeed under Article 3.

11. In response, Mr Nicholson stressed that all the appellant's  particular
    circumstances were relevant to the issue of reasonableness,  which  had
    not been addressed. With regard  to  materiality,  the  fact  that  the
    appeal had been allowed under the ECHR did not address the  appellant's
    rights under the 1951 Convention. In addition, there might be  relative
    benefits to a grant of asylum compared  to  what  the  appellant  might
    receive in relation to a grant of leave to remain under Article 3.

Decision on error of law

12. I concluded that the FTTJ made a material error  of  law,  in  that  in
    deciding the outcome of the appellant's claim  to  be  a  refugee,  she
    failed to consider whether he could reasonably be expected to  relocate
    to Kabul to avoid his persecutors. While Mr Bramble confirmed that  the
    Secretary of State continued to oppose the appeal,  he  was  unable  to
    point to any indication within the FTTJ's decision and reasons that the
    issue of the reasonableness of internal relocation had been considered.
    Given that the appellant's appeal  was  based  on  his  entitlement  to
    refugee status, the FTTJ did not complete  the  consideration  of  this
    matter. It is trite law that Article 8  of  the  Refugee  Qualification
    Directive obliges the consideration of the  personal  circumstances  of
    the applicant as well as the general circumstances  where  there  is  a
    part of the country of  origin  where  he  would  not  be  in  need  of
    international protection. The matter was clearly in  issue  before  the
    FTTJ, as can be seen from paragraph  37  onwards  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal which accompanied the asylum decision dated 3 February 2015.

13. In view of Mr Bramble's acceptance, on behalf of the respondent, of the
    facts  of  the  appellant's  case,  I  decided  that  I  could  proceed
    immediately to remake the decision,  preserving  the  previous  judge's
    findings in their entirety.  The  appeal  proceeded  by  way  of  brief
    submissions only from Mr Nicholson.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing,  I
    allowed the appeal.

Decision on remaking

14. The FTTJ made comprehensive findings in relation to the real  risk  the
    appellant would face of inhuman and degrading treatment, which  I  find
    provides a ready answer to the  issue  of  the  reasonableness  of  him
    relocating to Kabul. At [34] of the decision, the FTTJ notes  that  the
    appellant would have no family to return to anywhere in Afghanistan, no
    immediate means of support and  was  vulnerable  owing  to  his  mental
    health condition. There is reference to the  general  circumstances  in
    Kabul in terms of the unemployment rate and the increase in rents owing
    to the massive return of refugees from Pakistan. The FTTJ also  records
    that the provision of mental health care was described by Dr  Giustozzi
    in his report, as "almost non-existent." At [35], the  FTTJ  describes,
    in detail, the limited provision for mental health care, including that
    in Kabul. At [36] the FTTJ accepted that the appellant's  vulnerability
    would  seriously  impede  his  ability  to  access  such  care  as  was
    available.  In  addition,  the  FTTJ  accepted  that  the   appellant's
    subjective  belief  that  the  Taliban  could  find  him  anywhere   in
    Afghanistan together with his severe traumisation and the fact that  he
    had self-harmed, had resulted in him being at real risk of suicide. The
    FTTJ concluded that the appellant was at "serious risk of suicide  were
    he to be returned and as such return would reach the high threshold  of
    a breach of his rights under Article 3."

15. In finding that the appellant faced a breach of his  Article  3  rights
    throughout Afghanistan, which is a  higher  test  than  that  required,
    Januzi applied, I find that it could not  be  said  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to Kabul. The  appellant
    has demonstrated that he is entitled to refugee status.

16. The appeal is allowed.

17. No fee was paid or was payable and I therefore make no fee award.

18. An anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ,  and  I  consider  it
    appropriate that this be continued and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings."

Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    All the findings of the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.

    I remake the decision by allowing the appeal (on asylum grounds).


 Signed     Date: 20 December 2015

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
