
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02985/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 18 August 2015                    |On 21 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  YAN CHEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on  20  September  1984.   He
    sought asylum in the UK, basing his case on his association with  Falun
    Gong and breach of family planning  policy.   His  case  is  no  longer
    pursued in the second respect.

 2. The respondent's reasons for refusing the claim are set out in  the  17
    page letter dated 4 February 2015.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge P A Grant-Hutchison dismissed the appellant's
    appeal by determination promulgated on 27 April 2015.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    following grounds:

    Ground 1 - Error in dismissing real risk due to Falun Gong association

      2. The FTT accepts at paragraph 13 that a Falun Gong practitioner  may
         be subject to persecution in China and if such a person has come to
         the attention of the authorities he is  likely  to  be  persecuted.
         However, the FTT considers the credibility  of  the  appellant  and
         finds at paragraph 14:

             "The appellant contends that he first saw a friend undertaking
             exercises and that on searching the internet he realised  that
             he was practising Falun Gong.  The respondent replies that the
             appellant on his own account the authorities have blocked  the
             official Falun Gong website and he could  only  read  material
             about the persecution of Falun Gong  followers  and  therefore
             questions how he could have recognised the exercises.  It is a
             fair question to which the appellant has no reasonable answer.
              What is of considerably  more  significance  however  is  the
             limitations of the appellant's knowledge about the practice of
             Falun Gong.  During his asylum interview he gave answers about
             the history of  Falun  Gong  which  was  consistent  with  the
             objective  evidence.   If  the  appellant's  evidence  of  the
             practice was limited only  to  a  censored  website  then  his
             limited  knowledge  of   the   actual   exercises   would   be
             understandable.  The appellant has  stated  that  he  was  not
             formally taught Falun Gong and that he learned what  he  knows
             from a book and a DVD.  He has also stated  that  he  attended
             several gatherings of some 8 practitioners.  Indeed this would
             have to be his contention, otherwise he would be  unlikely  to
             have come to the attention of the authorities.  The  objective
             evidence shows that verses are chanted before  the  exercises.
             The appellant at his asylum interview and in his oral evidence
             before me  knew  nothing  about  such  chants.   There  is  no
             explanation  as  to  why  he  nor  any  of  the  practitioners
             attending the gathering knew anything about  the  chanting  of
             said verses.  It is also more than a little strange  that  the
             appellant has only displayed a very basic knowledge of  3  out
             of the 5 basic  exercises  of  Falun  Gong.   It  is  also  of
             considerable significance that the appellant has not  actively
             sought out fellow practitioners whilst in the UK  ...  He  has
             applied for asylum and  officially  disclosed  that  he  is  a
             practitioner  -  why  then  would  he  not  join  with   other
             practitioners in a country where the practice is legal."

      3. ... the FTT has erred in law:

          i) By arriving at a finding which is unsupported by the evidence.
              The FTT relies on the reasoning as to how the appellant could
             have identified the exercises as Falun Gong if the website was
             blocked.  However, the FTT acknowledged that the appellant had
             a book, DVD and leaflet.  The FTT  has  erred  in  failing  to
             exercise anxious scrutiny and assess whether the appellant was
             able to identify the exercises from those items as Falun Gong.
             The FTT has thus reached a finding which is not  supported  by
             the evidence.

         ii) By arriving at apparent contradictory and unclear findings and
             failing to resolve those.  The FTT finds  that,  "What  is  of
             considerably more significance however is the  limitations  of
             the appellant's knowledge about the practice  of  Falun  Gong.
             During his asylum interview he gave answers about the  history
             of  Falun  Gong  which  were  consistent  with  the  objective
             evidence.  If the appellant's experience of the  practice  was
             limited only to a censored website then his limited  knowledge
             of the actual exercises would be understandable."   It is  not
             clearly exactly what the FTT means in reaching these  findings
             and appears to find on one view that the appellant's knowledge
             of Falun Gong was consistent with the country information  but
             fails to make clear what weight is placed on that;

        iii) By arriving at a finding which is unsupported by the evidence.
              The FTT notes that there is no explanation as to why  he  nor
             any of the practitioners attending the gathering knew anything
             about the chanting of said verses.  However, the appellant did
             explain, as recorded at paragraph 8(d), that the DVD  did  not
             have any verses to chant and thus there was an explanation  as
             to why there was no chanting.  The  FTT  has  thus  reached  a
             finding which is unsupported by the evidence as there  was  an
             explanation tendered;

         iv) By arriving at a finding without assessing  the  evidence  and
             whether that supports the finding.  The FTT finds that  it  is
             more than  a  little  strange  that  the  appellant  has  only
             displayed a very basic knowledge of  three  out  of  the  five
             basic  exercises  of  the  practice  of  First-tier  Tribunal.
             However, the FTT has not assessed the appellant's evidence  as
             recorded at paragraph 8(d), namely whether it is still strange
             in light of the fact that the appellant did not have access to
             any material to remind himself of the  movements  and  he  was
             only interested in the fifth movement.  The FTT has arrived at
             a finding without assessing  the  explanations  proffered  and
             without exercising anxious scrutiny;

          v) The FTT has asked  a  rhetorical  finding  without  exercising
             anxious scrutiny on the evidence.  The  FTT  asks,  "why  then
             would he not join with other practitioners in a country  where
             the practice is legal."  However the appellant  gave  evidence
             as noted in paragraph 8(c) he was frightened that his personal
             details would be disclosed to the  Chinese  authorities.   The
             FTT has thus reached  a  finding  without  exercising  anxious
             scrutiny;

         vi) If the foregoing are well-founded the  remaining  findings  in
             relation to the appellant's Falun Gong case are not sufficient
             for the appeal to be dismissed. Reliance on section 8  of  the
             Asylum & Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004  is
             not sufficient where the FTT accepts the  country  information
             supports the appellant's fear of persecution and the fact that
             there is no warrant should be  treated  as  a  neutral  factor
             having regard that there is no  or  insufficient  evidence  to
             show that the police will always leave a warrant.

 5. On 20 May 2015 a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to
    appeal, considering it arguable that in reaching his  adverse  findings
    the judge failed to engage adequately with the appellant's explanations
    set out in particular at 8(c) and (d) of the determination,  or  failed
    to set out adequately why he did not accept those explanations.

 6. Mr Winter submitted that the grant of permission went usefully  to  the
    core of the grounds.  The judge  recorded  explanations  given  by  the
    appellant at paragraph 8, but in reaching his conclusions at  paragraph
    14 failed to resolve those points.  The judge accepted at paragraph  13
    that a Falun Gong practitioner who had come to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities was likely to be  persecuted.   Ground  3(i)  identified  a
    failure to assess the various sources from which  the  appellant  might
    have learned about Falun Gong.  The judge said  at  paragraph  14  that
    there was a fair question to which the  appellant  had  "no  reasonable
    answer", but the  appellant  had  provided  an  answer.   Ground  3(ii)
    identified an inconsistent finding.  The judge did not  make  it  clear
    what he made of this.  The respondent accepted that the appellant  gave
    various answers to questions at interview about Falun Gong  which  were
    largely correct.  Ground (iii) showed that  the  appellant  offered  an
    explanation for why he did not  know  about  the  chanting  of  verses.
    Ground (iv) and (v) disclosed similar errors.  While findings  of  fact
    were usually the province of the First-tier  Tribunal,  they  could  be
    displaced if they were insufficiently reasoned or if they  disclosed  a
    lack of anxious scrutiny.  Mr Winter  acknowledged  that  even  if  the
    criticisms were made out there was still the reasons given at paragraph
    15.  However, he pointed out that the judge did not find the absence of
    a warrant to be a decisive point on its own, because a warrant was  not
    always left by the police, and although delay was relevant, it was also
    by itself insufficient.  The determination should be set  aside  and  a
    fresh hearing directed.

 7. Mr Mullen in reply said that such explanations  as  the  appellant  had
    offered were partial and flimsy.  He said that he had not learned  much
    about Falun Gong but it remained odd that he knew as little as he  did,
    that he had not tried to replace the book and DVD which he said he lost
    once he was in the UK, and that he had not sought to  practise  in  the
    UK.  The critical question was not how much he knew  about  Falun  Gong
    either at interview or at the hearing but whether he was wanted by  the
    Chinese authorities.  His lack of interest in practising Falun Gong  in
    the UK indicated that his level of interest was not  such  as  to  have
    attracted  persecution.   The  judge's  reasoning  on  whether  he  was
    satisfied that the appellant was a wanted man could not be faulted, and
    was dealt with at a number of levels.  The lack of  an  arrest  warrant
    was inconsistent with the appellant's account,  taken  along  with  the
    background information.  Ongoing prolonged police interest in a  person
    who was at best a minor practitioner of Falun Gong was unlikely.  Delay
    arose not only while in France but over a period spent in  Ireland  and
    "more importantly", as the judge said at paragraph 15, in a delay of  2
    years and 3 months in the UK.  The judge noted  the  appellant's  claim
    not to have understood asylum procedure and to  have  had  reservations
    about costs, but said the difficulty about that was that his  wife  had
    sought asylum and he had lodged letters of support from individuals who
    had also sought asylum.  It was to be expected that they would have had
    advised the appellant earlier.  The appellant  said  that  he  did  not
    practise in Falun Gong because he feared being reported to the  Chinese
    authorities.  There was no evidence to support a risk that  Falun  Gong
    practitioners in the UK, who were likely to be refugees at least in the
    broad sense, would report on such matters to the  Chinese  authorities.
    There was no evidence of infiltration of Falun Gong groups in the UK by
    informers to the Chinese authorities.   This  was  a  poorly  supported
    account which the judge had been entitled to reject.   The  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal were in essence no more than a  series  of
    factual disagreements.  There were no  significant  self-contradictions
    or omissions in the judge's findings.

 8. Mr Winter  in  response  submitted  that  the  requirement  of  anxious
    scrutiny was in effect a duty to assess any factor which might tell  in
    favour of an appellant.  The crux of this case was that  the  appellant
    was recorded as giving various explanations which had not been factored
    into the conclusions reached.  For example, the appellant's explanation
    for not practising Falun Gong in the UK had not been dealt with even as
    a matter of inference.  The decision maker was bound to say whether the
    explanation given  was  accepted  as  valid,  and  why.   Although  the
    appellant's degree of knowledge of Falun Gong was not a decisive factor
    in itself, it was noticeable that at interview the appellant had  given
    quite detailed and accurate answers showing a level of knowledge of the
    practise, and the Tribunal at least ought to have said what weight  was
    to be given to that.

 9. I reserved my determination.

10. In my opinion, the assessment of exactly how much  or  how  little  the
    appellant knew about Falun  Gong,  from  which  particular  sources  he
    derived that knowledge, and whether he explained  any  deficiencies  in
    his knowledge, is a rather fruitless exercise.  The appellant  accepted
    that he did not know much about and had little involvement  with  Falun
    Gong.  The fundamental questions were whether it was reasonably  likely
    that in China he had come to the adverse attention of  the  authorities
    for that reason and whether they maintained an adverse interest in  him
    as a result.

11. A judge, even when bound to exercise proverbial anxious scrutiny,  does
    not have to deal line by line  with  every  assertion,  no  matter  how
    slight, which an appellant makes.   The  judge  had  the  advantage  of
    hearing and assessing the appellant's evidence.   He  was  entitled  to
    find him a less than impressive witness who  knew  little  about  Falun
    Gong.  While the expression about why he would not join in the practise
    in the UK is rhetorical, it is plainly a finding that the appellant has
    no real interest.  The appellant's  explanation  that  he  believed  he
    would be at risk of being reported to the  Chinese  authorities  if  he
    practised Falun Gong in the UK is not explicitly  rejected  but  it  is
    plain, reading the determination fairly and as a whole, that the  judge
    thought it feeble.  I see no error in that.

12. Reading paragraphs 14 and 15 together I find them  to  be  an  adequate
    explanation to the appellant of why his  claim  to  be  wanted  by  the
    Chinese authorities for  the  practice  of  Falun  Gong  is  not  found
    probative, even to the lower standard.  This was a patently weak claim.
     The judge's reasons for rejecting it have not been shown  to  be  less
    than legally adequate, or otherwise legally flawed.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           19 August 2015
