
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02785/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 September 2017                          |On 11 December 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m a b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R De Mello, instructed by Wornham & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Dunlop, instructed by Government Legal
Department (GLD)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this decision, I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent  and
    the respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
    the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, MAB, was born in 1965 and  is
    a male citizen of Iraq.

    BACKGROUND

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of
    the Secretary of State dated 14 April  2014  rejecting  his  claim  for
    asylum. The Secretary of State granted the appellant limited  leave  to
    remain.  Whilst the Secretary of State acknowledged that the  appellant
    was at real risk of Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment if returned  to  Iraq,
    she considered that the appellant was excluded from refugee  status  by
    the provisions of Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention (see also the
    Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC, Article  12).   The  appellant  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain from 24 October 2011 to 23  April
    2012 from 14 February 2013 until 13 August  2013  and,  most  recently,
    from 15 April 2014 to 14 October 2014.  Given the length of the periods
    of discretionary leave awarded to the appellant,  he  was  entitled  to
    appeal against the decision of  April  2014  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended).  His appeal first came before the First-tier  Tribunal  which
    allowed his appeal.   That  decision  was  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted for hearing de novo by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
    by a decision of 12 April 2016.  Thereafter, a newly-constituted First-
    tier Tribunal (Designated Judge McCarthy; Judge M Hall) in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 April 2017, also allowed the appeal of the  appellant,
    finding  that  he  was  not  excluded  from  refugee  protection.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, against that decision.
     At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 22 September 2017,  Mr  De
    Mello of Counsel appeared for the  appellant.   Mr  Dunlop  of  Counsel
    appeared for the Secretary of State.

 3. The factual matrix in this appeal is summarised  as  follows.   Between
    1992 and 1994, the appellant worked as a doctor for Al-Istikhbarat (the
    Military Intelligence Agency of the regime of Saddam Hussein in  Iraq).
    The appellant is a Sunni Muslim  who  claims  that  his  father  was  a
    colonel in the Iraqi army and was also a member of  the  ruling  Ba'ath
    Party of Saddam Hussein.  The appellant  worked  as  a  doctor  at  the
    clinic of the Al-Istikhbarat headquarters in  Iraq.   He  treated  both
    military intelligence officers and detainees.  He was aware  that  some
    of the prisoners whom  he  treated  had  been  tortured  and  would  be
    tortured again after he had treated them.  During his military  service
    at Al-Istikhbarat, the appellant did not  seek  alternative  employment
    within the army or elsewhere in government service.

 4. Having completed his military service in 1994, the appellant worked  as
    a doctor in Iraq.  In 1995, he  left  Iraq  and  travelled  to  Jordan.
    Thereafter, he travelled to Libya where he again worked in the  medical
    profession.  Travelling via Malta to the United Kingdom in  2000  on  a
    visit visa, he entered this country and applied for asylum.   Although,
    as I have noted above, the appellant has been granted  various  periods
    of leave to remain, he has never been granted asylum.  In January 2011,
    the War Crimes Unit of the Border Agency completed a report in relation
    to the appellant.  In a letter to the appellant dated 24 October  2011,
    it was explained by the Secretary of State that the appellant had  been
    excluded from the Convention by the operation of Article 1F(a).

 5. In March 2013, proceedings were brought before a panel of  the  Medical
    Practitioner Tribunal (MPT).  The MPT found the appellant's fitness  to
    practice impaired by reason of having been an accessory to  torture  in
    Iraq.  The Tribunal suspended the appellant from practice for one year.

 6. In April 2013, the appellant's wife  and  children  were  granted  five
    years' leave to remain as refugees.  By a decision dated 3 March  2014,
    the MPT concluded that the  appellant's  fitness  to  practice  was  no
    longer impaired and his practising  certificate  was  reinstated.   The
    respondent, however, continued to  reject  the  appellant's  claim  for
    refugee status.

 7. The appellant has not disputed the fact that  he  was  complicit  in  a
    crime against humanity.  The only issue is  whether  the  appellant  is
    entitled to the defence of duress.  The initial First-tier Tribunal  to
    consider the appeal found that the appellant had  proved  that  he  was
    able to rely on the defence of duress and that he should be entitled to
    refugee status.  The Upper Tribunal set aside the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision because, inter alia, it had failed coherently to make findings
    of fact on the appellant's  evidence,  in  particular  as  regards  his
    family connections  to  the  Iraqi  State  regime.   The  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge also concluded that the MPT had made findings which were
    of no assistance to the appellant in his immigration appeal.  The judge
    noted the MPT had not found that the appellant had acted under duress.

 8. A newly-constituted  First-tier  Tribunal  convened  to  determine  the
    remitted appeal in February 2017.  That Tribunal concluded  that  there
    were serious  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  appellant  had  been
    involved in crimes against humanity, namely in the torture  perpetrated
    upon prisoners at Al-Istikhbarat.   There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant himself had tortured anyone but he had provided  medical  aid
    to both the perpetrators and also  detainees  whose  suffering  at  the
    hands of the regime the appellant was aware may not  have  come  to  an
    end.  The First-tier Tribunal also found the appellant had carried  out
    orders and that, had he disobeyed those orders, he may have put his own
    life at risk.  The Tribunal concluded there had been  "some  force"  in
    the respondent's arguments that the  appellant  had  not  worked  under
    duress because he had been deployed at Al-Istikhbarat  because  of  his
    family's links to the Ba'athist regime and further that  he  had  never
    sought to use any family influence  he  may  have  had  to  leave  that
    facility.  However, the  appellant  had  changed  his  account;  having
    claimed that he had obtained  work  at  Al-Istikhbarat  through  family
    links, he later claimed that he did not know why he had worked there as
    opposed to  in  some  other  facility.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    concerns regarding this change noting that, "if the burden was  on  the
    appellant, we would have no hesitation but to  find  that  he  has  not
    given a truthful account."  However, the Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    burden of proof rested on the Secretary of  State   and  there  was  no
    evidence to show that the appellant or his family have  been  loyal  to
    the regime other than  by  reference  to  the  appellant's  own  first,
    unreliable  and  now  rejected  first  account  of  past  events.    In
    consequence, the Secretary of State had not discharged  the  burden  of
    proof.

    THE LAW

 9. Article 1F of the Refugee Convention (as amended) and  subject  to  the
    Protocol of 31 January 1967 provides as follows:

         F.   The provisions of this  Convention  shall  not  apply  to  any
             person with respect to whom  there  are  serious  reasons  for
             considering that:

             (a)  he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime or  a
                  crime against humanity as  defined  in  the  international
                  instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of  such
                  crimes ...

10. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court  defines  a  crime
    against humanity as "any of the following acts when committed  as  part
    of  a  widespread  systematic  attack  directed  against  any  civilian
    population with knowledge of the attack ... (f) torture."   Article  25
    of the same statute provides that an individual  shall  incur  criminal
    responsibility if he or she shall facilitate, "the commission of such a
    crime, aids, abets or  otherwise  assists  in  its  commission  or  its
    attempted commission including providing the means for its commission."

11. Article 31 provides the grounds on which criminal responsibility may be
    excluded.  Criminal  individual  responsibility  shall  not  attach  to
    conduct which has "been caused by duress resulting from the  threat  of
    imminent death or of continuing or imminent serious bodily harm against
    that person or another  person  and  the  person  acts  necessarily  or
    reasonably to avoid this threat provided the person does not intend  to
    cause a greater harm than the one sought to be avoided."   The  Article
    provides that the threat  must  emanate  from  "other  persons"  or  be
    "constituted by other circumstances beyond that person's  control".  In
    domestic law, Article 1F(a) should  be  construed  restrictively.   The
    burden of proof rests on the State.

12. The Rome Statute, Article 31 provides five requirements for the defence
    of duress:

         i.   There must be a threat of imminent death or of  continuing  or
         imminent serious bodily harm;

         ii.   Such  threat  requires  to  be  made  by  other  persons   or
         constituted by other circumstances beyond the control of the person
         claiming the defence;

         iii. The threat must be directed against the  person  claiming  the
         defence or some other person;

         iv.  The person claiming  the  defence  must  act  necessarily  and
         reasonably to avoid this threat;

         v.   In so acting the person claiming the defence does  not  intend
         to cause a greater harm than the one sought to be avoided

    DISCUSSION

13. Mr Dunlop submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  misunderstood  sub-
    paragraph (iv) of Article 31.  This requirement, the need to show  that
    one 'has acted necessarily and  reasonably  to  avoid'  the  threat  of
    'death or of continuing or imminent serious bodily harm'  was  recently
    examined by the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  AB  (Article  1F(a)  -
    defence - duress) Iran [2016] UKUT 00376 (IAC),in particular [78-80]:

         78. The reality of the appellant's account of acting  under  duress
         is that for a period of many years she took no steps whatsoever  to
         avoid compliance  with  her  duties  in  the  prison,  despite  her
         knowledge of  the  consequence  for  those  taken  to  the  torture
         facility. Even despite being off work after the birth of her  child
         for a lengthy period of time she chose not  to  explore  any  other
         option but to return to her duties in the prison. She continued  in
         those duties accepting promotion along the way.  The  immediacy  of
         her reaction on  learning  of  her  relative's  detention  and  the
         combined manner of the transfer to hospital and  subsequent  escape
         is evidence of a cunning and  resourceful  nature,  along  with  an
         ability and willingness to take appropriate steps when she chose to
         do so.

         79. We are perfectly satisfied that the defence of duress cannot be
         engaged on the basis  of  the  evidence  which  the  appellant  has
         adduced. It is untenable on the basis of the vague and  speculative
         consequence which she has associated with making a  request  to  be
         allowed to resign, leave or transfer. It is  equally  untenable  on
         the basis of the appellant's own evidence of having made no  effort
         of any description to extricate herself  from  her  duties  at  the
         prison over a period of 24 many years. The harm which the appellant
         knew she was causing was out of  all  proportion  to  the  risk  to
         herself which she has identified as befalling her if she  had  made
         efforts to leave short of desertion.

         80. In these circumstances we  are  satisfied  that  the  necessary
         evidential burden has not been discharged by the appellant and  she
         has advanced no valid answer to the serious reasons for considering
         that she has committed a crime against humanity  as  identified  by
         the Secretary of State. Since we were otherwise satisfied that  the
         Secretary of State was well entitled to arrive  at  the  conclusion
         which she did, the appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
         State's decision of 2 October 2012  must  fail.  The  same  outcome
         would be reached if we viewed the matter in the way suggested by Ms
         Pickup. If we ask ourselves whether  the  Secretary  of  State  has
         shown that there are  serious  reasons  for  considering  that  the
         appellant did not act under duress, then the  answer  is  that  she
         has, upon the same basis as we have just set out  in  paragraph  79
         above

14. In the instant appeal, the First-tier Tribunal acknowledged that  there
    were difficulties in "fixing the appellant" with his  earlier  account.
    This is the account which he had given prior to being notified that  he
    had been excluded from refugee protection. The  appellant  had  claimed
    that his strong family connections with the  hierarchy  of  the  Saddam
    Hussein regime had enabled him to obtain  work  at  the  Al-Istikhbarat
    military facility  in  the  first  instance.   At  [21],  the  Tribunal
    recorded that, "at the hearing, the appellant  distanced  himself  even
    further from his initial account by suggesting  his  interactions  with
    prisoner-patients were so restricted that he was not actually  able  to
    properly carry out  any  medical  function.   We  recognised  that  the
    appellant changes his account after being notified that he is  excluded
    from refugee  protection.   The  respondent  suggests  this  means  his
    earlier accounts are true accounts because the appellant does not  want
    to be excluded."  The Tribunal recorded the fact that the appellant had
    given two widely-differing  accounts  indicated  that  neither  of  the
    accounts  should  be  treated  as  reliable.   At  [24]  the  Tribunal,
    "concluded that it was not permissible for the respondent  to  fix  the
    appellant with his earlier account."  On that basis, the Tribunal  went
    on to make  findings  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  conduct.   The
    Tribunal accepted the appellant  had  never  actually  tortured  anyone
    himself but the Tribunal also found that there was "nothing in the  law
    that enables the appellant to distance himself from his involvement  in
    these atrocities."  The Tribunal went on to  record  that,  "in  simple
    terms, if [the appellant] had not treated the prisoners, their  torture
    may have ceased.  The fact that he treated the prisoners  knowing  what
    the organisation did and what would  do  means  he  is  linked  to  the
    torture of those prisoners."  However, at [45], the Tribunal found that
    "the respondent has failed  to  show  there  are  serious  reasons  for
    considering the appellant would have been able to consult with prisoner-
    patients  or  to  provide  pain  relief  or  that   he   signed   death
    certificates."

15. The Tribunal proceeded  to  consider  duress.   At  [50]  the  Tribunal
    reminded itself that the "repressive regime in Iraq was not  merely  an
    abstract danger or an elevated possibility of a  dangerous  situation."
    (see NT (Article 1F(a) - aiding  and  abetting)  Zimbabwe  [2012]  UKUT
    0015).  At [51], the Tribunal characterises the  respondent's  argument
    as follows: "The appellant carried out his duty as a loyal supporter of
    the regime.  He was deployed  to  the  headquarters  of  Al-Istikhbarat
    because of his family's links to the regime  particularly  through  his
    father and brother who the  appellant  literally  said  served  in  the
    Saddam Hussein army.  According to the respondent,  the  appellant  did
    not seek  an  alternative  placement  and  did  not  use  his  family's
    influence to assign him elsewhere."  The  Tribunal  acknowledged  there
    was "some force in these arguments" but found that that force  survived
    if the appellant were to be fixed for the accounts which he gave  prior
    to the exclusion decision.  The Tribunal had already decided not to  so
    fix the appellant with those accounts.  At [54-55], the  Tribunal  said
    this:

         54.  If  the  burden  was  on  the  appellant,  we  would  have  no
             hesitation but to find  that  he  has  not  given  a  truthful
             account.  We would not accept his explanation if  we  were  to
             find  that  his  account  is  incoherent   because   of   this
             inconsistency.  If we  were  determining  an  ordinary  asylum
             appeal, we would find the appellant's evidence to  be  lacking
             in truth on this aspect and we would find he has not made  out
             his account that his family were loyal  to  the  former  Iraqi
             regime.  We would reject both versions of events because it is
             reasonably likely  the  appellant  sought  to  exaggerate  his
             family's links to the former regime to secure  refugee  status
             and because it is reasonably likely that he sought to downplay
             his family's  links  to  the  former  regime  to  avoid  being
             excluded from refugee protection.

         55.  The burden of proof is on the respondent.  The respondent  has
             no evidence to show that the appellant's family  is  loyal  to
             the Iraqi regime  other  than  the  appellant's  own  earliest
             account which he says is not accurate.  We are unable to  find
             that the respondent can rely on that evidence since  he  would
             find it to be unreliable  at  the  lower  standard  of  proof.
             Thus, we find the respondent has not proven  to  the  relevant
             standard the appellant did not act under duress.

16. In its subsequent analysis [56], the Tribunal observes that it has also
    come "to the same conclusion by an alternative route."   Even  assuming
    that the appellant's account of his family members holding senior  rank
    within the Ba'ath Party  was  true  and  even  if  family  members  had
    arranged for his  deployment  to  the  Al-Istikhbarat  headquarters  in
    Baghdad there had been "no evidence to say the appellant  was  involved
    in that decision-making himself."  The Tribunal concluded, "we find  it
    is speculative to  conclude  that  the  appellant  served  in  the  Al-
    Istikhbarat out of his own loyalty to the former regime  and  therefore
    the evidence of family loyalty would not  be  sufficient  to  show  the
    appellant does not have a defence of duress."

17. I have quoted at length from this part First-tier  Tribunal's  analysis
    because it is the focus of the Secretary of State's appeal.  Mr  Dunlop
    submitted that the Secretary of State had never  sought  to  "fix"  the
    appellant with  his  earlier  accounts.   Rather,  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had given two widely differing accounts (depending on how  he
    thought each account at any given time might assist his appeal)  should
    have led the First-tier Tribunal to conclude  that  nothing  which  the
    appellant  had  said  was  reliable.  The  practical  effect   of   the
    inconsistency was that the appellant was could not be relied upon as  a
    witness of truth.  Secondly, Mr Dunlop submitted that the  question  of
    the  appellant's  loyalty  to  the  Saddam  Hussein  regime  is  wholly
    irrelevant.  Whether he loyally carried out  his  duties  as  a  doctor
    treating torture patients or whether he did  so  without  any  sympathy
    towards the regime was immaterial and the Tribunal's discussion of  the
    mater had led it into error.

18. Mr Dunlop further submitted that what mattered to the  success  of  the
    defence was whether the appellant  had  shown  that  he  had  made  any
    attempt to  be  deployed  during  his  military  service  elsewhere  in
    location where his complicity in torture may have  been  avoided  (sub-
    paragraph (iv) of Article 31).  I  agree  with  that  submission.   The
    Tribunal, having rejected the appellant as a truthful witness,  appears
    at [56] to place reliance upon the  appellant's  pre-exclusion  account
    concluding that, whilst the appellant's family  members  may  have  had
    influence with the regime,  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant himself had any influence sufficient  to  enable  him  to  be
    deployed elsewhere.  That approach is, in my opinion, inconsistent with
    the Tribunal's statement at [55] that  it  felt  "unable  to  find  the
    respondent can rely upon [the pre-exclusion accounts of the  appellant]
    since we find it would be unreliable at the lower standard  of  proof."
    Either the appellant's pre-exclusion account was unreliable or  it  was
    not.  The Tribunal went on to make a further error by concluding  that,
    if the appellant had no personal influence over  the  progress  of  his
    military service, then it was for the Secretary of State to prove  that
    the appellant remained at the facility treating torture patients out of
    loyalty to the regime.  I agree with Mr  Dunlop  that  the  appellant's
    attitude towards the regime is not relevant a consideration.   I  agree
    with him that it was for the Tribunal to satisfy itself,  by  reference
    to all the evidence, whether the appellant  had  taken  all  reasonable
    steps to cease assisting the regime in its crimes against humanity.  In
    answering that question, the Tribunal should have  had  regard  to  the
    fact that (a) in neither of his accounts had the appellant  claimed  to
    have taken or to have considered taking any steps to leave the military
    facility and thereby avoid the threat under which he claimed  to  work;
    (b) there was no need "to fix" the appellant with his previous account;
    nothing the appellant had said was, in light of  the  inconsistency  in
    his evidence, reliable so did not add to (a).  Ultimately, and  without
    fixing any account upon the appellant, there existed no or no  reliable
    evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  had  acted  "necessarily  and
    reasonably" to  avoid  the  threat  of  imminent  death  or  continuing
    imminent serious bodily harm.  The Tribunal in AB (see above)  observed
    that this test requires an individual to seek  "every  reasonable,  not
    too distant evasive alternative for  avoiding  the  commission  of  the
    crime."  ([73-74]).  This requirement of Article 31  does  not  require
    the State to prove that an individual was a  loyal  adherent  of  or  a
    particular regime or  to  prove  that  he  or  she  enjoyed  particular
    influence with that regime sufficient to enable the individual to avoid
    complicity against crimes against humanity.   It  simply  requires  the
    individual to show that he/she did everything that  was  reasonable  to
    avoid complying with  duties  that  constituted  or  involved  a  crime
    against humanity.  Whether or not he or his  family  may  have  enjoyed
    influence with the regime, the fact  remains  that  the  appellant  has
    never suggested that he did anything  at  all  to  seek  to  avoid  the
    threat.

19. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has fallen into error by its binary
    approach  to   the   appellant's   differing   accounts   by   focusing
    unnecessarily upon what it considered the failure of the respondent  to
    "fix" the appellant with his  pre-exclusion  account  of  past  events.
    Moreover, by requiring the respondent to prove that the appellant was a
    loyal supporter of the regime (which Mr Dunlop submits was  never  part
    of the Secretary of State's case) the Tribunal's analysis  has  drifted
    away from focussing on the much more obvious fact  that  the  appellant
    had himself provided no credible evidence whatever to show that he  had
    sought to meet the requirement of sub-paragraph (iv) of Article 31.  On
    the evidence which was before the Tribunal, it could not have concluded
    that the appellant had even  contemplated  let  alone  take  the  steps
    required by sub-paragraph (iv). In consequence,  because  he  does  not
    meet each of the five requirements of Article 31, the appellant is  not
    entitled to rely upon the defence of duress and the Tribunal  erred  in
    law by concluding otherwise.

20. In the light of the  above,  I  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision. I remake the decision by dismissing the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's  refusal  of  asylum.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    respondent has shown that the appellant should be excluded from refugee
    protection by reason of Article 1F of the Convention.

21. I will deal briefly with the cross-appeal of the appellant.  The  first
    ground of appeal challenges the First-tier Tribunal's decision  on  the
    basis that the Tribunal erred by finding that it was not bound  by  the
    findings of the MPT.  I find that the Tribunal did not err  in  law  as
    asserted.  As Mr Dunlop submitted, the MPT  is  a  different  statutory
    Tribunal,  performing  a  different  function  which  heard   different
    evidence and was applying a different legal test. Its findings of  fact
    are not binding on another Tribunal operating according to a  different
    statutory regime.  Further, I note that the MPT did not, in any  event,
    find  that  the  appellant  had  acted  under  duress.   Secondly,  the
    appellant's argument that he cannot have contributed to torture because
    he was treating and not actively injuring patients is not supported  by
    jurisprudential authority - see MH (Syria) [2009] EWCA Civ 26;  medical
    personnel are not automatically excluded from Article 1F.   The  cross-
    appeal of the appellant is dismissed.





NOTICE OF DECISION

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  6
    April 2017 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  14  April
    2014 is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

