
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02921/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 26 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              AJIT SINGH MADAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Todd, of Latta & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. There have been extensive prior proceedings in this case, running  from
    2007 to 2015, in which the appellant failed to establish  his  identity
    as a Sikh from Afghanistan.  However, he and his  family  proved  their
    Afghan nationality to the satisfaction of the respondent by  production
    of passports in March 2015.  (In  2007,  they  had  used  false  Indian
    passports.)  It is unexplained why it took them so  long  to  establish
    their nationality and identity, but that delay is now irrelevant.

 2. The respondent now accepts that the appellant and  his  family  members
    are Afghan Sikhs.  His date of birth is recorded as 1 January 1972  and
    his wife's as 1 January 1978.   They have 3 children,  whose  dates  of
    birth are recorded as 1 January 2005, 26 November 2008 and  16  January
    2012.  His wife and  children  are  dependants  on  his  claim.   On  5
    February 2015 they were all granted 30 months  leave  to  remain  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  However, protection in  terms  of  the  Refugee
    Convention and of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR was refused.

 3. The respondent's letter takes the view that the appellant  had  not  in
    the past been ill-treated or targeted on account of his  religion,  but
    only because of an individual dispute.  The letter depends  heavily  on
    adverse  findings  in  previous  proceedings.   It  goes  on  to   cite
    background information about Sikhs in Afghanistan,  the  police  force,
    and other avenues  of  complaint.   It  declines  to  find  a  risk  of
    persecution and holds that there is any event sufficiency of protection
    through  the  police  and  the  Afghanistan  Independent  Human  Rights
    Commission.

 4. A panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  comprising  Judge  Ferguson  and
    Designated  Judge  Murray   dismissed   the   appellant's   appeal   by
    determination promulgated on 22 April 2015.

 5. The panel took the adverse credibility findings of a determination made
    in 2008 as its starting point, and found that the  present  claim  also
    hinged on credibility, and that the appellant was neither credible  nor
    reliable.  As to general risk to Sikhs in Afghanistan the  panel  found
    there was "no evidence ... case specific to this appellant"  (paragraph
    40); there had been an improvement in local police  forces;  there  was
    still a Sikh community, although numbers had dwindled considerably; the
    appellant had previously been a shopkeeper, was capable of working, and
    had community ties; and he did  not  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    grounds of (1) failure to engage with the  appellant's  evidence  about
    the religious aspect of his experiences in Afghanistan; (2) failure  to
    consider the internal consistency of his account, and  its  consistency
    with country evidence; and (3) looking for "case specific evidence"  or
    corroboration which did not exist, while engaging only  minimally  with
    detailed background evidence regarding risk to Sikhs.

 7. Miss Todd sought to add a new ground of appeal,  based  on  Devaseelan,
    and which she said was possibly "Robinson obvious", along these  lines.
    The panel should not have  applied  Devaseelan  principles  as  it  did
    [without expressly citing Devaseelan], taking as  a  starting  point  a
    previous  adverse  determination  in  which  the  appellant  failed  to
    establish his identity as an Afghan Sikh.  Now that the  central  issue
    of identity was conceded, prior adverse findings which must  have  been
    inextricably linked to that issue  should  not  have  been  given  such
    weight.

 8. Miss Aitken did not object to amendment of the grounds to that  effect,
    partly on the view that the point could be extracted from the  existing
    grounds.

 9. Miss Todd submitted thus.  The determination started  to  go  wrong  at
    paragraph 35, where the adverse credibility findings made in  2008  are
    taken as the starting point.  That had to colour  what  followed.   The
    background evidence and country guidance was dealt  with  inadequately.
    There has been no country guidance since SL and Others (returning Sikhs
    and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005]  UKIAT  00137.   That  case  did  not
    support general risk, but it was followed by DSG  and   Others  (Afghan
    Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148,  holding  that
    the evidence had moved on and the First-tier Tribunal in that case  had
    been entitled to depart from SL and to allow an asylum appeal.  The FtT
    had been asked to take the same course in the present case, on a  legal
    and evidential basis set out in a written argument and in  submissions,
    with which the FtT failed to engage.  That error should be put right by
    remaking the decision.  At that stage, there should  be  admitted  into
    evidence an expert report by Dr A Giustozzi dated 18 October 2015.   Dr
    Giustozzi is an expert recognised as such in previous country  guidance
    cases.  His report explains why the large majority of Afghan Hindus and
    Sikhs have abandoned their  property  and  fled,  and  why  although  5
    million of those who fled Afghanistan have returned, Sikhs  and  Hindus
    have not done so in any  significant  or  proportionate  numbers.   The
    author considers that there is "rampant  hostility  and  discrimination
    against Sikhs in Afghanistan" (paragraph 12) and  that  they  are  easy
    targets because they have no redress.  The appellant is originally from
    Kunduz.  Miss Todd drew particular attention to  paragraph  15  of  the
    report which states that there was a small  Hindu  and  Sikh  community
    remaining there, but it is not clear what happened to  them  after  the
    city was stormed by the Taliban on 28 September 2015.  Miss  Todd  also
    drew  attention  to  other  particular  passages,  including  page  18,
    paragraph 10 - few returning Sikhs, often leaving  again  because  they
    cannot recover their properties and have no source of livelihood;  page
    20, paragraph 15, relocation  outside  Kunduz  would  not  improve  the
    appellant's predicament; and the near inability  of  Sikh  children  to
    attend school.

10. The concluding paragraph of the report states:

         'In sum, Mr Madan would certainly be unable to return to ... Kunduz
         ... where pro-government  militias  and  pro-Taliban  militias  are
         still rampaging.  The risk from these militias would be  very  high
         ... relocation to Kabul would represent only a relative improvement
         ... the Kabul/Sikh community  in  Karte  Parwan  has  largely  been
         expropriated and their properties  demolished  to  made  space  for
         villas of powerful war lords ... Mr Madan would in  all  likelihood
         experience harassment wherever he relocates  in  Afghanistan.   The
         risk of extortion would only arise if  he  managed  to  start  some
         economic activity of his own.  The risk for Mr Madan's wife is also
         plausible; she would have to spend her days at  home  in  order  to
         avoid being targeted for conversion to Islam by Muslim zealots.'

11. Miss Aitken submitted that  the  panel  had  properly  considered  both
    credibility and the  country  evidence.   The  principle  of  taking  a
    previous determination as a starting point had to be qualified  by  the
    narrowing of the issues, but paragraph 8 of  the  determination  showed
    that the panel was well aware that nationality  and  identity  were  no
    longer in dispute.  The panel had kept the resolution of  those  issues
    in mind.  This aspect did not undermine the previous  good  reasons  to
    doubt the appellant's credibility, or the further reasons given by  the
    panel in coming to their own view.  This case was  different  from  DSG
    because  that  appellant  had  the  benefit  of  positive   credibility
    findings.  SL and DSG showed that there had to  be  a  "case  by  case"
    approach and that  lack  of  credibility  was  a  significant  element.
    Having not been found credible, the panel were right to  conclude  that
    this appellant  fell  short  of  the  position  reached  in  DSG.   The
    determination should stand.

12. Miss Aitken did not raise any objection, if error were  found,  to  the
    expert report being introduced into  evidence.   She  argued,  however,
    that even with the addition of this evidence there was insufficient  to
    establish general risk to the level required by the Refugee  Convention
    or Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

13. I reserved my determination.

14. In my opinion, the panel erred in law at paragraph  35  by  taking  the
    determination made in 2008,  without  qualification,  as  the  starting
    point.  The appellant (largely, it  appears,  through  his  own  fault)
    failed in prior proceedings to show that his nationality  and  identity
    were as claimed.  That was  a  central  issue.   Once  that  point  was
    cleared up,  a  prior  determination  based  on  disputing  called  for
    cautious treatment.

15. I also think that the panel went wrong by  treating  this  as  a  claim
    hinging mainly on credibility.   Once  nationality  and  identity  were
    established, the case turned much more on the general risk to Sikhs  in
    Afghanistan.  That argument is clearly  and  crisply  set  out  in  the
    appellant's skeleton argument in the FtT, to which the panel gave  only
    cursory treatment.

16. The decision falls to be remade.

17. The respondent's refusal letter fairly cites the  background  evidence.
    It then mixes up its general  conclusions  with  consideration  of  the
    appellant's past failure to prove his case, and the  absence  of  fresh
    individual evidence.  It is far from clear that the background evidence
    cited in the letter justifies its conclusion that Sikhs in  Afghanistan
    face no more than harassment  and  discrimination,  or  that  there  is
    sufficiency of protection for Sikhs in particular.  Paragraph 28 states
    that  there  is  no  accompanying   evidence   that   the   appellant's
    difficulties regarding education, housing or employment would be  "over
    and above that of the general population"; yet much of the  information
    the respondent has quoted is precisely to  the  effect  that  Sikhs  do
    suffer problems which do not apply to the general population.

18. The refusal letter  cites  a  particular  instance  both  from  the  US
    Commission on International Religious Freedom Annual  Report  2012  and
    from a Guardian newspaper report of 3 July 2012.  This concerns a  Sikh
    returned from the UK  to  Afghanistan  in  2010.   On  arrival  he  was
    identified by his turban, imprisoned  for  18  months  on  an  informal
    "charge" of falsely claiming to  be  Afghan,  verbally  and  physically
    abused,  and  eventually  returned  to  Birmingham  "by   the   British
    government".  This is quoted as if it is a reliable  account.   If  the
    British government were not responsible for this person's return to the
    UK, the respondent would have been in a  position  to  know  and  would
    surely have said so.

19. The enforced return of failed  asylum  seekers  to  any  country  is  a
    difficult task.  The number of Sikh returnees to  Afghanistan  must  be
    very low.  This is the only available example (in these proceedings) of
    what has happened to a returnee.  If there had  been  any  examples  of
    more successful returns of Sikhs, it would be reasonable to expect  the
    respondent to have reported on  them,  by  way  of  contrast  with  the
    disastrous example which is quoted.

20. On the background evidence cited by the respondent, as fortified by the
    expert report, the appellant has shown that the country guidance in  SL
    and Others should be departed from herein, and that he and  his  family
    would be at such risk on return to Afghanistan as to  entitle  them  to
    asylum.

21. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
    following decision is substituted: the appeal, as originally brought to
    the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed on Refugee Convention  grounds  and
    under Article 3 of the ECHR.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                    [pic]


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                    29 October 2015


