
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 May 2015                        |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     kl
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the final determination in the above appeal following  hearings
    before me on 2 June 2014, 26 November 2014 and 7 May 2015.

 2. To summarise, the hearing on 2  June  2014  was  when  the  appeal  was
    subject to the fast track procedure.  I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision  to  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Following the hearing on 26 November 2014 I  concluded  that
    the appellant had given a  credible  account  of  being  gay.   I  made
    findings in terms of how the appellant was  likely  to  behave  on  his
    return to Albania.  I gave directions for final disposal of the  appeal
    in the light of those findings.  Following the hearings on 2 June  2014
    and 26 November 2014 I gave written decisions which are annexed to this
    determination.  They are referred to in the annexes as Decision  1  and
    Decision 2, respectively (now anonymised).  Reference should be made to
    those decisions for the full background to the appeal.

 3. Following the hearing on 7 May 2015 I received further submissions from
    the parties as to the final disposal of the appeal in the light  of  my
    credibility findings.  In the  respondent's  submissions  there  was  a
    request for further time to provide yet further evidence.  However,  in
    the light of the respondent's manifest failure to  have  complied  with
    previous directions this request was refused.

 4. As can be seen from Decision 1, the appellant is a citizen of  Albania,
    born on 25 September 1994.  His claim for asylum on the grounds of  his
    sexuality was refused by the respondent  and  dismissed  in  an  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The narrow question for resolution is  whether,  in  the  light  of  my
    positive credibility findings,  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on account of the fact of  his  being  gay,  on  return  to
    Albania.  At this point it is  necessary  to  repeat  what  I  said  in
    Decision 2, as follows:

          "47.    In the light of all the evidence, I am satisfied that  the
             appellant has established that he  is  gay.   I  am  similarly
             satisfied that he has given a credible account of having  been
             involved in two relationships in Albania, as described by him.
              I accept his account of the circumstances in  which  he  left
             Albania, namely that in his village he  was  afraid  of  being
             discovered as a gay person for fear of breaking the Kanun,  as
             explained in his witness statement.  I accept that he was  put
             under pressure, or at least  felt  under  pressure,  to  marry
             which eventually led to his disclosure to his grandfather that
             he  was  gay.   He  has  given  a  credible  account  of   his
             grandfather not initially having understood what the appellant
             had explained to him but that  when  he  did  understand,  the
             appellant was slapped and expelled from the house.

         48.  The appellant has given an account of having been told by  his
             grandfather that he would shoot him  and  that  the  appellant
             believed him.  I also accept that his grandfather said that he
             would not be able to face their  cousins  in  the  village  or
             other people there if it was found out that the appellant  was
             gay.  I similarly accept that the appellant sought  protection
             from the local police but that they,  in  effect,  refused  to
             help him.

         49.  In terms of how the appellant is reasonably likely  to  behave
             were he to be returned to Albania, in the light of my positive
             credibility assessment I accept that he would wish to live  as
             an openly  gay  person.   That  conclusion  follows  from  his
             behaviour in Albania, the circumstances in which he  left  and
             his account of his feelings in the UK of a gradual  confidence
             in being open about his sexuality.  I accept  that  he  has  a
             fear of returning to his home area and where he would  not  be
             able to be open about his sexuality.

         50.  Whether or not in an area of internal relocation the appellant
             would be at risk of persecution, I do accept  that  he  has  a
             subjective  fear  of  such  persecution.    In   his   witness
             statements he makes it clear that  he  has  a  fear  of  being
             openly gay because of the risk of harm.  In the  light  of  my
             generally positive assessment  of  his  credibility,  and  the
             consistency overall of his account, there is no reason not  to
             accept those assertions.  I also bear in mind that when  asked
             about this in his interview (question 121) he stated  that  he
             could not go back to Albania because of fear and that he would
             wish to express his sexuality openly but would feel he had  to
             be discreet (question 122)."

 6. Further, at [53] I said as follows:

         "53. I do accept that on his return the appellant  would  feel  the
             need to modify his behaviour out of  a  fear  of  persecution,
             regardless of whether such a fear is objectively  well-founded
             in an area of relocation, and about which there may  need  yet
             to be a finding, subject to  further  submissions.   I  accept
             that a material reason for his deciding to live discreetly  on
             his return would be a fear of persecution.  It  is  reasonably
             likely that social pressures in terms of the  way  he  may  be
             viewed by society in general, even away from  his  home  area,
             would have a part to play in his  behaviour.   However,  as  I
             have indicated, a material reason for his living discreetly on
             his return would be a fear of persecution.

         54.  I am not satisfied that  the  evidence  establishes  that  the
             appellant would be at risk from immediate or  extended  family
             members from his home area wherever he went in Albania.  There
             is little if anything in the evidence to indicate that such  a
             risk extends to the whole of Albania, and for example that  he
             would not be able to live in Tirana and be free from any  risk
             from them there."

 7. As I said at [52] of my decision, the decision of the Supreme Court  in
    HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31 is highly relevant.   I  again
    quote from paragraph 82 of that decision as follows:

         "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-
             founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,  the  tribunal
             must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the  evidence
             that he is gay,  or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
             potential persecutors in his country of nationality.

             If so, the  tribunal  must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
             satisfied on the available evidence that gay people who  lived
             openly would be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's
             country of nationality.

             If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
             applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

             If the applicant would in fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
             exposed to a real risk of persecution, then  he  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the  risk
             by living "discreetly".

             If, on  the  other  hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the
             applicant  would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and   so   avoid
             persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do so.

             If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would  choose  to
             live discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would
             wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting
             to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
             application should be rejected. Social pressures of that  kind
             do not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
             protection against them. Such a  person  has  no  well-founded
             fear of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing  to
             do with any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a
             way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted because he is gay.

             If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material
             reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would
             be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were  to
             live openly as a gay man, then, other things being equal,  his
             application should be accepted. Such  a  person  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution. To reject his application on  the
             ground  that  he  could  avoid  the  persecution   by   living
             discreetly would  be  to  defeat  the  very  right  which  the
             Convention exists to protect - his right to  live  freely  and
             openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By  admitting
             him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as  a
             gay man without fear of persecution, the receiving state gives
             effect to that right by affording the  applicant  a  surrogate
             for the protection  from  persecution  which  his  country  of
             nationality should have afforded him."

 8. The respondent's written submissions dated May 2015 rely  on  the  Home
    Office Country Information  and  Guidance  on  Sexual  Orientation  and
    Gender Identity in Albania,  dated  13  October  2014  ("CIG"  report).
    Paragraph 6 of the respondent's written submissions evidently refers to
    [54] of Decision 2, although mistakenly suggests that I had found  that
    the appellant could live in Tirana and be free from any risk  from  his
    family.  That is not in fact what  I  said  at  [54]  which  is  subtly
    different, although maybe not materially different  from  the  way  the
    respondent has characterised my conclusion.

 9. In any event, in summary, it is contended on behalf of  the  respondent
    that the appellant would be able to live in Tirana where  he  would  be
    free from persecution, either from his family or from others.

10. There is reference in those written submissions to a document  entitled
    "Study on Homophobia, Transphobia  and  Discrimination  on  Grounds  of
    Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity" written by one  Krenar  Loloci,
    described as an independent researcher.   On  the  first  page  of  the
    document is the Council of Europe  logo  with  the  words  "Council  of
    Europe In co-operation with British Embassy, Tirana".   The  report  is
    dated 23 May 2014 and contains a disclaimer to the following effect:

         "This report was drafted by an independent expert and is  published
         for information purposes only.  Any views or opinions expressed  in
         the report are those of the author and do not represent  or  engage
         the Council of Europe or the Officer of the Commissioner for  Human
         Rights."

11. No particular  paragraphs  are  referred  to  and  its  effect  is  not
    summarised in the respondent's written submissions.  At  [8]  of  those
    submissions however, the following is stated:

         "The view of the  British  Embassy,  while  Albanian  families  and
         communities tend to be at the  conservative  end  of  the  European
         spectrum and there is room for more enlightened attitudes, there is
         little credible evidence that discrimination against  or  hostility
         to the LGBT community in Albania is such as to  justify  an  asylum
         claim in the UK.  The background contained in the COE  is  adequate
         to reassure asylum assessors and the immigration courts of this."

12. However, as is pointed out in the written submissions on behalf of  the
    appellant, it is not clear where in the report that information  is  to
    be  found.   Furthermore,  there  is  it  seems  to  me  merit  in  the
    appellant's contention to the effect that there is  a  failure  on  the
    part of the respondent to particularise  what  aspect  of  that  report
    supports the respondent's case.

13. I have not derived  much  assistance  from  that  report.   I  do  note
    however, what is said in the executive summary at  [1]  to  the  effect
    that same sex relations are no longer illegal in Albania.  I also  note
    the summary on page 24 which states that:

         "Significant milestones have been attained in the legal  protection
         of the LGBT community in the period 2010 to 2014.  Albania has been
         a parliamentary democracy since 1991 and,  with  the  repealing  of
         Article 137 of the old Criminal Code, same sex relations have  been
         legal   since   1995.    Since   decriminalisation   the   previous
         administration was  successful  in  introducing  antidiscrimination
         legislation protecting LGBT individuals  as  well  as  making  hate
         crime a criminal offence."

14. The CIG report contains the following relevant paragraphs:

         Is the person at real risk from the  Albanian  authorities  or  non
         state actors due to their sexual orientation?

         1.3.4 Same sex relations have  been  legal  since  1995  and  anti-
         discrimination laws in Albania expressly protect LGBT  persons  and
         make hate crimes a criminal offence.  The  current  Albanian  Prime
         Minister has publicly met with LGBT activists at  which  he  voiced
         his support for the community.

         1.3.5 The State has attained significant milestones  in  the  legal
         protection of the LGBT community since 2010. Freedom of assembly  -
         in particular regular public LBGT gatherings  -  and  several  well
         funded LGBT NGOs attest to the progress Albanian society is  making
         and these developments enjoy support from relevant  ministries  and
         the office of the ombudsman.

         1.3.6 Despite the law and the government's formal support for  LGBT
         rights, Albania remains a conservative society in which  homophobic
         attitudes persist - particularly in northern areas of the  country.
         [There] have been incidents of LGBT people in Albania being subject
         to  intolerance,   discrimination,   physical   and   psychological
         violence, job loss, evictions, threats and possible rejection  from
         their families. In addition, transgender people have experienced  a
         denial  of  healthcare.   However   in   general   the   level   of
         discrimination is not such that it will reach the  level  of  being
         persecutory or otherwise inhuman or degrading treatment.

         1.3.7 This was confirmed in the country guidance case of IM (Risk -
         Objective Evidence - Homosexuals) Albania CG [2003] UKIAT 00067  (8
         September 2003) where the Tribunal concluded that ".. there  is  no
         country background evidence which supports a reasonable  likelihood
         that homosexuals as such in Albania are subject to  any  action  on
         the part either of the populace  or  the  authorities  which  would
         amount to persecution for the purposes of the Refugee Convention or
         would be in breach of their protected human rights."(para 7).

         1.3.8 In the more recent country guidance  case  of  MK  (Lesbians)
         Albania CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00036  (September  2009),  the  Tribunal
         concluded that "In our view the evidence supports  the  proposition
         that homosexuals known to be members of gay associations and  those
         who visit cruising areas in the centre of Tirana are likely  to  be
         harassed and on occasions ill-treated by the police but we are  not
         satisfied that merely being effeminate or butch, being unmarried or
         living with a person of the same sex who was not a  member  of  the
         family, would in itself attract the risk of serious harm  from  the
         police for reasons of sexual orientation." (para 339).

         Is there effective protection for the LGBT community?

         1.3.10 The state  police  have  reportedly  coordinated  with  LGBT
         organisations and provided effective security/protection for  LGBT-
         related  events.  However,  public  officials  continue   to   make
         derogatory homophobic statements, police violence against the  LGBT
         community is reported and there are cases where the police fail  to
         take  protective  measures  when  requested  to  do  so   by   LGBT
         complainants, in some instances detaining them instead.  There  are
         avenues of redress in such circumstances - for example  the  police
         ombudsman who process complaints against police officers mainly  on
         arrest and detention problems.

         1.3.11 The Commissioner for Protection  from  Discrimination  (CPD)
         has also reported having registered complaints  from  LGBT  persons
         and organizations and has issued sanctions.

         1.3.12 Since the country guidance cases of IM and MK,  Albania  has
         taken  further  measures  to  tackle  discrimination  against  LGBT
         persons. For example in May 2013, the assembly passed an  amendment
         that added sexual orientation and gender identity to  the  list  of
         classes protected by the country's hate crime law. Even though this
         law is a relatively new one, it has started to be enforced  by  the
         Government and the Albanian Commissioner against Discrimination.

         1.3.13 Albania's  current  government,  which  came  to  office  in
         September  2013,  has  further  stepped  up   efforts   to   tackle
         discrimination against  LGBT  persons  with  it  having  reportedly
         prepared draft laws, such as amendments  to  the  Labour  Code  and
         Family   Code   (to   obtain   legal   recognition   of    same-sex
         relationships), which are expected to be  introduced  in  the  near
         future to the Parliament, whereby the rights of the LBGT  community
         are further protected.

         1.3.14 There are also non governmental organisations in Albania who
         advocate for LGBT rights and the LGBT community and can potentially
         assist the person to avail themselves  of  the  protection  of  the
         state.

         Are those at risk able to internally  relocate  within  Albania  to
         escape that risk?

         1.3.15 It may be possible for an open same-sex oriented person  (or
         someone perceived to be such), who is able to  demonstrate  a  real
         risk in their home area because of their particular  circumstances,
         to relocate internally to a major city, for  example  Tirana  where
         Albanian LGBT support organisations are mainly based, but  only  if
         the risk is not present there and if it would not be  unduly  harsh
         to expect them to do so. Decision makers  must  however  take  into
         account that the Supreme Court in the case of HJ  (Iran)  made  the
         point that a person cannot be expected to  modify  their  behaviour
         and that internal relocation is not the answer if it depends on the
         person concealing their sexual  orientation  in  the  proposed  new
         location for fear of persecution.

         1.3.16 The onus will be on the person to demonstrate why they would
         be unable to internally relocate to a part  of  the  country  where
         they would not face  difficulties  even  without  concealing  their
         sexual orientation in the proposed new location.

15. On  behalf  of  the  respondent  there  is  reference  in  the  written
    submissions to evidence of a shelter being set up specifically for LGBT
    persons, in December 2014, although the article from the Home Office in
    relation to the shelter was not available at the time of the sending of
    the written submissions.

16. It is contended on behalf of the appellant that the conclusion that  he
    would feel  the  need  to  modify  his  behaviour  out  of  a  fear  of
    persecution, even in an area of relocation, is sufficient to mean  that
    the appeal should be allowed.

17. With reference to the proposed LGBT shelter, it is argued that the very
    fact that such a shelter is necessary reveals  that  Tirana  is  not  a
    "safe haven" for the gay community.  At [13] of the appellant's written
    submissions it is  noted,  with  reference  to  various  news  articles
    appended to the written submissions, that it is  the  only  shelter  in
    Albania and has a maximum of eight places, 4  for  self-identified  men
    and 4 for self-identified women, with a maximum of  six  months'  stay.
    It is argued that there is no evidence to show that the shelter  is  an
    effective resource to address the needs of  gay  men  who  will  modify
    their conduct due to a fear of persecution.

18. The most  recent  country  guidance  pertinent  to  the  issues  is  MK
    (Lesbians) Albania CG [2009] UKAIT 00036.  Notwithstanding the title of
    that decision, it is not  silent  on  the  situation  for  gay  men  in
    Albania.  Thus, at [339] the Tribunal stated that:

         "In our view the evidence supports the proposition that homosexuals
         known to be  members  of  gay  associations  and  those  who  visit
         cruising areas in the centre of Tirana are likely  to  be  harassed
         and on occasions ill-treated by the police but we are not satisfied
         that merely being effeminate or butch, being  unmarried  or  living
         with a person of the same sex who was not a member of  the  family,
         would in itself attract the risk of serious harm  from  the  police
         for reasons of sexual orientation."

19. At 22.12 of the Country of Origin Information report for Albania, dated
    30 March 2012 ("COI report") it states that:

         "According to human rights observers, LGBT people  in  Albania  are
         subject  to  "intolerance,  physical  and  psychological  violence"
         (Balkan Insight 24 June 2010;  Human  Rights  Brief  3  Mar.  2010;
         Council of Europe  18  June  2008,  No.  96).  ...  Balkan  Insight
         similarly states  that  those  who  are  open  about  their  sexual
         orientation have faced job loss,  threats  and  possible  rejection
         from their families (5 Dec. 2007)."

20. The decision in MK and what is said in the COI report is  reflected  in
    the CIG report quoted above. It is evident, for example  from  the  CIG
    report, that progress is being made in Albania in terms  of  protecting
    the rights of the LGBT community.  It appears that  efforts  are  being
    made to tackle  discrimination  and  that  there  are  non-governmental
    organisations in Albania who advocate for LGBT rights.

21. The evidence does not reveal that there is no persecution of gay men in
    Albania.  As I have already indicated, in the appellant's case he  fled
    Albania in fear of persecution.  The most recent country guidance in MK
    and  the  background  evidence  does  not  rule  out  a  real  risk  of
    persecution in some cases.

22. However, I do not agree with the broad proposition that appears  to  be
    advanced on behalf of the  appellant  to  the  effect  that  HJ  (Iran)
    mandates a grant of refugee status in any case  where  a  person  would
    modify their behaviour out of  a  fear  of  persecution.  The  fear  of
    persecution must still be well-founded, that is to say there must be an
    objective basis for it.  A fear of persecution which has  no  objective
    basis to support it, cannot justify a grant of refugee status.

23. On the other hand, it could not be said  that  there  is  no  objective
    basis for the appellant's fear of persecution from society  in  general
    in an area of relocation such as Tirana, as the background evidence and
    the CIG report reveals. It is unlikely  that  the  appellant  would  be
    willing to avail himself of the protection of the police in  the  light
    of his fear of persecution and wish to live openly as a gay man, and it
    could not be said on the evidence before me, that such unwillingness is
    irrational or unreasonable (see for example,  2.2.3-2.2.8  of  the  CIG
    report).

24. That is aside from the question of whether it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to relocate within Albania given the  evidence  of
    discrimination against gay people, for example in terms of  employment.



25. In all these circumstances, I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established to the required standard that he has a well-founded fear of
    persecution for a Convention reason, namely membership of a  particular
    social group. I am not satisfied that  he  has  available  to  him  the
    option of internal relocation to a place where he would not have such a
    well founded fear and to which it would be reasonable to expect him  to
    go. Accordingly, the appeal on asylum grounds is  allowed.  It  follows
    that the appeal is also allowed with reference  to  Article  3  of  the
    ECHR.

26. Although I have allowed this appeal, my decision does not establish any
    point of  principle,  or  provide  any  specific  or  general  guidance
    relating to the situation of gay men  in  Albania,  my  decision  being
    based on the  particular  facts  of  this  appeal  and  the  background
    evidence put before me.

    Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision having been  set
    aside, the decision is re-made, allowing the appeal on  asylum  grounds
    and with reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) rules 2008.  Consequently,  this  determination  identifies
the appellant by initials only.

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  9/09/15
                              ANNEX-DECISION 1

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Harmondsworth               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 2 June 2014                       |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     kL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Collingridge, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born on 25  September  1994.  He
    arrived illegally in the UK on 15 October 2013 and claimed asylum on  2
    April 2014. His asylum claim having been rejected, a decision was  made
    on 2 May 2014 to  remove  him  to  Albania.  His  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N.M.K.  Lawrence
    after a hearing subject to the fast-track procedure on 16 May 2014.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claim, in summary, is that he fears return
    to Albania on account of his  homosexuality.  He  had  lived  with  his
    grandparents from the age of 8. He had had two homosexual relationships
    in Albania. Faced with pressure from his  grandparents  to  marry,  the
    appellant told his grandfather of his sexuality. As  a  result  he  was
    beaten and the appellant left home. He went to stay with a  friend  who
    was one of the people he had had a relationship with.  His  friend  was
    able to help him make arrangements to leave the country. He fears  harm
    from his grandfather, from his cousins and society  in  general  if  he
    returns to Albania. He would not be  able  to  live  openly  as  a  gay
    person.

 3. Judge Lawrence concluded that the appellant had not established that he
    is gay. He also found that even if the appellant was gay and does  have
    a fear of persecution in his local area, he could live elsewhere and be
    able to practise his sexuality  freely.  He  found  that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection for gay people in Albania.

 4. The grounds of appeal in relation to the  decision  of  Judge  Lawrence
    argue that in coming to his conclusion about the appellant's sexuality,
    Judge Lawrence made assumptions about how a gay person would behave. He
    had referred to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not  sought  any
    homosexual encounters in the UK when he had the freedom to  do  so.  In
    addition, it is argued in the grounds that Judge Lawrence had failed to
    take into account written and oral  evidence  from  witnesses  said  to
    support the appellant's claim to be  gay.  Lastly,  he  had  not  given
    appropriate consideration to the background evidence in relation to the
    situation for gay people in Albania and had failed  properly  to  apply
    the decision in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Chelvan sought to rely on amended  grounds
    and material that was not brought to the attention  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. However, I indicated that  I  would  first  proceed  to  hear
    submissions on the  original  grounds  and,  if  necessary,  go  on  to
    consider whether permission should be granted for the  amended  grounds
    to be relied on. I invited Mr  Collingridge  to  address  me  first  in
    relation to the appellant's original grounds.

 6. Mr Collingridge sought to explain the judge's findings in  relation  to
    the appellant's behaviour in the UK  in  terms  of  not  having  sought
    contact with other homosexual men, putting that into the context of the
    appellant having come to the UK so that he could be  free  to  practise
    his sexuality. It was submitted that in the circumstances the judge was
    entitled to find that it damaged the appellant's  credibility  that  he
    had not sought contact with other gay men. Judge Lawrence had  accepted
    that the appellant did not need to establish that he had  relationships
    with other gay men on a frequent basis.

 7. Although it may have been an error of law for the judge apparently  not
    to have taken into account the evidence of the witnesses relied  on  in
    support of the appellant's claim, that is not an error of law  that  is
    material to the outcome of the appeal. The  judge  had  considered  the
    background material and considered the case of HJ (Iran).  At  [19]  he
    had noted that  homosexuality  was  not  illegal  in  Albania.  He  had
    acknowledged that there was homophobia in Albania, just as there is  in
    the UK, but concluded that there was a sufficiency of state protection.
    He had taken into account evidence of support services in Albania.

 8. Judge Lawrence had also been entitled to  conclude  that  even  if  the
    appellant is gay, he would be able to live in another part  of  Albania
    where he would be free to practise his sexuality and where there  would
    be a sufficiency of protection.

 9. I did not consider it necessary to hear submissions from Mr Chelvan and
    I announced that I was satisfied that there was an error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal requiring the decision  to  be  set
    aside.

My assessment

10. At [14] Judge Lawrence referred to the appellant not having sought  any
    homosexual relationships in the UK when he has had the  opportunity  to
    do so. He  concluded  that  this  meant  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he is gay. This finding was  in  the  context  of  the
    appellant's claim that he  had  had  two  homosexual  relationships  in
    Albania and that in the UK there is freedom to express one's sexuality.

11. I do not accept the interpretation of that paragraph which  appears  to
    be advanced in the grounds  to  the  effect  that  Judge  Lawrence  was
    stating that if the appellant  was  gay  he  would  have  had  frequent
    homosexual encounters or relationships in the UK "every other day  with
    many men". He expressly stated that  he  did  not  consider  that  such
    behaviour needed to be shown. However, it is clear that in that  single
    paragraph was the judge's assessment of the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    gay, and the rejection of  that  claim  solely  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant not having engaged in, or sought to engage in, any homosexual
    relationships in the UK, or not having visited any place where he might
    meet other homosexuals.

12. I do consider that those reasons, or more accurately that  reason,  for
    rejecting the appellant's claim to be gay is legally unsustainable.  In
    the first place, it does make an assumption  about  how  a  gay  person
    would behave, even taking into  account  the  appellant's  reasons  for
    coming to the UK. It is an assessment which fails  to  have  regard  to
    what Judge  Lawrence  referred  to  in  [13]  as  the  appellant  being
    "diffident, soft spoken and not verbose" and that it is  possible  that
    he is "not given to talk much", which may all be manifestations of  his
    character which could inform an assessment of how he might behave.

13. In addition, and significantly, that finding fails to take into account
    what the appellant  said  at  questions  116  and  117  of  the  asylum
    interview. At question 116 he was asked whether he  had  been  able  to
    express his sexuality at all in the UK, to which the appellant answered
    that he had not been out too much because he feared  the  police  might
    detain him. Asked in the next question whether he had been to gay bars,
    clubs or help groups he repeated that he had not been out much.

14. Thus, I am satisfied that there is an  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's sexuality for the reasons stated above.

15. Before the First-tier Tribunal there were witness statements from a  Ms
    CL and Mrs TL, and an e-mail in the form of a letter from a Mr BL.  The
    L family took the appellant in when BL found him walking around  making
    enquiries in order to find work on building sites. BL, according to him
    and his mother Mrs TL, is himself gay.  Mrs  L  and  CL  gave  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal and BLs written evidence was relied on.

16. The First-tier Tribunal's determination does not record  what  evidence
    was given by Mrs L and CL, except to  state  that  they  adopted  their
    witness statements and were cross-examined.  To  a  greater  or  lesser
    extent the evidence of those witnesses supports the  appellant's  claim
    to be gay. However, there is no assessment of that  evidence  in  Judge
    Lawrence's  determination.  Whilst  arguments  could  be  advanced   in
    relation to the weight to be attached to their evidence, it  could  not
    be said that the evidence could be dismissed out of  hand  as  patently
    having no probative  value.  It  is  evidence  that  should  have  been
    evaluated when Judge Lawrence made his assessment of whether or not the
    appellant had established that he is gay.  The  failure  to  take  that
    evidence into account is an error of law.  That there was an  error  of
    law in this respect was accepted by Mr Collingridge.

17. I bear in mind the judge's alternative findings in terms of sufficiency
    of protection and internal relocation. It was submitted  on  behalf  of
    the respondent that any error of law in the assessment of  whether  the
    appellant is gay is not an error of law that is material.

18. However, it is apparent  that  Judge  Lawrence  did  not  consider  the
    country guidance decision in MK (Lesbians) [2009]  UKAIT  36  which  is
    referred to in the reasons  for  refusal  letter.  Notwithstanding  the
    title of the decision, there is some assessment of the position of  gay
    men in Albania and guidance on the issue in that decision. Whilst there
    is reference to country background material in the  determination,  the
    failure to consider relevant country guidance is also an error of  law.
    I do not consider that the background evidence put  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal necessarily establishes that there is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in Albania for gay men.

19. In addition, so far as sufficiency of protection is concerned, in  this
    case an assessment of the  extent  to  which  the  appellant  could  be
    protected by the authorities in Albania must be made in the context  of
    sustainable findings in relation to the factual  basis  of  the  claim.
    There is an inter-relationship between this issue and the  decision  in
    HJ (Iran).

20. Similarly, in terms  of  internal  relocation,  the  reasonableness  of
    internal  relocation  must  be  informed  by  a   legally   sustainable
    assessment of the factual basis of a person's claim, in particular when
    one is considering how a person may  behave  on  return  to  their  own
    country, and why the person would behave in a  particular  way.  Again,
    this has obvious resonance in terms of the decision in HJ (Iran).

21. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
    such that the decision is to be set aside. I heard submissions from the
    parties in relation to whether the appeal should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing or whether the decision should be re-
    made in the Upper Tribunal. I do not need to  rehearse  in  detail  the
    submissions on this point made on behalf of the appellant.  Suffice  to
    say that it was contended that there were legal issues of  significance
    to be decided, for example in relation to the decision  in  MK.  I  was
    provided with copies of e-mails which indicate that  the  appellant  in
    that case was granted refugee status, the respondent having  apparently
    conceded the appeal, notwithstanding the guidance in MK.

22. In the circumstances, I decided that the decision should be re-made  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

23. Mr Collingridge submitted that the appeal should remain subject to  the
    fast-track procedure. Mr Chelvan  submitted  to  the  contrary.  Having
    regard to rule 5(4) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I decided that the appeal should no longer be  within  the  fast-
    track procedure in view of the issues to be  determined  should  it  be
    found that the appellant has given a credible account of being gay.

24. It is as well to deal at this stage with a further submission  made  on
    behalf of the appellant, namely that in the absence of challenge to the
    evidence of what may  be  described  as  the  Landers'  evidence,  that
    evidence should be,  if  not  accepted,  then  at  least  found  to  be
    unchallenged evidence. As I indicated at the hearing, I do not consider
    that I should make such a finding. The First-tier Tribunal's assessment
    of credibility is unsustainable and the  appellant's  credibility  will
    have to be reassessed with all evidence being at large. It  will  be  a
    matter for the respondent the extent of any challenge  to  any  of  the
    evidence called on behalf of the appellant.

Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside. The decision will be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

                                 DIRECTIONS

    1.   The appeal will be on a de novo basis, with no findings preserved.

    2.   The appeal will be listed in the first instance for CMR.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      2/06/14
                              ANNEX-DECISION 2

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Promulgated                         |
|On 26 November 2014                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     kl
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This appeal comes before me following a  hearing  on  2  June  2014  at
    Harmondsworth at which I decided that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    law in dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision to remove
    him to Albania.  The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was  in  the
    context of a claim for asylum.

 2. The background to the appellant's claim and my reasons  for  concluding
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law are to be found in the  error
    of law decision promulgated on 3 June 2014.  Reference should  be  made
    to the error  of  law  decision  for  a  fuller  understanding  of  the
    background to the appeal.

 3. Subsequent to the hearing before me on  2  June  2014  the  appeal  was
    listed for Case Management Review following which I  issued  directions
    to the parties indicating that the next  hearing  would  in  the  first
    instance consider the credibility of the appellant's claim to  be  gay.
    In  consequence,  I  directed  that  at  the  next  hearing  issues  of
    sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation  would  not  require
    consideration.

 4. At the outset of the hearing on 26 November 2014 I pointed out that the
    appellant's  skeleton  argument  prepared  for  this  hearing,  in  its
    reliance on an attendance note by counsel in relation to the  CMR,  was
    incorrect in stating that I had indicated that if I found the appellant
    to be gay that would determine the outcome of the  appeal.   I  do  not
    suggest that counsel who completed the attendance note and who appeared
    at the CMR wilfully misrepresented what had been said at that  hearing,
    merely that she misunderstood it.  So much is evident at the very least
    from the Further Directions dated 10 September 2014 which  stated  that
    the appeal was to be listed for hearing "in  the  first  instance"  for
    consideration of the credibility of the appellant's claim  to  be  gay.
    Furthermore,  such  an  understanding  of  what  I  had   intended   is
    inconsistent with the earlier consideration, of which the parties  were
    aware, of making this a reported country guidance case.  It would  have
    been inconsistent with such course of action, i.e. making it a  country
    guidance case, if there was a credibility issue to be determined.   The
    full panoply of preparation for a county guidance case  would  need  to
    have been unhindered by questions of credibility.  In addition, Mr Nath
    on behalf of the respondent indicated that he was under the  impression
    that the hearing before me on 26  November  was  indeed  in  the  first
    instance to consider credibility.  There is no  need  to  say  anything
    further on this issue.

 5. Not all the witnesses that were potentially expected to  give  evidence
    were  available  for  the  hearing  before  me  on  26  November  2014.
    Nevertheless, Mr Chelvan indicated that he was ready to proceed.  Given
    that I had decided that the appeal before the Upper Tribunal was to  be
    a de novo hearing, I heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  other
    witnesses.  Below is a summary of the oral evidence.

    The oral evidence

 6. In examination-in-chief the appellant adopted his  witness  statements.
    In cross-examination he confirmed that he first realised  that  he  was
    gay when he was about 14 or 15  years  of  age.   As  per  his  witness
    statement dated 24 November 2014 at para 6 he said that he made friends
    with a person called E.  They used to  stay  together  when  they  were
    young and their houses were close to each other.  It is true that other
    boys would say that they were like a married couple.  Nevertheless,  it
    is also true that he did not want to keep the company of  male  friends
    because he did not want them to see that he was physically attracted to
    them.

 7. He and E did not have problems with other people when they saw him  and
    E together because they did not know that they were in love  with  each
    other and in a  relationship.   People  thought  that  they  were  only
    friends.  They used to go by the  river  together  and  take  herds  of
    animals to villages.  The relationship ended the day he  left  Albania.
    They had been in a relationship since the appellant was  16,  until  he
    left.

 8. His relationship with Z was when he was at school in [ - ].  He  and  Z
    were in the same class.  With reference to  his  witness  statement  at
    para 12 where he stated that Z told him one day that he loved  him,  he
    was asked in cross-examination  how  Z  knew  that  he  was  gay.   The
    appellant said that they used to talk  together  at  school,  and  they
    would talk about each other's lives.  He realised more or less  that  Z
    was gay but he was not exactly sure until Z expressed himself as  being
    gay.

 9. In his asylum interview, as far as he remembers, he  mentioned  that  Z
    had said that he loved him.  At  this  point  Mr  Chelvan  referred  to
    question 61 of the interview in which the appellant  said  that  Z  had
    told him that "he fancied me and liked me".

10. He and Z would go to normal nightclubs because  he  does  not  know  if
    there are any gay nightclubs in [ - ].  They would stay together a  lot
    but Z was also very busy after school because he had a  job.  They  did
    not encounter problems when they were together because it was  like  it
    was with E.  They did not kiss in public or tell friends that they were
    gay.

11. Referred to his interview at question 60 where he said that he  knew  Z
    was gay because of the way be walked  and  talked,  the  appellant  was
    asked whether other people would know that he was gay.   The  appellant
    said that they would not and that it was much simpler for a gay  person
    to understand as opposed to people who are not gay.

12. Mr Chelvan in re-examination asked the appellant to explain how,  as  a
    gay man, he would be  able  to  recognise  another  gay  man,  but  the
    appellant's answers did not illuminate that question.

13. In examination-in-chief BL adopted his witness statement and  an  email
    put before the First-tier Tribunal.  In cross-examination he said  that
    he met the appellant at the Vauxhall Tavern pub.  He went and spoke  to
    the appellant.  He did not know straight away that  the  appellant  was
    gay but he had his suspicions because he was in an area around the back
    of the Vauxhall Tavern which is  known  as  a  gay  area.  Heterosexual
    couples do go there but it is an area used by gay people to have a chat
    and a drink.

14. With reference to his witness statement, he was asked why he needed  to
    know if the appellant was gay.  Mr L said that if one was in that  area
    of the pub you would ask most people if  they  were  gay.   People  are
    curious in that respect.  At that time he had just split  up  from  his
    previous  partner,  T.   Although  he  was  not  looking  for   a   new
    relationship as such he  thought  that  the  appellant  was  attractive
    looking.  Now they have become friends.

15. He does not go out with the appellant and other gay friends very often,
    only for example on special occasions like New Years Eve or  birthdays.
    The appellant is not a recreational party person as he is not  able  to
    do that financially.

16. As to whether the appellant is comfortable amongst his gay friends,  at
    first he was in his shell a little but he was told  that  he  could  be
    himself as long as he was not rude to other people.  He does not openly
    express who he is attracted to.  As far as he knows the  appellant  has
    not gone out with any of his friends.  He and the  appellant  are  like
    brothers.

17.  As  to  whether  the  appellant  had  ever  mentioned  being  in   any
    relationships, when he first met the appellant  he  had  explained  his
    situation in terms of what had happened to  him  in  Albania.   He  had
    explained to him that in Albania the gay community get  attacked.   Now
    he is quite open and has nothing to be ashamed of.  The  appellant  had
    not mentioned to him that he had had two relationships in Albania.   He
    had said that his family had thrown him out and told him to leave as he
    was an embarrassment to the family.

18. He could not say for certain whether or not the appellant goes  to  gay
    clubs by himself.  He has come out with him on a  couple  of  occasions
    such as birthdays and New Years Eve.  He has said that he would like to
    settle down eventually but that he wanted to  get  himself  sorted  out
    before he had a relationship.  He said that he could  be  walking  down
    the street and get stopped (by  the  police).   He  knew  he  would  be
    bringing trouble to the person he was with.

19. There was no re-examination.  I asked the witness whether the appellant
    had ever spoken about being in a casual relationship in the UK.   Mr  L
    said that the  appellant  had  said  that  he  would  like  to  have  a
    relationship but that would not be fair because he was not even able to
    look after himself.  Every time he went to  the  Home  Office  and  saw
    people in a van he would be petrified.

20. He had never told him about having had a casual relationship such as  a
    one night stand.  When they have been out together he has made comments
    about other men and how they look but he is not the sort of person  who
    would speak about a relationship that he has had with someone.  He  has
    seen him making comments about other men that he is sexually  attracted
    to.

21. In re-examination he said that he had seen  him  "dirty  dancing"  with
    another male, about three or four times.

22. CL adopted her witness statements in  examination-in-chief.   She  said
    that her mother was not here because her father had  had  an  accident,
    although it was not too serious.

23. Her brother (BL) is gay and she has two aunts who are lesbians.   Asked
    whether if her mother thought the appellant was lying about  being  gay
    she would still support him, the witness said that  she  believed  that
    she probably would because she is the sort of person for whom the  door
    is always open.

24. In cross-examination she said that the appellant had told  her  he  was
    gay a few weeks after he had started staying  at  her  mother's  house.
    They have discussed relationships and have a  rapport  whereby  he  can
    speak to her and she can speak to him about things.  She  explained  to
    him her personal situation of being a single mother with two  children.



25. She has been out with him and seen that he is not  the  most  confident
    person.  He is quite reserved and blushes quite easily.  He  would  try
    to make eye contact (with other males) in a very subtle way.   She  has
    been with him when they have danced in a group but  he  is  not  really
    confident to dance directly with another man.  She  had  not  seen  him
    dancing  with  another  man.   The  appellant  definitely  feels   more
    comfortable around the rest of the family.  He is more  confident  with
    them.  He is in a foreign land where he does not know anyone.

26. GP adopted his witness statement in examination-in-chief. As to how  he
    knows the appellant is gay, his daughter is gay and she is aged 37.  He
    has been around a lot of gay people.  He works for a disabled  persons'
    organisation and there are a lot of gay people there.  He is quite sure
    the appellant was gay when he first met him because of his  mannerisms.
    He has also told him that he is gay.

27. As to whether he had known the appellant to have  a  male  partner,  he
    said that he had not seen him act in the same way with another  man  as
    he had seen him with BL.

28. There was no re-examination.  I asked him to clarify what he  meant  by
    not having seen the appellant act in the same way as he has acted  with
    BL. He replied that he and BL act like a couple,  in  that  they  share
    things just like people in a relationship.  They talk and go  out.   He
    has seen them holding hands but because he is grandfather  to  BL  they
    have a lot of respect.  Maybe therefore, they do not do a lot of things
    (that they otherwise might).

    Submissions

29. Mr Nath relied on the refusal letter in  relation  to  the  credibility
    issues that arise from the appellant's account.   As  set  out  in  the
    refusal letter, his account of his relationship with E  is  vague.   He
    had not mentioned any reprisals that he had suffered  as  a  result  of
    that relationship.  Although the appellant claims that people said that
    he and E were like a married couple, they nevertheless  openly  visited
    places together, without suffering any reprisals.  On the one  hand  he
    claims that he wanted to keep the relationship private but on the other
    hand they were quite open.

30. Although he said that their relationship ended when he left Albania, it
    was not explained why they were not able to  keep  in  contact  through
    correspondence or email.  Similarly, no problems were encountered as  a
    result of his relationship with Z.

31. Although the evidence from BL was "coherent", the appellant  apparently
    said nothing to him about any gay relationships that he had in Albania.
     That however, is the very foundation of the appellant's case  and  the
    evidence that was given was that they are like  brothers  and  talk  to
    each other and confide in each other.

32. So far as CL is concerned, what she had seen (or observed) was  limited
    in relation to the appellant.

33. GP suggested that the appellant and BL were in a  relationship,  having
    seen them holding hands.  That however, was not their account.

34. Although the appellant had had two  relationships  in  Albania,  he  is
    freer in the UK to pursue such  relationships  but  had  not  done  so.
    Overall, the evidence did not establish that he is gay.

35. Mr Chelvan adopted his skeleton argument.  It was submitted that  there
    was nothing to suggest that the evidence given by the appellant and the
    witnesses was not credible.  None of it was expressly  challenged.   BL
    had seen the appellant physically intimate with other men.   There  was
    evidence from Counsellor AM to the effect that Mrs L asked her for help
    on account of the appellant being gay  and  needing  to  sort  out  his
    immigration status.  That was in November 2013 before he made his claim
    for asylum in April 2014.  It  was  not  a  case  of  him  having  been
    apprehended (by immigration officials).

36. I was referred to the appellant's witness  statement,  for  example  in
    terms of the circumstances in which his claim arose, when he  told  his
    grandfather that he was gay and that his grandfather did not know  what
    he meant.  The appellant's evidence is  completely  in  line  with  the
    "DSSH" model, described as an 'identity checklist', and in  respect  of
    which again the skeleton argument was relied on.

    My assessment

37. At the conclusion of the above hearing I announced that I was satisfied
    that the appellant had given a credible account of being  gay.   I  now
    give my reasons for that conclusion.

38. At paras 32-38 of the refusal letter there are credibility  issues  set
    out in relation  to  the  appellant's  account  of  being  gay.  It  is
    suggested, for example,  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide
    evidence  of  an  "emotional  journey"  in  terms  of  discovering  his
    sexuality.  It is further suggested that in other respects his  account
    was vague or evasive, for example in terms of  the  two  relationships,
    with E and Z.  Credibility issues are raised in terms of their  actions
    in relation to the appellant.

39. I do not consider it necessary to deal with each  and  every  point  on
    credibility raised in the refusal letter.   In  his  witness  statement
    dated 15 May 2014 the appellant provides responses to the issues raised
    in the refusal letter.  For example, in terms of the  appellant  having
    allegedly failed to provide evidence of  any  "emotional  journey",  he
    refers to his answer to  question  32  of  the  asylum  interview,  the
    question asking how did he feel when he realised he  was  attracted  to
    boys/men.  His answer was that at the age of 14 or 15 he did not  quite
    understand what it was and what was happening to him.  I note  that  at
    question 50 it is recorded that the appellant started  crying  and  was
    asked if  he  needed  a  break.   That  followed  questions  about  his
    relationship with  E.   At   para  20  of  the  witness  statement  the
    appellant states that he felt emotional at that point  because  he  was
    forced to disclose information which he had  not  disclosed  to  anyone
    else and that that was not easy for him.

40. As regards his relationship with E, in my view the appellant did give a
    satisfactory and credible account of that relationship from question 39
    of the asylum interview.  Similarly,  in  considering  his  answers  to
    questions about his relationship with Z, I am also  satisfied  that  he
    explained how that relationship started and developed.

41. Having considered for myself the whole of the asylum  interview,  I  do
    not agree with the criticisms made in the refusal letter in relation to
    the credibility of the appellant's claim to be gay.

42. So far as the witnesses' evidence is concerned, it could  not  be  said
    that their evidence was wholly consistent.  For example, there was some
    inconsistency between the evidence of CL and  BL  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's behaviour whilst out on social occasions,  for  example  in
    terms of whether he was confident enough to dance with other men.  GP's
    evidence suggested an intimate relationship between the  appellant  and
    BL, something which BL himself did  not  refer  to,  and  nor  did  the
    appellant or any other witness.

43. Furthermore, it does seem to  me  that  there  is  some  merit  in  the
    submission made on behalf of the respondent in terms of  the  appellant
    apparently  not  having  told  his  confidante,  BL,  about   his   two
    relationships in Albania.

44.  However,  when  dealing  with  issues  of   sexuality   and   intimate
    relationships it does seem to me to be important to  avoid  a  dogmatic
    insistence on  what  one  might  expect  of  individuals  in  terms  of
    disclosure or openness.   As  regards  inconsistency  in  the  evidence
    amongst witnesses, I do not regard the inconsistencies that  have  been
    referred to as being so significant as to undermine the credibility  of
    the appellant's account.

45. Furthermore, there is much more to be said for the consistency  amongst
    the  witnesses  as  to  the  appellant's  sexuality,  as   opposed   to
    inconsistency.  All the witnesses who gave  written  or  oral  evidence
    about the appellant's sexuality were consistent in their  view  of  his
    being gay.  Some witnesses had more experience than others in terms  of
    seeing the appellant on social occasions.  There was nothing whatsoever
    in the evidence to indicate that he had, or has, any attraction at  all
    towards women, and every indication that he is  attracted  to  men.   I
    also bear in mind that the Landers family are attuned and accustomed to
    same-sex relationships, as is evident from  the  family  background  in
    this respect.

46. Notwithstanding what is said about the ability of the appellant  to  be
    freer in the UK to become involved in a same-sex relationship  compared
    to in Albania, the lack of evidence of his having  engaged  in  such  a
    relationship in the UK I consider to be a neutral matter  in  terms  of
    the assessment of whether he is gay.

47. In the light of all the evidence, I am satisfied that the appellant has
    established that he is gay.  I am similarly satisfied that he has given
    a credible account of having been  involved  in  two  relationships  in
    Albania,  as  described  by  him.   I  accept  his   account   of   the
    circumstances in which he left Albania, namely that in his  village  he
    was afraid of being discovered as a gay person for fear of breaking the
    Kanun, as explained in his witness statement.  I accept that he was put
    under pressure, or  at  least  felt  under  pressure,  to  marry  which
    eventually led to his disclosure to his grandfather that  he  was  gay.
    He has given a credible account of his grandfather not initially having
    understood what the appellant had explained to him but that when he did
    understand, the appellant was slapped and expelled from the house.

48. The appellant  has  given  an  account  of  having  been  told  by  his
    grandfather that he would shoot him and  that  the  appellant  believed
    him.  I also accept that his grandfather said that he would not be able
    to face their cousins in the village or other people there  if  it  was
    found out that the appellant was gay.   I  similarly  accept  that  the
    appellant sought protection from the local police  but  that  they,  in
    effect, refused to help him.

49. In terms of how the appellant is reasonably likely to behave were he to
    be returned to  Albania,  in  the  light  of  my  positive  credibility
    assessment I accept that he would wish to live as an openly gay person.
      That  conclusion  follows  from  his  behaviour   in   Albania,   the
    circumstances in which he left and his account of his feelings  in  the
    UK of a gradual confidence in being open about his sexuality.  I accept
    that he has a fear of returning to his home area and where he would not
    be able to be open about his sexuality.

50. Whether or not in an area of internal relocation the appellant would be
    at risk of persecution, I do accept that he has a  subjective  fear  of
    such persecution.  In his witness statements he makes it clear that  he
    has a fear of being openly gay because of the risk  of  harm.   In  the
    light of my generally positive assessment of his credibility,  and  the
    consistency overall of his account, there is no reason  not  to  accept
    those assertions.  I also bear in mind that when asked  about  this  in
    his interview (question 121) he stated that he could  not  go  back  to
    Albania because of fear and that he would wish to express his sexuality
    openly but would feel he had to be discreet (question 122).

51. In my assessment of the appellant's credibility  I  have  reflected  on
    what is said in the skeleton argument, and in submissions, in  relation
    to the 'DSSH model' in terms of the assessment of sexuality  or  sexual
    identity.  Whilst it does appear  that  the  DSSH  model  has  achieved
    international recognition as a tool for assessment of sexual  identity,
    in the circumstances of this case I have found its  application  to  my
    judicial assessment of the appellant's credibility  of  limited  value.
    On a more general note, a judicial assessment of the credibility  of  a
    person's account of their sexual orientation or  sexual  identity  must
    necessarily take into account all the evidence put  forward,  including
    evidence from other witnesses and, in  appropriate  cases,  documentary
    evidence.  A whole range of other factors are also relevant to such  an
    assessment, for example the circumstances in which  a  person  makes  a
    claim for asylum.

52. Of course, highly relevant to the assessment of the appellant's  asylum
    claim is the decision in HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31.   At
    paragraph 82 Lord Hope said as follows:

         "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-
             founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,  the  tribunal
             must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the  evidence
             that he is gay,  or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
             potential persecutors in his country of nationality.

             If so, the  tribunal  must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
             satisfied on the available evidence that gay people who  lived
             openly would be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's
             country of nationality.

             If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
             applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

             If the applicant would in fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
             exposed to a real risk of persecution, then  he  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the  risk
             by living "discreetly".

             If, on  the  other  hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the
             applicant  would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and   so   avoid
             persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do so.

             If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would  choose  to
             live discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would
             wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting
             to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
             application should be rejected. Social pressures of that  kind
             do not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
             protection against them. Such a  person  has  no  well-founded
             fear of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing  to
             do with any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a
             way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted because he is gay.

             If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material
             reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would
             be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were  to
             live openly as a gay man, then, other things being equal,  his
             application should be accepted. Such  a  person  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution. To reject his application on  the
             ground  that  he  could  avoid  the  persecution   by   living
             discreetly would  be  to  defeat  the  very  right  which  the
             Convention exists to protect - his right to  live  freely  and
             openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By  admitting
             him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as  a
             gay man without fear of persecution, the receiving state gives
             effect to that right by affording the  applicant  a  surrogate
             for the protection  from  persecution  which  his  country  of
             nationality should have afforded him."

53. I do accept that on his return the appellant would  feel  the  need  to
    modify his behaviour out  of  a  fear  of  persecution,  regardless  of
    whether  such  a  fear  is  objectively  well-founded  in  an  area  of
    relocation, and about which there may need yet to be a finding, subject
    to further submissions.  I  accept  that  a  material  reason  for  his
    deciding  to  live  discreetly  on  his  return  would  be  a  fear  of
    persecution.  It is reasonably likely that social pressures in terms of
    the way he may be viewed by society in general, even away from his home
    area, would have a part to play in his behaviour.  However, as  I  have
    indicated, a material reason for his living discreetly  on  his  return
    would be a fear of persecution.

54. I am not satisfied that the evidence  establishes  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk from immediate or extended  family  members  from  his
    home area wherever he went in Albania.  There is little if anything  in
    the evidence to indicate that such a  risk  extends  to  the  whole  of
    Albania, and for example that he would not be able to  live  in  Tirana
    and be free from any risk from them there.

55. I indicated to the parties that I would give further directions  as  to
    the  future  conduct  of  the  appeal  once  my  initial  decision   on
    credibility was sent out.  I described in outline the likely  scope  of
    those directions.  The purpose of the directions is to give the parties
    the opportunity to make written submissions as to whether, in the light
    of my conclusions and taking  into  account  the  Home  Office  Country
    Information and Guidance report entitled "Albania:  Sexual  orientation
    and gender identity"  13  October  2014,  in  particular  at  paragraph
    1.3.15, the appellant is, without more,  entitled  to  refugee  status.
    For my part, I do not see it as essential that  a  further  hearing  be
    convened although if either party wishes to make  oral  submissions  in
    addition to the written submissions consequent upon  these  directions,
    then arrangements will be made for such a further hearing.

                                 DIRECTIONS

    (1)  No later than 21 days  from  the  date  of  promulgation  of  this
         decision, both parties are to file and serve written submissions as
         to the final disposal of the appeal on the basis of  the  facts  as
         found, including with reference  to  the  Country  Information  and
         Guidance Report for Albania dated 13 October 2014.

    (2)  Both  parties  have  liberty  to  reply  to  the  initial  written
         submissions of the other party no later than 7 days from receipt of
         the same.

    (3)  If either party wishes a further hearing for oral  submissions  to
         be made, the Upper Tribunal is to be notified of  that  request  no
         later than 28 days from the date of promulgation of this decision.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      3/02/15
