
[pic]
-
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02373/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     JK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Ruddy, Solicitor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Watters.  For  reasons  given  in
    his decision dated 15 June 2015, the  judge  allowed  the  Respondent's
    appeal on asylum grounds.  We shall refer  to  the  respondent  as  the
    claimant in these proceedings for ease.

 2. The claimant who was born in 1989 is a citizen of Sri Lanka and  is  of
    Tamil ethnicity.   He arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 May 2011  with
    a student visa and claimed asylum on 19 September 2013.  That claim was
    based on a fear from the authorities in Sri Lanka arising out of having
    undertaken activities for the Karuna Group and attendance at rallies in
    the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State rejected the claim and gave
    notice of her decision to remove the claimant as an illegal entrant  on
    27 March 2014.

 3. The claimant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by a judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal following a hearing on 13 March  2014.   On  27
    August 2014 Mr CM Ockelton, Vice President of the  Upper  Tribunal  set
    aside that decision and remitted the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for its further consideration.  This led to the hearing  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Watters on 10 June 2015.

 4. The grounds of challenge to his decision are (i) that the judge  failed
    to give reasons or any adequate reasons why the  claimant's  attendance
    at demonstrations in the United Kingdom would put  him  at  danger  and
    (ii) support for the Karuna faction was not a risk factor identified in
    the Country Guidance decision, GJ & Others (post-civil war:  returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT00319 (IAC).  The third  ground  is  less  well
    expressed and, as acknowledged by Mr Mullen, is  subsumed  within  (ii)
    above based on the assertion that no satisfactory explanation was given
    why the claimant would be of adverse interest  based  on  his  "alleged
    activities on behalf of the Karuna faction".

 5. With understandable candour Mr Mullen  accepted  the  weakness  of  the
    challenge and we consider that he was right to do so.  At [16]  of  his
    decision the judge began his analysis of the  evidence  and  issues  as
    follows:

         "At the start of the hearing both representatives accepted that the
         issue of the appellant's credibility was essentially  determinative
         of the appellant's appeal.  Both representatives  referred  to  the
         Country Guidance case of GJ & Others."

 6. The analysis undertaken by the judge focuses on the credibility  issues
    raised in the refusal  letter,  taking  account  of  all  the  evidence
    adduced in support including the medical evidence that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not properly taken into account at the  first  hearing  in
    May 2014, and at [28] reached this conclusion:

         "I regard the appellant's evidence as largely consistent  and  free
         from major discrepancies or inconsistencies.  I consider  that  the
         appellant has provided adequate explanations of the  issues  raised
         in relation to credibility both in the reasons for  refusal  letter
         and at the hearing.   The  appellant's  evidence  is  plausible  by
         reference to the background material in relation to Sri  Lanka.   I
         do not  consider  that  the  reasons  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         Respondent for rejecting the appellant's  evidence  as  lacking  in
         credibility should, for the reasons I have explained, be given  any
         significant weight.  Accordingly, I accept the appellant's  account
         as credible."

 7. In the following paragraph, the judge turned to GJ & Others  and  noted
    that the  claimant's  home  in  Sri  Lanka  had  been  visited  by  the
    authorities as they were aware of his participation  in  demonstrations
    in the  United  Kingdom.   He  concluded  "it  seems  to  me  that  the
    appellant's past history and his activities would result in  him  being
    perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as a threat to the  Sri  Lankan
    State or the Sri Lankan Government.  I considered that the  appellant's
    case falls within the current categories  of  risk  identified  by  the
    Tribunal in GJ & Others."

 8. The reasons letter accompanying the removal decision  clearly  set  out
    the Secretary of State's position in connection with  the  claim  made.
    It was not accepted that the claimant had been asked to carry guns  for
    the Karuna group and furthermore she gave her reasons why she  rejected
    his claimed interaction with  the  Pillayan  Group.   At  [30]  of  her
    decision letter, the Secretary of State set out her case based  on  the
    hypothesis of the account being accepted.  As  to  the  claimant's  ill
    treatment, no medical report had been provided to accompany photographs
    of injuries and there was no "objective evidence" to support or  refute
    the claimant's  account  of  having  been  beaten  in  detention.   His
    passport had been stamped by the Sri Lankan  authorities  on  departure
    and thus did not support his claim to be at risk from them.

 9. It was accepted by the Secretary of State in the  reasons  letter  that
    the claimant had attended the rally in London in July 2013, but it  was
    not accepted that this had raised his profile to be perceived  to  have
    had a significant role in relation to post conflict Tamil separatism.

10. There was no mention at all of the assertion now made in the grounds of
    challenge that support for the Karuna faction was not  a  risk  factor.
    There is no indication that the Secretary of State  sought  to  advance
    this case at either hearing, and in this regard we  note  that  at  the
    first hearing the presenting officer also accepted that the claim stood
    or  fell  on  credibility.   That  credibility  consideration  extended
    additionally  to  the  claim  that  the  authorities  had  visited  the
    claimant's home after he had  attended  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

11. The judge did all that was required by the parties which was  to  carry
    out an assessment of the  claimant's  credibility;  that  exercise  was
    determinative of the appeal.  There is no challenge to  the  methodical
    way in which the judge analysed the  evidence  and  reasons  given  for
    finding the claimant was truthful.

12. Accordingly, there was no need for the judge to consider  GJ  or  carry
    out any further risk assessment.  The brief terms in which  he  did  so
    cannot therefore be criticised.  Furthermore it  is  not  open  to  the
    Secretary of State to use the vehicle of appeal to  raise  a  point  of
    challenge that had not  been  previously  canvassed.   With  the  judge
    having found as credible the claim that the authorities had visited the
    claimant's home, we are satisfied that meets the concern  expressed  in
    the first ground referred to above.

13. Accordingly we are not persuaded that the grounds of challenge identify
    an error of law by the judge.  He reached a  legally  correct  decision
    confined to the basis on which the parties indicated  that  the  issues
    were to be resolved.  Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.

Signed   [pic]         Date 28 September 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
