
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02802/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     P V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs J Rothwell, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of India, appealed against the refusal of  the
    Respondent of her claim for international protection.  Her  appeal  was
    heard on 30 June 2015 by Judge Feeney sitting at  Taylor  House.   Both
    parties were represented, the Appellant by Mrs Rothwell.  In a decision
    of 13 July, promulgated on 24 July, 2015 the appeal  was  dismissed  on
    political asylum and human rights grounds  and  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

2.   Permission to appeal was refused by Judge Lambert on 17 August 2015  in
    the following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Feeney) who,  in  a
             decision promulgated on 24 July 2015 dismissed the Appellant's
             appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse
             leave to remain on human rights grounds.

         2.   The Judge found that neither the Appellant nor her husband  (a
             Sri Lankan with refugee status in the UK) would be at risk  in
             the Appellant's home  country  of  India  and  no  significant
             obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  reintegration  there   within
             paragraphs EX2 or 276ADE.  While the  circumstances  justified
             consideration of private life  under  Article  8  outside  the
             Rules, the  Appellant's  husband  could  continue  to  receive
             medical treatment in India and return of the whole  family  to
             India was proportionate and  consistent  with  the  children's
             best interests.

         3.   The grounds argue failure  to  consider  expert  evidence  and
             properly to apply the test in para EX2.  The decision does not
             support this. Having at paragraph 9 emphasised the absence  of
             reference in the decision to any particular piece of  evidence
             does not mean failure to consider it, at paragraphs 54 and  55
             the judge makes clear that she has considered the  Appellant's
             husband's medical condition and makes a reasoned finding  that
             there are 'no obstacles' to the Appellant returning (with  her
             husband) to India. The husband's mental condition  is  further
             considered at paragraphs 72-73.  The medical reports  did  not
             need to be referred to in terms. If  there  are  no  obstacles
             under EX1, the judge obviously does  not  need  to  go  on  to
             consider under EX2  what  obstacles  are  to  be  regarded  as
             'insurmountable'.

         4.   The remaining grounds take issue with the findings made by the
             Immigration Judge on the evidence, but in effect amount to  no
             more than disagreement with those findings and an  attempt  to
             reargue the Appellant's case.

         5.   No arguable error of law is disclosed by the application."

3.   On second application, permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Bruce
    on 5 October 2015 in the following concise terms:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal applied the wrong test
         and/or failed to taker material matters into account when assessing
         EX.1 read with EX.2. Permission is granted on all grounds."

4.   The error of law hearing before me took the form of submissions,  which
    I have taken into account, together with the application for permission
    to appeal.  I reserved my decision.

Determination

5.   The judge wrote that the fact that she had  not  specifically  referred
    to any particular piece of evidence did  not  mean  that  she  had  not
    considered  it  (paragraph  9).   She  summarised  the  mental   health
    difficulties  of  the  Appellant's  husband  and  her  care   for   him
    (paragraphs 32, 33).

         "I find that the Appellant's husband  would  not  receive  suitable
         medical care in India.  The medication he  takes  is  available  in
         India and crucially he has the support of his wife.": paragraph 54.



6.   In context this must be a typing error for,  for  example,  "I  do  not
    find that the Appellant's husband would not  receive  suitable  medical
    care in India".  She accepted part of the evidence about a visit by the
    Appellant's husband to his parents in  Sri  Lanka  but  rejected  other
    parts (paragraph 52).

         "Taking the above into account I am not satisfied  that  there  are
         any obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  returning  India.   I  am  not
         satisfied to the required standard that she will be  at  risk  from
         her father or the authorities for perceived LTTE membership.  I  am
         not satisfied that her husband  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
         India.": paragraph 55.

7.   There are areas of the evidence which the judge does not  address.   In
    determining the asylum appeal of her husband  in  October  2009,  Judge
    Stokes and Mr Thursby addressed  the  medical  evidence  about  him  at
    paragraphs 29 to 35, concluding at the end of  paragraph  35  that  "We
    accept his further written opinion that deportation to Sri Lanka  would
    have a massive deteriorating effect on the Appellant's mental state and
    that he was currently of significant suicidal risk."

8.   There were in evidence two reports by Dr  Saleh  Dhumad,  a  consultant
    psychiatrist, upon the Appellant's husband.  The first, of 14 May 2014,
    diagnosed recurrent depressive disorder, severe  depression  and  PTSD,
    with a significant suicide risk if his wife were removed.  The  second,
    of 24 June 2015, diagnosed continuing severe depression and  PTSD.  The
    Appellant's husband's condition had deteriorated over the  past  twelve
    months. He was not receiving the appropriate treatment and required  at
    least twelve months of therapy, in addition to the support of his wife,
    to  provide  the  social  and  cultural  support,  which  is  extremely
    important for his recovery. If she  were  forcibly  returned  to  India
    there would be a significant deterioration in his mental health coupled
    with significant increase in suicide risk,  which  would  be  extremely
    high.

9.   As stated, the judge alluded to the mental health difficulties  of  the
    Appellant's husband at paragraphs 32 and 33.  He wrote at paragraph  54
    that crucially the husband  had  the  support  of  his  wife;  this  Mr
    Whitwell submitted, was an allusion, albeit unattributed, to the second
    report of Dr Dhumad at paragraph 4(a).

10.   The  judge  was  aware  of  the  mental  health  difficulties  of  the
    Appellant's  husband.   But  she  accorded  them  very  little  weight,
    concluding that she was not satisfied that there were any obstacles  to
    the Appellant returning to India or that the husband would be  at  risk
    on return there.  She did not refer to, nor seemingly consider, the two
    medical reports. To write at paragraph 9 that to refer to a  particular
    piece of evidence did not mean that it had not been  considered  is  an
    inadequate  formula  to  establish  proper  consideration  of  material
    evidence.

11.  The Appellant's husband has refugee status following his  appeal  being
    allowed in November 2009, and has leave to remain in  the  UK  until  3
    June 2018.  Their two children have leave to remain  until  25  January
    2017 and a date in 2018 respectively. These  facts,  which  are  highly
    material,  do  not  appear  within  the  decision.  This  omission   is
    particularly significant because of the judicial finding  at  paragraph
    71 that this is a stable and cohesive family unit, inter-dependent  and
    mutually supportive.

12.  The judge commented at paragraph  73  that  there  is  no  evidence  of
    medical or social services' concern about the welfare of the  children.
    However there was no  reason  for  this  to  be  suggested,  since  the
    children were in the care of their mother.

13.  The judge omitted to take into account or to pay sufficient  regard  to
    areas of evidence which were so material as to be capable of  affecting
    her findings of fact and thus the outcome of the appeal.  This  was  an
    error of law.  The decision cannot stand, and is set aside.

14.  The appeal is to be reheard in its entirety, because of the nature  and
    volume of the evidence in the First-tier Tribunal, by any  judge  other
    than Judge Feeney.

Decision

15.  The original decision contains an error of law and is set aside.

16.  The appeal is to be reheard on all issues in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    by any judge other than Judge Feeney.


Signed   Dated: 9 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

