
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02518/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 December 2016                       |On 09 January 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               Ali Hamid Amin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel instructed by Turpin Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I make no order restricting publicity about this case. Although  its
       origins can be traced to an asylum  claim  the  issues  concern  the
       proper consideration of article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
       Human Rights.

    2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Iraq against the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  decision  of
       the Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain.

    3. The only point of contention before me  is  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was right to dismiss the appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights.  I am entirely  satisfied  that
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself.  The Judge  dealt
       with the case on the basis that the appellant did not have leave  to
       be in the United Kingdom, but he did.   The  appellant  was  in  the
       United  Kingdom  with  discretionary  leave   when   he   made   his
       application.  It is trite  law  that  that  leave  was  extended  by
       Section 3C of the 1971 Act and so although it took the Secretary  of
       State something like three years to actually  make  a  decision  the
       Appellant had "3C leave"  which  extended  his  discretionary  leave
       throughout that period.

    4. It follows therefore that the  whole  approach  to  the  case  under
       Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights is  just  wrong
       and it has to be set aside if a proper consideration might have made
       a difference and I am satisfied that it might have made a difference
       in the sense that it is possible that a properly  directed  Tribunal
       might allow the appeal with all the  information  before  it.   That
       part of the case has proved entirely straightforward.

    5. I have had more difficulty  with  an  argument  put  forward  by  Ms
       Radford about the operation of the appropriate policies  determining
       the likelihood of his discretionary leave being continued.   I  have
       been given something called Section 10 Transitional Arrangements but
       I have not been given a copy of the discretionary  leave  policy  in
       force at the relevant time which was before  9  July  2012  when,  I
       assume, something of significance happened.  It is  clear  that  the
       discretionary leave given in this case was given under the policy in
       force before 9 July 2012 and it is regrettable that a copy  of  that
       policy was not put before me although it might be that the terms  of
       that policy are now for all practical purposes untraceable because I
       know that Ms Radford has tried to find it.

    6.  There  is  a  convoluting  argument  before  me  suggesting,  as  I
       understand it, that a person who has  in  fact  accrued  six  years'
       discretionary leave should be  treated  as  a  person  eligible  for
       further leave but I find that  is  based  on  a  misreading  of  the
       policy.  I understand Ms Radford's submission that the part  of  the
       policy referring to a person being  given  a  further  three  years'
       discretionary leave should apply to a person  who  has  already  got
       three years, bringing the total up to six years, but I do not accept
       that the mere fact that a person has accumulated a full  six  years'
       discretionary leave puts him in the position that Ms Radford says he
       is in, namely that of a person prima facie eligible  to  remain.   I
       say that because of the wording of  the  policy  beginning  at  10.1
       which states:

  "Those granted leave under the DL policy in force before 9 July 2012 will
  normally  continue  to  be  dealt  with  under  that  policy  through  to
  settlement if they continue to qualify for  further  leave  on  the  same
  basis as their original DL was  granted  (normally  they  would  be  then
  eligible to apply for settlement after accruing six years' continuous  DL
  ...)."

    7. The critical words to my mind are "if they continue to  qualify  for
       further leave on the same basis as their original DL  was  granted".
       This appellant clearly does not.  His original  discretionary  leave
       was granted because he was a minor and he is not  a  minor  anymore.
       It follows that I cannot agree that he is to be dealt with as if  he
       were a person entitled to remain but he should not have  been  dealt
       with as a person in the United Kingdom without permission because he
       had permission and that clearly skewed the approach to Article 8.

    8. I listened to outlined submissions from Ms Radford to help me decide
       if it was right for me to go ahead and remake the  decision  that  I
       set aside.  I decided it would not be right.  This is a case where I
       find that the appellant should be entitled to the right to  preserve
       all avenues of appeal.  It is not his fault he did not  have  proper
       consideration of his case at the last hearing.  It follows therefore
       that although I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  I
       cannot make any progress beyond directing that  the  case  be  heard
       again in the First-tier which will give directions  for  the  proper
       progress of the case.



Decision

    9. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its  decision  and
       order  that  the  appeal  be  determined  again  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 January 2017                 |

