
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02214/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Date Sent                  |
|On 30 May 2013                                  |On 12 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                          TARISAI HALIYANA MASHAWI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Targett-Parker, Counsel (30 May)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer (30 May
                  2013)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Smith made
    following a hearing at Newport on 16th March 2010.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born  on  17th  May  1981.   She
    entered the UK as a visitor in December  2001  and  claimed  asylum  in
    January 2010.  The refusal of her claim is the subject  of  the  appeal
    before the judge.

 3. The judge made a series of adverse  findings  and  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had cynically tried to bring about the situation whereby  she
    would be granted asylum because of anti-regime activities. He  accepted
    that she had joined the Bournemouth branch of the  ROHR  very  recently
    but said that any interest that she had in the  organisation  had  come
    about since the rejection of her appeal against the refusal of  a  visa
    in November 2009.  She was able to  demonstrate  only  a  very  limited
    knowledge of the ROHR. He found that she did not attend a demonstration
    by them in Liverpool as claimed because she was unable to give even  an
    approximation of where it had taken  place.  She  had  also  failed  to
    provide a subscription card, and although there was a letter dated  4th
    March 2010 from the ROHR interim Chairperson, he gave it little  weight
    both because the author was not available to give evidence and  because
    there was a discrepancy between the date given in the  letter  and  the
    Appellant's evidence as to  when  she  began  her  involvement  in  the
    organisation.

 4. The judge took into account the fact that the Appellant  had  knowingly
    provided forged documents in respect of a previous application.

 5. The judge noted that the Appellant had returned to  Zimbabwe  on  three
    occasions,  the  last  being  in  2006,  and  did  not  encounter   any
    difficulties with the Zimbabwean regime. He considered the then country
    guidance case of RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083 and said
    there was  nothing  before  him  to  suggest  that  there  was  a  real
    possibility that the authorities in Zimbabwe would know of  her  having
    attended meetings of the ROHR nor that any of the photographs which had
    been taken of her  would  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities.

 6. The judge considered the Appellant's  claim  to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds.  He said that her relationship with the man she said  was  her
    boyfriend was not a close one.  He had  not  attended  the  hearing  in
    order to give evidence on her behalf.  Neither did he accept that there
    was a family tie in  the  UK  with  her  aunt  -  the  Appellant  lives
    independently with friends.  He accepted that she enjoyed private life,
    having been in the UK for some eight years, but concluded that  removal
    would not be disproportionate.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law in concluding that the Appellant was not  credible  in
    respect of her claimed commitment to the ROHR, that the  Appellant  had
    shown that she would be unable to show loyalty to the regime on  return
    and had misapplied the principles of Razgar.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by me on 20th July 2010.   It  was  my
    view that the judge was fully entitled to reach the adverse credibility
    findings which he did for the reasons which he gave but I accepted that
    it was arguable that the Immigration Judge did not properly  apply  the
    country guidance case of RN.

 9. Directions were given to the parties on 13th October 2010 stating  that
    the  Upper  Tribunal  would  hear  submissions  for  the   purpose   of
    determining whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law  and,
    if one was established, the Upper Tribunal would be able to remake  the
    decision without any further hearing.

10. Thereafter  the  matter  seems  to  have  gone  into  abeyance  for  an
    inexplicable period  of  almost  three  years.   Hearing  notices  were
    finally sent out on 15th March 2013.

11. Prior to the hearing the  Appellant's  present  representatives  stated
    that they were yet to receive a complete set of the Appellant's  papers
    as well as the Respondent's bundle because  they  had  been  unable  to
    obtain her previous file from her former representatives.   Furthermore
    the Chairperson of the ROHR would not be available  to  give  evidence.
    They asked for an adjournment.

Submissions

12. Mr Haywood stated at the outset that whilst he was  in  a  position  to
    deal with the error of law hearing he would not be able to proceed to a
    full hearing of this appeal because his instructing solicitors had  not
    been  able  to   obtain   the   relevant   papers   from   the   former
    representatives, and in any event were  unable  to  obtain  funding  to
    prepare for a full hearing until the  error  of  law  had  been  found.
    There had been a substantial delay between the first hearing  and  now,
    and matters had moved on, and he needed to be in a position to  present
    the case to the basis of the facts as they currently stand.  He  relied
    on his grounds and submitted that the error of law  was  identified  in
    the grant of permission.  The judge had not made any  decision  on  the
    central issue in this case, namely whether the Appellant would be in  a
    position to demonstrate loyalty to the regime on return.

13. Mr Avery accepted that the judge had not properly considered  the  case
    of RN but in his view the error was not material because, on the  basis
    of the present country guidance and the facts as found  by  the  judge,
    the Appellant could not succeed.

Findings

14. In RN, which was applicable at the time of the  judge's  decision,  the
    Tribunal held that

         "A person who is unable to demonstrate  that  he  is  a  member  or
         supporter of ZANU-PF or otherwise loyal to or associated  with  the
         regime when asked to do so by any of the  various  groups  deployed
         across the  country  by  the  Zimbabwean  regime  to  maintain  its
         authority and hold on power will be at real risk of being subjected
         to ill-treatment amounting to persecution and serious harm such  as
         to infringe Article 3 of the ECHR.

         That risk arises throughout the country in  both  urban  and  rural
         areas.  ...

         It remains the position in our judgment that a person returning  to
         his home area from the UK  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  will  not
         generally be at risk on that account alone, although in some  cases
         that may in fact be sufficient to give rise to a  real  risk.  Each
         case will turn on its own facts and the particular circumstances of
         the individual are to be assessed as a whole. If such a person (and
         as we explain below there may be a not insignificant number) is  in
         fact associated with the regime or is otherwise a person who  would
         be returning to a milieu where loyalty to the regime is assumed, he
         will not be at any real risk simply because he has  spent  time  in
         the UK and sought to extend his  stay  by  making  a  false  asylum
         claim.

         But, apart from in those circumstances, having made an unsuccessful
         asylum claim in the UK will make it very difficult for the returnee
         to demonstrate the loyalty to  the  regime  and  the  ruling  party
         necessary to avoid the risk of serious harm at the hands of the War
         Veterans or militias that are likely to be  encountered  either  on
         the way to the home area or after having returned  there.  This  is
         because, even if such a person is not returning to one of the areas
         where the risk arises simply from being resident there, he will  be
         unable to demonstrate that he voted for the ZANU-PF and so  he  may
         be assumed  to  be  a  supporter  of  the  opposition,  that  being
         sufficient to give rise to a real risk of being subjected  to  ill-
         treatment such as to infringe Article 3."

15. The judge did not address the central question in  the  appeal,  namely
    whether the Appellant would in fact be in  a  position  to  demonstrate
    loyalty on return.  That is an error of law. The decision is set aside.



16. With respect to the remaking of the decision, my initial view was  that
    it ought to be possible to move straight on to decide the appeal on the
    basis of the findings of the Immigration Judge since there is no  error
    of law in his findings of fact which were  plainly  open  to  him.   Mr
    Haywood opened his submissions by stating that the judge was  wrong  to
    say that little weight ought to be given to the letter from  the  ROHR,
    but that in itself is an acknowledgement that he merely disagrees  with
    the decision. The question of weight  is  entirely  a  matter  for  the
    assessment of the judge, who carefully considered all of  the  relevant
    evidence and came to conclusions  based  on  that  evidence.  There  is
    nothing in the grounds which  establishes  any  error  in  the  judge's
    application of Razgar or his approach to the decision on Article 8.

17. The findings of fact in the First-tier Tribunal will  be  the  starting
    point for the resumption of this case on the 30th May 2013 before Mrs D
    Taylor at Field House. The Appellant is directed to ensure that all  of
    the evidence upon which she seeks to  rely  is  served  upon  both  the
    Tribunal and the Respondent 7 days before that hearing. There  will  be
    no further adjournment of this matter.

The Resumed Hearing

18. At the resumed hearing I heard oral evidence from the  Appellant,  from
    the Chair of ROHR,  Ephraim  Tapa  and  the  Appellant's  aunt,  Jemina
    Nyatsambo.  The Appellant produced two bundles  of  papers.  The  first
    includes witness statements, the death certificate of  her  father  and
    evidence that her sister is outside Zimbabwe. The second  supplementary
    bundle relates to the Appellant's activities with the ROHR  in  the  UK
    and background evidence from Zimbabwe.  I was  also  given  a  skeleton
    argument by Ms Targett-Parker and a copy of  CM  (EM  country  guidance
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059.

The Appellant's Case

19. The Appellant accepted in  her  oral  evidence  that  her  interest  in
    politics started after her arrival in the UK and that, prior to  coming
    here, she had no previous fear of persecution in Zimbabwe.   She  first
    came to the UK  in  2001  as  a  visitor  and  then  decided  to  study
    accountancy here.  She has completed all of her accountancy exams  save
    for one.  Her mother died very shortly after she came and her father in
    2011.  She has no remaining siblings in Zimbabwe and all of her friends
    are here.  She accepted that from the start she had wanted to  stay  in
    the UK and never considered going  back  because  she  had  nothing  to
    return to in Zimbabwe.

20. The Appellant says that her brother was assaulted by  ZANU-PF  in  2004
    but it is clear that this did not play any part in  her  present  claim
    because she subsequently went back  to  Zimbabwe  for  three  weeks  in
    August 2006.

21. The Appellant acknowledged that she did provide forged bank  statements
    but says that she allowed herself to be misled by  crooked  immigration
    advisors and she otherwise has an unblemished  record  of  honesty  and
    integrity.

22. It is her case that she first attended a Zimbabwe vigil  in  London  in
    2007 and joined the Bournemouth branch of the ROHR in January 2009.

23. The Appellant has produced evidence of her involvement with Bournemouth
    ROHR.  There is a copy of the Bournemouth minutes dated 29th  May  2010
    when the Appellant was introduced as a new member.  She says that  this
    was a typing error and a mistake since she had been with the group  for
    over a year.  There is  evidence  of  her  attendance  at  meetings  in
    January and February 2010.

24. No minutes had been produced for the group between  November  2010  and
    September  2012  because  none  were  held  during  that  period.   The
    Appellant said that there were issues with the  HQ  and  people  became
    discouraged.  Mr Tapa in his evidence said that during that time  there
    was a disinformation campaign against him  which  led  to  difficulties
    within the organisation.

25. The Appellant was elected as secretary of the Bournemouth branch on 7th
    August 2010.  Mr Tapa, who is the founder and  president  of  the  ROHR
    said that he knew the Appellant as a member of the  Bournemouth  branch
    having first met her in 2009 and again in 2010 when she was elected  to
    the position of branch secretary.  He had also seen her at a number  of
    vigils and fundraising events.  He said that he did not  give  evidence
    on behalf  of  all  members  of  the  ROHR  but  only  outstanding  and
    consistent members.  The Appellant had been consistent  and  loyal  and
    was passionate about the human rights cause and he  felt  compelled  to
    support her.

26. He said that the purpose of the organisation was to raise awareness  of
    human rights abuses and to sponsor resistance  activities  in  Zimbabwe
    and to provide a voice to the voiceless there.  If active members  were
    sent back they would be targeted.  The organisation had had to move its
    head office  five  times  in  Zimbabwe  because  of  targeting.   Their
    activists were killed in 2008 and his own son was arrested in 2011 when
    he returned to Zimbabwe.  His younger brother  was  also  detained  for
    half a day at the airport.

27. Mr Tapa said that the authorities  could  find  information  about  the
    organisation from the internet.  The Appellant has provided a number of
    examples  of  her  being  quoted  on  zimpolitics.net  and  there   are
    photographs of her taken with other activists at ROHR gatherings in the
    UK  on the same website and on a friend's flickr account.

28. It was put to the  Appellant  and  to  Mr  Tapa  that  the  Appellant's
    knowledge of the ROHR was lacking when she was  interviewed.   Mr  Tapa
    said that many members did not know  every  detail  because  they  were
    focusing on human rights abuse.

The Respondent's Case

29. The Respondent does not accept that the  Appellant  is  a  genuine  and
    committed human rights activist.

30. At her interview she was asked whether the ROHR had  a  motto  and  the
    Appellant said that she did not think that  it  did.   However  on  the
    ROHR's site its motto is said  to  be  "peace,  justice  and  freedom".
    Moreover the motto is  imprinted  on  all  ROHR  T-shirts.   She  ought
    therefore to have been aware of the words of the motto or at the  least
    be aware that it actually exists.  Furthermore  she  was  not  able  to
    identify the emblem of the ROHR which is the scales of justice which is
    on the website and imprinted on the T-shirts.

31. The Appellant was unable to identify the approximate  location  of  the
    demonstration which she said she had attended in Liverpool nor to  have
    been able to recall the date or even the approximate month. She claimed
    to be a paid-up member of the ROHR but did not possess  a  subscription
    card at the point of he asylum interview on 13th January 2010 and  gave
    discrepant explanations for  the  failure  to  produce  the  card.  Her
    answers at interview were basic, generalised and non-specific  and  did
    not illustrate that she had undertaken membership activities  with  the
    ROHR as claimed.

32. The Respondent's view is that the Appellant's activities with the  ROHR
    were undertaken solely with a view to supporting her asylum claim which
    was made on 5th January 2010, shortly after the dismissal of her appeal
    against the refusal to further renew her student visa on  9th  November
    2009.  Her credibility was damaged further  because  she  had  produced
    forged bank statements in support of her application for  an  extension
    of her stay in the UK as a student.





Findings and Conclusions

33. There is no documentary evidence to support the  Appellant's  assertion
    that she had any interest in politics prior to 2010 when  records  from
    the Bournemouth branch of the  ROHR  show  that  she  began  to  attend
    meetings there.  I find that she joined  the  branch  in  January  2010
    which is not inconsistent with her being mentioned in  the  minutes  of
    May 2010 as being a new member.  Mr Tapa said that he thought  that  he
    first met her in 2009 but there is no reason why he should  remember  a
    meeting with her in 2009 and the evidence points to her  only  becoming
    involved in the organisation at the point when she was claiming asylum.
    The Appellant is an intelligent young woman,  having  almost  completed
    her accountancy exams.  Her lack of knowledge of the ROHR when she  was
    interviewed on 5th January 2010 is consistent with her only having very
    recent involvement with the organisation.

34. The findings of Immigration Judge  Smith  are  my  starting  point  and
    nothing in the evidence today would  cause  me  to  depart  from  those
    findings, namely that the Appellant's motivation for joining  the  ROHR
    was in order to support a late  claim  for  asylum  occasioned  by  the
    dismissal of her appeal against the refusal to renew her student  visa.
    Like Judge Smith I reject the evidence that the Appellant has  had  any
    involvement in demonstrations for the ROHR since 2007 and find that her
    involvement began either in very late 2009 or more probably 2010.

35. The evidence does show however that since August 2010 the Appellant has
    been the Bournemouth branch secretary  of  the  ROHR  albeit  that  the
    branch has not been particularly active and there was a lengthy  period
    when no meetings at all were  held.   Most  importantly,  Ephraim  Tapa
    would not have taken time away from his work as a probation officer  in
    order to attend the Tribunal hearing had he not genuinely believed that
    the Appellant was a committed member of the organisation and, as he put
    it, passionate about human rights causes.  The Appellant herself gave a
    significant  flavour  of  that  commitment  in  her  evidence.   I  was
    impressed with the evidence of  Mr  Tapa  who  clearly  himself  has  a
    significant profile.

36. I therefore conclude that at the time of her interview  and  indeed  at
    the time of her previous hearing in March 2010 the Appellant's interest
    in the ROHR was primarily brought about by her express wish  to  remain
    in the UK since she had little to return to in Zimbabwe.  However  over
    the intervening period, during which there was an  extensive  delay  on
    the part of the Tribunal, I accept that the Appellant's  commitment  to
    the cause of ending human rights abuse in Zimbabwe  has  grown  and  is
    sincere.

37. Mr Nath in his submissions  accepted  that  the  ROHR  was  a  credible
    organisation although he said that it was  not  effective  in  relaying
    information to its members, organisation had some  failings  and  there
    was  no  evidence  that  members  returning   to   Zimbabwe   had   any
    difficulties.  It would be safe for the Appellant to live  in  Zimbabwe
    having gained substantial  experience  in  the  UK  and  almost  having
    qualified as an accountant.

38. The assessment of risk on return must be made in  accordance  with  the
    Tribunal's guidance in CM.  Ms Targett-Parker undertook to do a  search
    of that case for references to the ROHR but, since she did not  contact
    my clerk with the result of her search, I have to conclude  that  there
    are no specific references in the country guidance case.

39. In CM the Tribunal re-affirmed the country guidance as set out in EM  &
    Others (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 which  found  that  there
    had been a durable change since RN (returnees) Zimbabwe CG  2008  UKAIT
    00083 which was the country guidance case governing the decision by the
    Immigration Judge.  As a general matter there  was  significantly  less
    politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe compared with the  situation
    considered by the AIT in RN and in particular the evidence did not show
    that the return of a failed  asylum  seeker  from  the  UK,  having  no
    significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing a real risk
    of having to demonstrate loyalty to  the  ZANU-PF.   The  position  was
    otherwise in the case of a person without ZANU-PF connections returning
    from the UK after a significant absence to a rural area of Zimbabwe.

40. The Tribunal found that a returnee to Harare would in general  face  no
    significant difficulties if going to a low density  or  medium  density
    area.   Whilst the socio-economic situation in high  density  areas  is
    more challenging in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
    not face significant problems there including a loyalty test unless her
    or she has a significant MDC profile which might cause him  or  her  to
    feature on a list of those targeted for harassment or  would  otherwise
    engage in political activities likely to attract the adverse  attention
    of ZANU-PF or would be reasonably likely to engage in  such  activities
    but for a fear of thereby coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

41. The delay by the Tribunal in listing this case for over three years has
    enabled the Appellant to develop a genuine commitment to the  ROHR  and
    there is evidence of that commitment on the internet both  in  relation
    to her position as secretary of the Bournemouth  branch  and  also  her
    support for the organisation more widely.  I accept that she  does  not
    have immediate family to return to in  Harare  and  that  she  has  not
    completed her accountancy qualifications.  She has been  working  as  a
    healthcare assistant in the UK.  In these circumstances  she  may  well
    have to live in a high density area and would be returning to a  milieu
    in  which  problems  with  ZANU-PF  may  arise.   The   Appellant   has
    demonstrated commitment to the human rights cause which would  continue
    in Zimbabwe.  She is a person who  might  be  required  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to ZANU-PF and would be unable to do so.

42. It is the Appellant's case that the danger also arises at the  airport.
    She says that her relatively prominent role within the organisation  as
    secretary of the Bournemouth branch would put her  at  risk  since  the
    ROHR is monitored by ZANU-PF organisations. She has written an  article
    posted on the website  www.zimpolitics.net  and  her  presence  at  the
    meetings and in the photographs show that  she  has  been  involved  in
    recent anti-regime activity. The Tribunal in CM reaffirmed the guidance
    in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT  00094  which
    held  that  the  process  of  screening  returning  passengers  is   an
    intelligence led process and the CIO  will  generally  have  identified
    from the passenger manifest in advance, based upon  such  intelligence,
    those passengers in whom there is any possible interest.   There  is  a
    real  possibility  that  the  Appellant's  name  would  come  to  their
    attention as a consequence of her activities in the UK. Her  activities
    for the ROHR in the UK, as published on the internet, may have led  her
    to be featured on a list of those targeted for  harassment.   I  accept
    the evidence of Mr Tapa that his relatives were targeted on return  and
    whilst they would in all likelihood have a higher profile than that  of
    the Appellant, she  is  a  young  female  without  family  support  and
    vulnerable.

43. The Appellant therefore succeeds on the basis that she has demonstrated
    a real possibility of risk of ill-treatment on return.

Decision

44. The decision of  the  original  judge  is  set  aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed  on  asylum
    grounds.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

