
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02889/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th August 2018                            |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     W I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 9 November 2017, I  set  aside  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge (FtT) A A Wilson for material error  of  law.
    Judge Wilson had dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a  decision
    made by the respondent on 4 February 2015 refusing his application  for
    international protection.  The appellant's  original  appeal  had  been
    heard by Judge Clarke of the FtT in June 2015 but Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Archer set aside Judge Clarke's decision and remitted it  to  the
    FtT for a de novo hearing.  The error of law  hearing  before  me  took
    place on 16 October 2017. It is now my task to re-make the decision  on
    appeal.

2.   Central to the appellant's asylum claim is his contention that the  Sri
    Lankan authorities had taken out an arrest warrant against him.  At the
    hearing before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer (who was  considering
    the decision of Judge Clarke) the appellant produced documents  from  a
    Sri Lankan attorney and an arrest  warrant.   Following  DUTJ  Archer's
    decision, the respondent took steps to verify the  arrest  warrant  and
    filed a verification report dated 8 August 2016 stating that the arrest
    warrant relied upon by the appellant was not genuine.  The report noted
    that  a  first  telephone  contact  with  the  Registrar  of   Puttalam
    Magistrates Court met with a  request  for  a  written  request  to  be
    submitted.  The report then gave the reference to this request  in  PDF
    form with a number.  The report then stated:

         "Contacted  the  Registrar  [who]  acknowledged  receipt   of   the
         verification request.  She confirmed the Warrant of Arrest document
         submitted to be a false document and stated that it  had  not  been
         issued by the Puttalam Magistrates Court".

     It concluded that the document was not  genuine.   The  appellant  then
    lodged a letter from the attorney-at-law (who  had  sent  the  original
    arrest warrant), Mr A M Kamarudeen, disputing the verification  report.
    Judge Wilson did not accept that this document was genuine.  In setting
    aside Judge Wilson's decision, I expressed concern  about  the  judge's
    reason for preferring  the  verification  report  over  the  attorney's
    evidence, noting that "the evidence from  the  registrar,  unlike  that
    from the attorney, was not communicated in writing and the verification
    report relied on what was claimed to have been said in a  phone  call".
    I stated:

         "Given that the respondent was alleging not just unreliability  but
         fraud, the onus was on the respondent to prove fraud and I  do  not
         consider that a report  simply  stating  what  was  said  during  a
         telephone call with the registrar's office  discharges  that  onus.
         There is no explanation proffered by the  respondent  for  why  the
         information said to have been conveyed by telephone was not sent in
         writing, as one would expect of such a report.  I also  noted  that
         points  raised  by  the   appellant's   representatives   regarding
         shortcomings of the DVR had force (inter alia, failure to name  the
         source of the information; failing to disclose the written  request
         for verification; the  lack  of  any  written  statement  from  the
         registrar confirming what is alleged; the lack of information about
         the person who checked the record and how qualified they were)."

3.   In light of the clear difference in view between the parties  over  the
    authenticity and reliability of the arrest  warrant  I  directed  on  9
    November 2017 that the respondent adduce further evidence  relating  to
    the alleged inauthenticity of the arrest warrant (whether in  the  form
    of an amended document verification report or otherwise); and that  the
    appellant produce further evidence  in  response.   I  indicated  that,
    given the accepted fact that Attorney Kamarudeen was a  friend  of  the
    appellant, the appellant's representative should consider approaching a
    different attorney to comment on the arrest warrant and what was  known
    as regards its authenticity.

4.   On 15 November 2017 the respondent enclosed  an  FCO  report  dated  16
    October 2017 stating that an official of the  British  High  Commission
    conducted a site visit on the same date "to verify what purports to  be
    Court documents which  include  a  warrant  of  arrest  issued  by  the
    Puttalam Magistrates Court, to the above-named subject [the  appellant]
    with the reference number B3347/09.  The report goes on to say:

         "On arrival I spoke to the Registrar and introduced us as officials
         from the BHC, Colombo.  I explained that we wished to  check  their
         records to see what was recorded against court reference  B3347/09.
         The court documents were not with me nor did I divulge any personal
         details of the subject such as his name or address.


         A clerk in  the  Registrar  records  room  physically  located  the
         register and manually searched  the  records  confirming  that  the
         reference number provided did not relate to any case heard  by  the
         Puttalam Magistrates Court in 2009.  He further went  on  to  state
         that the case references for 2009 went up to 'number 1371' and that
         there were no case numbers beyond  '1371'.   The  report  concluded
         that 'the documents provided by the subject are not genuine ... The
         case reference number does not exist.'"

5.   The appellant's representatives produced a letter from Attorney S  I  M
    Hismi dated 29 November 2017.  It stated that the method adopted by the
    author of the DVR "breaches the strict procedures in place" since:

         "No one, not even an official from a diplomatic mission, can verify
         the securely held court documents in the manner  described  in  the
         report ... There is no way that a  Registrar  of  the  court  would
         readily comply with the request of a stranger  and  freely  provide
         the information as claimed in the report."

     The letter also took issue with the timing  of  the  report,  it  being
    contended that the court closes at 4.30 and the official could not have
    got from Colombo to Puttalam before 6.30 (counting back from end of the
    UT hearing in London earlier that day).  The letter went on to say that
    "I have now verified the authenticity of the  arrest  warrant  via  the
    official channel" and attaches a court receipt  "as  the  proof  of  my
    attending and making the official  application  to  verify  the  arrest
    warrant".

6.   At the resumed hearing before me on 6 August 2018, the  appellant  gave
    evidence.  Having confirmed that his witness statement of 19 June  2015
    was true and correct, he was then tendered for  cross-examination.   In
    reply to Mr Bramble's questions he stated that  he  had  been  detained
    nearly eleven months (Jan-Nov 2009) and that following his detention in
    2009 during which he was beaten he had scars immediately after.  He had
    straightaway upon release sought the help of a herbal  doctor,  he  had
    not brought papers relating to this with him;  he  believed  they  were
    with his mother.  Asked if he had been found not guilty  he  said  yes,
    there was not enough evidence.  He had  got  bail.   There  was  not  a
    decision either way, his case was still pending.  Mr  Bramble  reminded
    him what he had said in his interview at Q69: ("The court decided I did
    not sell the medicine to the LTTE") and Q152  ("I  was  not  charged").
    The appellant replied that he was granted bail on the basis  that  they
    withdrew the charges "against me for lack of evidence".  Asked  why  he
    had not gone to the UK at the same time as his wife and  children,  the
    appellant said that his funds were not sufficient.

7.   Mr Bramble asked the appellant if he was still  reporting  pursuant  to
    his  bail  conditions  between  November  2009  and  March  2012.   The
    appellant said he did not report between 2009 and May  2010  (he  later
    mentioned five dates on which he had reported), but in May 2010 he  was
    told he did not need to report, although the court case continued.   In
    March 2012 they had said he should report  again.   At  that  point  he
    decided to leave and go to Colombo.

8.   Mr Bramble asked why would the authorities have been interested in  him
    in March 2012.  The appellant said that after the end of the civil  war
    the authorities were keeping an eye out for any resurgence of the LTTE.
     The appellant said the authorities had  reintroduced  a  law  in  2012
    making it possible to require suspects  to  report.   Asked  about  the
    documents at p.51 concerning a court attendance on 9 August 2011 (which
    only noted  his  lawyer  as  attending),  the  appellant  said  he  had
    attended.  He said it may have been an error by the translator  not  to
    mention that both he and his lawyer attended.

9.   Asked why he had decided not to report in  March  2012,  the  appellant
    said he had heard  accounts  of  a  man  who  had  gone  missing  after
    reporting.

10.  The appellant confirmed  that  he  had  no  link  with  the  LTTE;  his
    connection was solely with Dr Mendes.

11.  In relation to the appellant's statement at Q41  (that  these  problems
    "affected me mentally"), Mr Bramble asked the appellant if he  had  any
    treatment for mental health issues.  The appellant said  a  doctor  had
    prescribed him sleeping pills; he could find the records if needed.

12.  Asked how and when he had first heard about  the  arrest  warrant,  the
    appellant said his mother had phoned him after the authorities had come
    to her house in 2012.  Mr Bramble put to the appellant that there would
    be no reason for the authorities to go to his house if he had  attended
    court on 6 March  2012.   The  appellant  said  he  had  not  gone  for
    reporting in March.  The arrest warrant was issued on 20  October  2012
    (the same day).  He was not  checked  at  the  airport.   He  left  the
    country in October 2012.

13.  The airport authorities were not aware of his  case.   The  people  who
    had  come  to  his  mother's  house  were  "white  van"  plain  clothes
    policemen; no-one knew the way they operated.

14.  In re-examination the appellant said that the beatings he had  suffered
    in 2009 were in Ngombo jail, they were in  the  form  of  kickings  and
    being hit with batons; when he was subsequently moved to an army  camp,
    they only verbally abused him.  Asked why he had not sought  a  medical
    report about the scarring, he said he had suffered from  the  beatings.
    The appellant said he had just wanted to flee.  Asked why  he  had  not
    sought one when he got to the UK, he said he did not think  any  doctor
    would give him one; three years had gone by by then.

Submissions

15.  Mr Bramble submitted that if I found the  appellant  credible,  he  was
    entitled to succeed as he would then  fall  within  the  GJ  CG  [2013]
    000319 (AC) risk categories.  However, he said  that  the  respondent's
    issues regarding the credibility of the  appellant's  account  remained
    valid.  The appellant had failed to produce medical evidence  regarding
    his claimed beatings in detention in 2009 and his explanation for  that
    failure was unsatisfactory.  The appellant's account  of  being  issued
    with an arrest warrant three years after a court had found he  had  not
    assisted the LTTE was implausible.

16.  Ms Anzani submitted that the  appellant's  evidence  had  been  broadly
    consistent, notwithstanding the relevant events  had  happened  a  long
    time ago.  The appellant was still  able  to  give  clear  and  concise
    evidence.  As regards the injuries the appellant suffered in detention,
    it was more than possible they had not resulted in scars and  that  the
    medical treatment he received  -  painkillers  -  was  the  appropriate
    treatment.  His evidence that when he came to the UK his scars were  no
    longer visible was not inherently implausible.  The appellant had dealt
    with all the issues raised by the respondent regarding his  credibility
    in the refusal decision.

17.  Ms Anzani asked that I find the respondent had  failed  to  prove  that
    the appellant's arrest warrant  and  the  related  court  and  attorney
    documentation  was  false.   There  were  serious  concerns  about  the
    procedures followed by  the  British  High  Commission  in  seeking  to
    establish whether the arrest warrant was authentic or not.  The further
    report  was  curious  in  not  saying  that  the  arrest  warrant   was
    inauthentic.  The timing of  the  second  report  also  raised  serious
    questions since it is not clear how the official concerned  could  have
    visited the court and spoken to the Registrar on the same day as the UT
    hearing in London.  Three  different  attorneys  had  stated  that  the
    procedures described by the DVR would have breached  Sri  Lankan  court
    rules.  Furthermore,  all  three  attorneys  had  said  they  had  been
    informed upon proper inquiry that the  arrest  warrant  was  authentic.
    The most recent attorney evidence was also  very  specific  in  stating
    that so far from ending in 1371 the case number for the  relevant  year
    went up to 4,007.

My decision

18.  In re-making this decision  it  is  clear  in  light  of  Mr  Bramble's
    concession that my principal focus must be on whether the appellant has
    given a credible account of material particulars. The burden  rests  on
    the appellant but to the lower standard of proof. I must  consider  the
    evidence as a whole, which has been significantly added to by responses
    from both sides to my directions in relation to the DVR evidence.

19.  I must of course assess the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  evidence
    relating to the 2012 arrest warrant in the context of the evidence as a
    whole, but it is convenient if I first address the documentary evidence
    relating to this.

20.  Although in his asylum interview the  appellant  made  reference  to  a
    letter stating that he was the subject of an arrest warrant, it was not
    until the first set of appeal proceedings that he produced evidence  to
    support  this  claim.   He  produced,  inter  alia,  a  certificate  of
    registration of an individual, a letter from an officer  in  charge,  a
    Puttalam Magistrates Court record cover,  a  detention  order  request,
    detention orders, a bail order, a bond and a warrant of arrest dated 16
    October 2012, a letter from Attorney  Mr  A  M  Kamarudeen  and  an  ID
    regarding the letter  from  the  Bar  Association  of  Sri  Lanka.   Mr
    Kamarudeen attested in his letter to having obtained  certified  copies
    of the court case records relating to the appellant on the instructions
    of his sister. In August 2015 Judge Clarke did not  find  the  evidence
    reliable.

21.  In concluding that Judge Clarke had erred  in  law  DUTJ  Archer  noted
    that:

         "[t]he documentary evidence  was  extensive,  running  to  over  40
         pages.  Fabrication of that evidence would have been a  significant
         task.  I am satisfied that the judge did not give adequate  reasons
         for rejecting the court evidence".

      DUTJ  Archer  also  considered  that  the  judge  had  not  explicitly
    considered the evidence from the attorney.

22.  By the time of the de novo appeal hearing before Judge A A  Wilson  the
    respondent had obtained the DVR dated 18 August  2016  concluding  that
    the arrest warrant was inauthentic.    Judge  Wilson  was  sufficiently
    satisfied by that DVR report  to  conclude  that  all  the  appellant's
    documents  were  a  "false  and  a   fraudulent   attempt   to   obtain
    international protection".

23.  In response to my directions following a decision setting  aside  Judge
    Wilson's decision, the respondent  produced  a  further  DVR  dated  16
    October 2017, the same date  as  the  hearing  before  me  to  consider
    whether Judge Wilson had erred in law.  The appellant in  response  has
    produced a number of documents including from attorneys Mr S I M  Hismi
    and Mr M H M Falsur Raahman verifying the existence of  the  case  file
    B/3347/09 and calling into question the verification described  by  the
    respondent.

24.  It was made clear by the respondent both at the  hearing  before  Judge
    Wilson and at the two hearings before me that she considered  that  the
    appellant's arrest warrant documentation was false.  As I stated in  my
    error of law decision, when the respondent elects to allege  fraud  the
    onus rests on her to prove it.  Her original attempt to prove it in the
    form of the DVR dated 18 August 2018 was problematic, not least because
    there was no written confirmation provided  by  the  Registrar  of  the
    Puttalam Magistrates Court for what was said to have been  stated  over
    the telephone.  It was in light of shortcomings  in  the  original  DVR
    report that I directed the respondent to obtain another.

25.  Certain of the criticisms levelled against the respondent's second  DVR
    report do not on their own persuade me that the second  DVR  report  is
    deficient.  It is contended that the British  High  Commission  inquiry
    breached set procedures for a Sri Lanka court to provide particulars of
    a case filed with it, but the respondent was clearly not asking for any
    documents relating to the file or any particulars  of  the  case;  only
    about whether the court Registry held a  file  under  a  given  number.
    There is nothing in the evidence before me to indicate that  the  court
    in question would be prevented from responding to an  inquiry  of  this
    limited nature.  It is also contended that the British Embassy official
    could not in fact have got to the court in Puttalam in time on the  day
    the visit is stated to have taken  place,  but  that  assumes,  without
    foundation, that the British Embassy official  was  in  Colombo  rather
    than in closer proximity to the court on the day in question.

26.  Nevertheless, notwithstanding that my error of law decision noted  that
    one of the shortcomings of the first  report  was  that  there  was  no
    written document from the Court Registrar confirming that there was  no
    case number matching the appellant's documentation, the  second  report
    does not provide  this  and  indeed  manifests  the  same  shortcoming.
    Furthermore, the respondent has not sought to raise any  objections  to
    the documentation adduced  from  the  three  attorneys  who  have  each
    attested that they attended the same court to  obtain  verification  of
    the arrest warrant (the respondent had ample time to  have  shown  this
    documentation to the embassy official concerned and to  have  sought  a
    response).  I take judicial notice of the fact that background  country
    information shows that  court  documents  can  be  forged  or  obtained
    fraudulently, but, like DUTJ Archer, I cannot ignore that in this  case
    the respondent has made no direct attack on this body of documentation,
    but has rather relied, in order to disprove its  authenticity,  on  two
    DVRs relating only to the issue of whether there is a court file number
    matching that stated in the appellant's documentation.  I  accept  that
    one of the reasons why the respondent may have chosen not  to  ask  the
    Registrar to peruse the appellant's file was to ensure confidentiality,
    but it would have been open to the respondent to  ask  the  appellant's
    solicitors  whether  they  would  have  any  objection  to  their   own
    documentation  being  shown  to  the  Registrar.   Absent  any  written
    document from the Court Registrar confirming that these documents  were
    false and that the court case number cited did not exist, I am not able
    to conclude that the respondent has  discharged  the  burden  of  proof
    resting  on  her  to  show  that   the   appellant's   arrest   warrant
    documentation  was  false.  I  do  not  underestimate   the   practical
    difficulties in the way of the British Embassy  devoting  resources  to
    responses to Tribunal directions, but at the same time I cannot  ignore
    the deficient nature of the two DVRs relied on in this particular case.



27.  This finding is not, of course, conclusive in favour of the  appellant,
    as I still have to consider whether this arrest  warrant  documentation
    is reliable in the context of the evidence as a whole and in respect of
    simple reliability the burden of proof is on the appellant.

28.   It  is  difficult,  however,  to  deny   that   the   arrest   warrant
    documentation  loom  large  in  assessing  the   credibility   of   the
    appellant's account.  Indeed, Mr Bramble went so far as to state at the
    outset that if I accepted it was reliable, the appellant  was  entitled
    to succeed in his appeal.

The claimed 2009 detention

29.  The arrest warrant documentation relates to an event in  2012,  but  it
    cannot be considered in isolation from the appellant's  claim  to  have
    been detained in 2009 and  subsequently  required  to  report  on  bail
    conditions.

30.  Notwithstanding his assessment that the  arrest  warrant  documentation
    (as it was in April 2017) was false, Judge Wilson was still prepared to
    accept that the appellant  was  a  pharmacist  and  that  he  had  been
    detained in 2009 and did not specifically find he  had  not  been  ill-
    treated during that period.   Whilst  I  stated  in  my  error  of  law
    decision that "I cannot preserve any of the  FtT  Judge's  findings  of
    fact "(paragraph 8), I did so because of the judge's error  in  dealing
    with the DVR evidence and, on my own findings, this evidence  fails  to
    demonstrate falsity in  the  arrest  warrant  documentation.   In  such
    circumstances, I consider it significant that despite rejection of  the
    arrest   warrant   documentation   and   despite    the    respondent's
    identification of inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence regarding
    his 2009 detention, a FtT Judge was prepared to accept it was credible.

31.  It is also true to say that the appellant has been  broadly  consistent
    in his evidence about having run a pharmacy in  Puttalam,  having  been
    detained on suspicion of supplying drugs  to  the  LTTE  via  a  doctor
    associate (Dr Mendes) and having been released on bail.  I say "broadly
    consistent" because there were some discrepancies in his evidence about
    his pharmacy qualifications, but like Judge Wilson I  do  not  consider
    these were sufficient to disbelieve his account of being a  pharmacist.
    The appellant also gave inconsistent answers regarding what he had been
    told by the authorities about which drugs the boy (K Baskorm) had  been
    carrying when stopped at the Trincomalee army checkpoint and  how  long
    he had been detained and questioned, but again, like Judge Wilson, I do
    not consider these sufficient to undermine his account of 2009  events.
    Mr Bramble has submitted that the appellant has failed to  substantiate
    his claim to have been ill-treated when  in  detention  in  2009,  even
    though he had opportunities to produce medical evidence both  from  Sri
    Lankan doctors and doctors in the UK.  This failure  is  a  significant
    shortcoming, but I accept that the length of time since  his  detention
    occurred has made it more difficult to support it  by  way  of  medical
    evidence and, even though the appellant himself referred to "scarring",
    the injuries caused by the beatings he described appeared to have  been
    more temporary and his account of seeking medical help  from  a  herbal
    doctor straight afterwards also points  to  his  injuries  having  been
    bruising and swelling rather than what is strictly meant in UK  medical
    parlance by "scarring".

32.  Mr Bramble has  argued  that  the  appellant's  account  of  the  court
    proceedings and of his being believed by the  court  that  he  was  not
    involved with the LTTE was not coherent  or  plausible,  since  if  the
    court had concluded he had not supplied drugs to the LTTE, there was no
    reason  to  impose  reporting  conditions.   However,  albeit  somewhat
    confusing, the appellant's evidence was that the court had  said  there
    was not enough evidence and he had never said in terms that he had been
    acquitted.  His consistent account has been  that  for  one  reason  or
    another they did not dismiss the charges against him.  In  the  absence
    of precise background information about how  criminal  proceedings  are
    conducted in Sri Lanka, one must be wary of assuming proceedings follow
    a UK pattern.

33.  In assessing the credibility of the claimed  2009  events  it  is  also
    fair to say that the appellant was able  to  provide  a  very  specific
    amount of detail, in terms of dates, names and  the  sequence  of  what
    occurred.

The appellant's situation between 2009 and 2012

34.  Mr Bramble highlighted the respondent's concerns about the  lack  of  a
    coherent account of what happened between 2009 and 2012, in  particular
    the implausibility of his account that he should wait almost two  years
    before sending his wife away to the safety of the UK in 2011.  However,
    the appellant's claims that he believed he was  not  in  danger  during
    this period and that he was experiencing  financial  difficulties  were
    not inherently implausible.

March 2012 - October 2012

35.  The appellant claimed that  he  only  decided  he  was  at  risk  after
    receiving a letter in March 2012 telling him that he had to sign at the
    local police station.  Following receipt of that letter  the  appellant
    then contacted his wife in the UK to arrange dependent  visas  for  him
    and the two children to join her in the UK.   I  have  some  difficulty
    with understanding why he would delay six months, but the  sequence  of
    events he described in going about getting the visas was likely to take
    that amount of time and, unlike other possible options, it offered  him
    a safe destination outside Sri Lanka where they could reside  lawfully.
    On his own account he was keeping a low  profile  during  the  relevant
    period; hence this delay is not inherently improbable.

October 2012

36.  According to the appellant the Sri Lankan authorities issued an  arrest
    warrant against him dated 16 October 2012.  This followed  his  failure
    to appear at a bail hearing fixed for 15 March 2012, thereby  breaching
    his "bail conditions".  It  is  the  respondent's  position  that  this
    warrant is inconsistent with his claim that the court had accepted that
    he had not sold medicines to the LTTE.  However, as already  noted,  it
    was the appellant's consistent account that the court had not dismissed
    the case against him and that it had believed him. If the case  against
    him had not been closed  and  he  had  been  bailed,  then  it  is  not
    inconsistent or implausible that the authorities might have decided  to
    take further action against him when he failed to appear  to  meet  his
    bail hearing on 15 March 2012.  Whilst it  is  not  probable  that  the
    authorities would issue an arrest warrant  pursuant  to  section  3(a),
    5(a) and (b) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act No 48 of  1979  (aiding
    and abetting terrorists), I do not consider that  it  fails  the  lower
    standard of reasonable degree of likelihood, since if as  a  result  of
    the original court proceedings the charges against  him  had  not  been
    dismissed, an arrest warrant for a failure to report was not an unusual
    step for the Sri Lankan authorities to take  in  the  context  of  this
    legislation.

37.  There are limited other shortcomings in  the  appellant's  account,  in
    particular to do with lack of documentation regarding  the  reports  he
    claimed to make to international human rights bodies, but viewed in the
    round the appellant has  made  considerable  efforts  to  document  key
    aspects of his claim.  In general terms I am  prepared  to  accept  the
    explanations he has given for failure to provide all relevant documents
    bearing on his claim.   Having  considered  the  main  aspects  of  the
    appellant's claim under chronological headings I am persuaded  that  he
    has done just enough to the lower  standard  to  establish  a  credible
    account.

38.   In light  of  Mr  Bramble's  concession  that  if  I  found  that  the
    appellant's account of there  having  been  an  arrest  warrant  issued
    against him in 2012  is  credible  then  he  is  entitled  to  succeed,
    applying the country guidance set out in GJ, it is unnecessary  for  me
    to proceed to assess the issue of risk on return further. On  my  above
    findings, and in light of Mr Bramble's concessions,  the  appellant  is
    entitled to succeed in his appeal against  refusal  of  his  claim  for
    international protection.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 12 October 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
