


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/02427/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |      Decision & Reasons         |
|On 29 September 2015              |Promulgated                      |
|                                  |On 30 September 2015             |
|                                  |                                 |
|                                  |                                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                                   Mr S E
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Reynolds, Counsel
      (instructed by BHT Immigration Legal Services)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Landes on 29 July 2015 against  the  decision  of
           First-tier Tribunal Judge C Ferguson  made  in  a  decision  and
           reasons promulgated on 16 June 2015 dismissing  the  Appellant's
           asylum appeal, following its remittal to the First-tier Tribunal
           for the second time.  The earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal
           promulgated on 15 January 2015 to allow the Appellant's  Article
           8 ECHR appeal was unaffected.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Iran, born on  25  January  1989.
           He had claimed asylum in February 2005, aged 16, on the basis of
           his Kurdish ethnicity and KDPI involvement, albeit  inadvertent.
           The history  of  the  claim  and  its  unfortunately  protracted
           litigation is set out at  [2]  to  [6]  of  Judge  C  Ferguson's
           decision and reasons and so need not be recited here.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal, Judge Landes considered that
           it was arguable that Judge C Ferguson had erred  in  failing  to
           consider the additional and cumulative risk factors set  out  in
           the Appellant's expert's report when reaching her  finding  that
           the Appellant was not at real risk on return  after  a  10  year
           absence.


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
           appeal was  opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
           tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of  whether
           or not there was a material error of law.




      Submissions


      5.    Mr Reynolds for the Appellant relied on the grounds  of  onwards
           appeal earlier submitted, together with the grant of  permission
           to appeal.  Counsel submitted that the judge had indeed erred by
           failing to take into account the risk factors identified in  the
           expert's report of Ms Sheri J Laizer dated 10  August  2014  and
           addendum, specifically in the conclusions the expert  had  there
           expressed.  This was important because the  judge  had  accepted
           large  elements  of  the  Appellant's  evidence   as   credible,
           including visits to the family home by the authorities enquiring
           into  possible  KDPI  activity.   Mr  Reynolds  developed  those
           submissions in dialogue with the tribunal and in some detail  by
           direct reference to the report.  He submitted  that  the  report
           showed that there was still a present  risk  to  the  Appellant,
           exacerbated by his long period in the United Kingdom,  now  some
           10 years.  The decision and reasons should be set aside and  the
           appeal reheard by another judge in the First-tier Tribunal.


      6.    Mr Bramble for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24
           notice.  He submitted that the decision and reasons disclosed no
           error of law.  The Appellant's complaints at most  were  just  a
           disagreement with  the  judge.   The  judge  had  distilled  the
           essence of the expert's report and did not have to go into every
           detail.  The grounds were extravagant.  The decision and reasons
           should stand.


      7.    In reply, Mr Reynolds submitted that while it was true that  the
           judge did not have to go into every detail, the problem was that
           insufficient reasoning had been given.  The Appellant could  not
           say why he had lost his appeal  despite  being  found  at  least
           substantially credible.




      No material error of law


      8.     The  tribunal  accepts  Mr  Bramble's  submissions.    In   the
           tribunal's view,  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  was  a
           generous response to a reasons challenge.  It was, of course,  a
           matter for the Appellant and those advising him, but at  a  time
           of great strain on public finances it may reasonably be wondered
           what value to anyone was served by yet further litigation in the
           face of the Appellant's success over his Article 8 ECHR  private
           life claim.   The Appellant  was  not  in  fact  facing  removal
           anywhere.


      9.    As always, the judge's decision and reasons needed to be read as
           a whole, which the Appellant's grounds of appeal and  subsequent
           submissions failed to do.   The  judge  examined  the  case  put
           forward by the Appellant in  the  round,  with  evident  anxious
           scrutiny.  Her finding, contrary to the Respondent's case,  that
           the Appellant  was  a  credible  witness  was  subject  to  some
           important qualifications: see [36] and  [37]  of  the  decision.
           These  included  the  reasoned  rejection  of  the   Appellant's
           evidence that the authorities were still in effect  looking  for
           him.  This was where, very obviously, the judge and  the  expert
           parted company, because the expert's opinion was  based  on  the
           declared assumption that the Appellant's claims  were  accurate:
           see, e.g., section 7 iii of the report, "if he was implicated as
           he believes". In many ways little more need be said.   Most,  if
           not all, of Mr Reynolds's submissions were an attempt to reargue
           the asylum appeal.


      10.   The judge summarised the expert's report and addendum at [26] to
           [29] of her decision.  There was no complaint on the Appellant's
           behalf that her summary was incomplete.  The judge's analysis of
           the report at [39] was securely reasoned, and at [40] the  judge
           applied BA (Demonstrations in Britain - risk on return) Iran  CG
           [2011] UKUT 36  (IAC),  which  the  judge  had  carefully  noted
           earlier  at  [11].   That  took  account  took  account  of  the
           Appellant's long absence  from  Iran  of  which  the  judge  was
           plainly aware: see, e.g., [41].


      11.   In the tribunal's judgment, the risk assessment which the  judge
           reached in the light of her findings was  open  to  her  and  is
           sustainable.  The decision was a  thoughtful  and  comprehensive
           reflection on the various issues raised in  the  appeal.   There
           was no material error of law.  There is no basis for interfering
           with the judge's decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  asylum
           appeal, which dismissal must stand.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell

