
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02264/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 9 January 2015             |
|Given 22 December 2014                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     H K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, date of birth  4  June  1994,
    appealed against the Respondent's  decision  dated  24  March  2014  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain and to  make  removal  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The Appellant  had  been  granted  limited  leave  to  remain  until  4
    December 2011 on a  discretionary  basis  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.   An in-time application was made under  paragraph  327  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended for that variation  of  leave.   In
    the light of the reasons given and contained  within  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter the Appellant appealed and the matter came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Dove QC on 4 July 2014.  The judge had  dealt  with
    an asylum claim and gone on to consider whether the Appellant  met  the
    requirements of either Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  or  under
    the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

3.   In respect of the  appeal,  issues  were  also  raised  concerning  the
    claimed connection  between  the  Appellant  and  a  child  born  of  a
    relationship with a Miss K.

4.   The judge dismissed the appeal and although nothing was said  I  assume
    the judge dismissed the appeal against the removal directions.

5.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Levin on 3 July 2014,

6.   On behalf of the Appellant's solicitors,  Sultan  Lloyd  through  a  Mr
    Bedford, settled grounds of appeal.

7.   Recently the Appellant attended on the offices  of  Sultan  Lloyds  who
    sought payment far in excess of the Appellant's means, and being unable
    to obtain funding from elsewhere he is now  unrepresented,  and  Sultan
    Lloyd have withdrawn their name from the office file as the Appellant's
    representative.

8.   As such, the Appellant has attended the hearing but it is fair  to  say
    he has some ability in the English language, but plainly is not able to
    do more than simply state, as he does, his wish that he has  to  return
    to Afghanistan with his young son or alternatively remain in  order  to
    be with his son.

9.   The grounds settled by Mr Bedford of 15 July 2015 essentially  seek  to
    reargue the issues of return and the associated risks as  well  as  the
    issue of the family life and the connections  that  the  Appellant  had
    with his new born son.

10.  It would appear that things have moved on since the hearing before  the
    judge in that the Appellant has a new relationship and his new  partner
    attended the hearing to support  him.

11.  The Appellant also sought to inform me that whatever may have been  the
    position at the date when First-tier Tribunal Judge Dove dealt with the
    matter things had moved on and he now  has  greater  contact  with  his
    young son.

12.  There is nothing to indicate any  factual  disputes  arising  from  the
    judge's decision. Essentially the challenge  on  which  permission  was
    given was confined to the issue that the  judge had failed to  consider
    and make any findings as to whether the  Appellant  had  any  remaining
    ties to Afghanistan under paragraph  276ADE  (iv)  of  the  immigration
    rules.   Mr  Mills  accepted  that  on  a  reading   of   the   judge's
    determination there is no analysis of the issue of subsisting ties with
    Afghanistan and it  is  arguable  that  the  judge's  consideration  in
    paragraph 30 was taking the view that there was nothing to disadvantage
    the Appellant on a return. From that it may reasonably be inferred that
    the judge was properly  considering  whether  the  Appellant  had  lost
    contact  with  his  country  of  origin  to  the  extent  that  it  was
    unreasonable for him to be returned to  Kabul,  not  least  because  he
    would be returning, albeit as a young man, in  circumstances  where  he
    had not been for many a year.

13.  It seemed to me that the failure to refer to that matter was  an  error
    but in the light of the  circumstances  it  was  not  material  to  the
    overall outcome, not least when the judge taking similar considerations
    into account reached the view that he did in respect of  Article  8  of
    the ECHR: Those considerations were largely the same  or  similar.   No
    issue was taken concerning the  factual  matters  that  the  judge  had
    concluded on the Appellant's private life both in  the  United  Kingdom
    and in Afghanistan The judge also took  into  account  the  information
    then before him on the Appellant's  contact  with  the  child  and  its
    significance in terms of the implications for removal.

14.  What is claimed is that there has since been a  substantial  change  in
    the  Appellant's  circumstances  and,  if  so,  that  may  provide  the
    Appellant with an opportunity to make a further application.

15.  In these circumstances I do not find in relation to the  assessment  of
    asylum or indeed subsidiary protection or Articles 2, 3 and 8  ECHR  or
    under the immigration rules there is any material error  of  law.   The
    original Tribunal decision stands.

Anonymity
I find that this is a case where it is  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
order and I so direct.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 7 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
