
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02812/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd December 2015                 |On 7th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   TUAN HA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Norman, Counsel, instructed by Immigration
Advice Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Vietnam,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  30th
    January 2015 to refuse to grant him asylum in the UK or  to  grant  him
    leave to remain on the basis that his removal would breach Article 8 of
    the European Convention on  Human  Rights.   Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Wellesley-Cole dismissed the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal  but
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appeals against that decision with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  claims  to  have
    arrived in the UK in September  2010  and,  following  his  arrest  for
    working illegally,  he  claimed  asylum  on  25th  October  2013.   The
    Appellant entered into a relationship with a British national with whom
    he has lived since November 2013. The  Appellant's  partner  has  three
    British children.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  it  was
    accepted by the Presenting Officer that  the  Appellant  had  a  strong
    relationship with the  children  and  that  he  enjoys  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the two elder  children  and  has
    contact with the younger one who he cares for [15].

 4. In considering the human rights aspect of  the  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  in  a  section  headed  "Family  and/or  Private  Life
    Paragraph 399A and 117B (vi) (a) and (b)" said "In assessing the public
    interest under Article 8(2) I have  kept  in  mind  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ..."[27]. The judge went on to consider the provisions of section  117B
    and paragraph EX1 of the Immigration Rules.  The judge  concluded  that
    paragraph EX1 applied and concluded in  the  notice  of  decision  "The
    Appeal on human  rights  grounds  under  family  life  Appendix  FM  EX
    succeeds and is allowed on that basis".

Error of Law

 5. There is no challenge to the judge's decision  to  dismiss  the  asylum
    appeal. The challenge is from the Secretary of State  who  contends  in
    her Grounds of Appeal that the judge made a  material  misdirection  in
    law in relation to the Article 8  decision.   It  is  accepted  in  the
    grounds that the Appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with his stepchildren.  However it  is  contended  that  the  Appellant
    cannot meet any of the definitions of partner within  Appendix  FM  and
    cannot therefore qualify for consideration under Appendix FM-EX on  the
    basis of his relationship with his partner.  It  is  further  contended
    that the Appellant cannot meet any of the requirements of  Appendix  FM
    for limited leave to remain on the basis of family life  as  a  parent.
    The Secretary of State relies on the case of Sabir (Appendix FM  -  EX1
    not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC) which makes  clear  that  EX1
    does not create a freestanding right of appeal.  It is contended in the
    grounds that paragraph 9 of Sabir notes the requirements of Appendix FM
    have to be read  sequentially  and  EX1  does  not  create  a  separate
    category of individual that  can  succeed  under  the  Rules,  it  only
    excludes an applicant from meeting certain of the Rules. It is  further
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  misdirected  herself  by
    going on to consider EX2 of paragraph 27 in respect of the  Appellant's
    relationship with the children as EX2 does not apply to  considerations
    under EX1A and there is no test of insurmountable obstacles.

 6. It is contended that the Appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and the appeal should not have been allowed on  that  basis
    and that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 and did not  carry  out  a  balancing  exercise  of  relevant
    factors.

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas relied on the grounds.  He  submitted
    that the judge erred in allowing the appeal on  grounds  of  EX1  given
    that that is not a freestanding provision.

 8. Miss Norman submitted that at the first sentence of paragraph 27 of the
    decision the judge made clear that she  was  conducting  an  assessment
    under freestanding Article 8 not  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   She
    relied on Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 which states that in the case of a person who is not liable to
    deportation, the public interest does not require the person's  removal
    where  -  (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship  with  a  qualifying  child,  and  (b)  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  She
    submitted that it  is  not  in  the  public  interest  to  require  the
    Appellant's removal and that it is clear that  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules.  She  submitted
    that if the words "Appendix FM EX" were taken  out  of  the  notice  of
    decision section of the determination it would be clear that the  judge
    allowed the appeal on the basis of Article 8.

 9. In response Mr Kotas submitted that Section 117B(6) is not freestanding
    and the judge needed to take  into  account  all  of  the  elements  of
    Section 117B and he submitted that it would  be wrong to  speculate  as
    to the outcome of a full analysis of Article 8.

10. I indicated to the parties that I was satisfied that the judge had made
    an error in terms of the structure of the Article 8 assessment and  the
    notice of decision element of the determination. The structure  of  the
    decision means that it appears that the judge may not  have  considered
    the Immigration Rules before going on to consider freestanding  Article
    8.  It seems to me that there is some confusion in the judge's decision
    particularly when one looks at the heading before paragraph 27 and  the
    conclusion at the notice of decision section.   The issue  for  me  was
    therefore whether this error is material.

11. I heard submissions from the parties in relation to materiality  and/or
    remaking the decision.  Mr Kotas submitted that Section 117B(6) is  not
    freestanding and the judge should have taken into account  all  of  the
    elements of Section 117B and that it would be wrong to speculate as  to
    the outcome of a full analysis of Article  8.   Miss  Norman  submitted
    that Section 117B(6) is clear in  that  it  says  there  is  no  public
    interest in removing a person who has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with a qualifying child when it would not be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the UK.  She submitted that it is  impossible
    to see how, even if the judge went through all the elements of  Section
    117B, she could have reached another conclusion.   She  submitted  that
    any error was not material in light of the judge's findings.

12. Mr Kotas submitted that Section 117B(6) is not a trump  card,  he  said
    that it applies where all other things are equal but all  other  things
    are not equal in this case given the Appellant's  immigration  history.
    He submitted that it could be open to the Appellant  to  make  a  fresh
    entry clearance application and it would  not  be  disproportionate  in
    light of his immigration history to expect him to return to Vietnam  to
    make an entry clearance application.  He  submitted  that  Chikwamba  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 does not bite in this case as it is not a  foregone
    conclusion that entry clearance would be granted to  the  Appellant  in
    this case.

13. Miss Norman submitted that there is nothing in the statute to  add  the
    extra words suggested by Mr  Kotas  in  Section  117B(6).   It  is  not
    parasitic on any other provisions of 117B and there is no case  law  to
    permit the  inference  suggested  by  Mr  Kotas.   In  any  event,  she
    submitted, bearing in mind the other  findings,  there  is  nothing  in
    Section 117B which impacts negatively upon the Appellant. She submitted
    that the evidence before the judge as set out in paragraph 14  is  that
    the Appellant's  partner  supports  the  family  and  he  is  therefore
    financially independent.  She understands  that  the  Appellant  speaks
    English  but  accepted  that  that  was  not   referred   to   in   the
    determination.  She accepted that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  Appendix  FM.   She  submitted  that  this   was   an
    appropriate case for consideration on the basis of Article 8 outside of
    the Rules and that Section 117B makes clear in a consideration  of  the
    public interest that the Appellant should not be removed.

Assessment

14. Although the judge's determination in relation to Article 8 should have
    been better structured I accept that the judge made no  material  error
    in this case.  Despite the misleading heading above paragraph  27,  the
    first sentence of that paragraph refers to  Article  8(2)  and  Section
    117B.   I bear in mind the concession made by Ms Norman before me  that
    the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM, a submission
    also made by the Secretary of State  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   Of
    course, in any consideration of freestanding Article 8, it is necessary
    to bear in mind whether an Appellant meets the terms of the Immigration
    Rules. It seems to me that in considering Section  EX1  the  judge  was
    attempting to consider the Rules in terms of the public interest.

15. I note that the judge did take into account the fact that the Appellant
    had a precarious immigration history and was  an  asylum  seeker  [27].
    The judge noted that the Home Office Presenting Officer  placed  little
    emphasis on Section 117B(4) which suggests that little weight should be
    given to a private life or a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying
    partner established by a person at a time when the person is in the  UK
    unlawfully.  I note that the judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has
    parental responsibility for his partner's children and  that  he  looks
    after the youngest child.  The judge took into account the interests of
    the children as a primary consideration.  The judge took  into  account
    that the children are British citizens and found that they could not be
    expected to relocate to Vietnam.  The judge took into account the  fact
    that the children go to school and that would be disrupted if they were
    to leave and that the judge took fully into account the children's best
    interests. Although the judge referred to  EX1  I  note  that  this  is
    almost identical to Section 117B (6).

16. The judge concluded at paragraph 28:

         "There are compelling reasons why this case outweighs other factors
         under Article 8 of the ECHR and there would be  a  disproportionate
         breach if the Appellant were to be removed which would  not  be  in
         the interests of his partner or step-children."

17. Had the judge ended there then the erroneous emphasis on Section EX  of
    Appendix FM would not have been made.

18. Mr Kotas submitted that Section 117B (6) is not free standing,  however
    in my view the wording of Section 117B (6)  is  clear  and  is  in  the
    context of Section 117B(1) which says that the maintenance of effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.  There are then  listed
    a number of factors which are in the  public  interest  culminating  in
    paragraph 6 which sets out what the public interest does  not  require.
    Whilst a relationship with a child is not a trump card it  is  a  clear
    expression of the public interest in circumstances  where  there  is  a
    parental relationship with a qualifying child.  That  relationship  was
    not in dispute in this case and the judge's  findings  in  relation  to
    reasonableness were not challenged.

19. In these circumstances, whist I  accept  that  the  judge  appeared  to
    conflate the Immigration Rules and Article 8, on more detailed analysis
    I accept that the judge's   consideration  of  the  Appellant's  family
    life was on the basis of freestanding Article 8.  Whilst  the  decision
    should have been structured more clearly, preferably by  following  the
    steps set out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, I accept that
    the judge's decision is sufficiently clear and reasons are adequate  to
    ensure that there is no material error of law in this case.

Notice of Decision

20. The judge made no material error of law. The decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 4th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 4th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
