
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02845/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2016                              |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                    [F B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar (Counsel, instructed by Queens Park
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer)


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Flynn  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 25th August 2015.   The  appellant
    claimed to be at risk on return to the Gambia, as a person of  interest
    to the authorities there.  The judge's primary findings were  that  the
    appellant had not shown that he was involved in any  political  protest
    until after he returned from the Gambia in late 2013, that the  country
    evidence did not show that the authorities attempted to trace  everyone
    photographed at anti-government demonstrations held abroad, that  there
    was no evidence to show that the Gambian authorities were  able  to  do
    this and, overall, that the appellant was not a credible  witness.   He
    was not a refugee, not entitled to humanitarian  protection  and  would
    face no real risk of ill-treatment on return, in breach of Article 3 of
    the Human Rights Convention.

2.   An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    judge had erred in her assessment of the country evidence and failed to
    apply guidance given in YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ  360.   The  judge
    also erred in giving weight to what  she  described  as  a  significant
    discrepancy between the appellant's account and evidence given  by  his
    father.

3.   Permission to appeal was refused by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and,
    following renewal, by an Upper Tribunal  Judge.   Following  a  further
    application to the Administrative Court in a  judicial  review  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision to refuse permission  to  appeal,  permission
    (in the judicial review) was granted  by  Sir  Andrew  Collins  on  8th
    February 2016.  Following that order and the quashing of  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal to refuse permission to  appeal,  on  16th  March
    2016, permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  14th
    April 2016.

4.   In a rule 24 response from the Secretary of State on 3rd May 2016,  the
    appeal was opposed  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  directed  herself
    appropriately and made sustainable adverse credibility  findings.   The
    grounds amounted to a disagreement with the overall outcome.

5.   In directions made subsequently, the  parties  were  advised  that  the
    Upper Tribunal would first consider whether the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained a legal error, such that the decision should be
    set aside.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Jafar said that the judge accepted that the appellant  had  attended
    anti-government demonstrations, held in the United  Kingdom,  and  that
    the photographs taken of him and others were placed  on  the  internet.
    This was clear from paragraph 23 of  the  decision.   A  Google  search
    showed that the photographs had been viewed many  times.   The  judge's
    finding in paragraph 44 of the decision that there was  no  substantial
    evidence that the authorities attempted to trace everyone who  attended
    anti-government demonstrations and nothing to show that they were  able
    to do so was unsustainable.  Important guidance was given by the  Court
    of Appeal in YB and the country evidence contained in  the  Operational
    Guidance Note which was before the judge, published  in  January  2014,
    showed that the authorities of the Gambia did indeed  seek  to  monitor
    activities abroad.  It was  clear  that  individuals  who  publicly  or
    privately criticised the government or the President  risked  reprisals
    and at  paragraph  3.17.15,  it  was  clear  that  those  perceived  as
    political opponents  were  subject  to  threats  and  monitoring  while
    outside the Gambia.  In 2011, the Justice Minister  said  that  Gambian
    dissidents who portrayed the country in a negative light  while  abroad
    would be prosecuted on return.  Amnesty International obtained a letter
    which appeared to show that Gambian security forces had been ordered to
    carry out surveillance of twelve citizens living abroad in a variety of
    countries, including the United Kingdom.  Country evidence  before  the
    judge also included  an  article  from  Jollof  News  online  regarding
    threats to a Gambian national based  in  Canada,  who  was  quizzed  on
    return on the basis of photographs taken under cover while he  attended
    a demonstration in Alaska.

7.   The appellant had been photographed demonstrating outside  the  Gambian
    Embassy and at 10 Downing Street.  The judge made  a  finding  of  fact
    that although he was not named in articles in  the  Gambian  press,  he
    could be identified from the photographs.  Overall, it was  clear  that
    the judge had not applied the guidance from YB.

8.   In a second ground, challenge was made  to  the  weight  given  by  the
    judge to the apparent discrepancy between the appellant's account  said
    and what his father said about making calls to a radio  station.   This
    aspect was described by the  High  Court  Judge  as  troubling  in  the
    judicial review proceedings.

9.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied upon the rule 24  response.   The  crux  of
    the matter was shown in paragraph 3.17.17 of the OGN.   Each  case  was
    fact-specific  and  the  judge's  approach  was  compliant  with   that
    guidance.  There was nothing in the OGN to suggest  that  everyone  who
    took part in demonstrations against  the  Gambian  authorities  was  at
    risk.  What was important was the frequency of attendance,  a  person's
    motivation and the sophistication of the foreign country's intelligence-
    gathering system.  The judge found as a fact that the  appellant  could
    be identified in some of the  photographs  but  he  was  not  named  in
    published articles, as was clear from paragraph  43  of  the  decision.
    The judge assessed the perceived risk and found that the appellant  was
    not a genuine activist.  She gave cogent reasons for that conclusion at
    paragraphs 38 to 41 and 42 of the decision.

10.  The judge was clearly alert to the  country  evidence  and  found  that
    there was  nothing  suggesting  that  the  Gambian  authorities  had  a
    sophisticated intelligence-gathering system.  The  appellant's  profile
    was not high.  Cogent reasons were  given  for  the  finding  that  the
    appellant had not discharged the burden upon him.  Merely  taking  part
    in sur place activities was not enough to put him at risk.   The  judge
    did not find him to be a credible witness, as was clear from  paragraph
    48 of the decision.  He was not someone who would  be  returned  as  an
    activist and he was able to  travel  to  the  Gambia  in  2013  without
    difficulty.  This was after he had taken part in some demonstrations in
    the United Kingdom and he was not detained on return.

11.  So far as ground 2 was concerned, the  appellant  said  in  his  asylum
    interview that he gave his name once when making contact with  a  radio
    station in the Gambia and thereafter said on air  simply  that  he  was
    from London.  His father had said that the  appellant  was  continually
    ringing the radio station, which begged the obvious question of how the
    authorities would have known that it was the appellant calling,  if  he
    merely said that  he  was  from  London.   The  judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph 37, regarding the discrepancy, was sustainable.  So too  were
    the other adverse findings she made, including  the  discrepancy  about
    the appellant's claimed political activities in the Gambia.

12.  In reply, Mr Jafar said  that  it  was  important  to  distinguish  the
    adverse credibility findings from  the  assessment  of  risk  that  was
    required in the light of the appellant's appearance in the  photographs
    which the Gambian authorities would come across without any difficulty.
     There was nothing in the country evidence,  including  the  OGN,  that
    sought to distinguish between levels of activity by  those  opposed  to
    the authorities.  The  judge's  finding  that  there  was  no  evidence
    showing that the authorities of the Gambia were able to trace  everyone
    photographed at  anti-government  demonstrations  was  insufficient  to
    safely found the conclusion that the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  on
    return.

13.  Both representatives agreed that if an error were found,  so  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision fell to be remade, the appropriate venue
    was the First-tier Tribunal as extensive fact-finding would need to  be
    made in relation to the asylum claim lying at the heart of the appeal.

Conclusion on Error of Law

14.  The decision  has  been  prepared  by  a  very  experienced  judge  and
    contains many careful findings of fact, most of  them  adverse  to  the
    appellant.  In his submissions, Mr Jafar focused on guidance  given  by
    the Court of Appeal in YB and, in particular, part of paragraph  18  of
    the judgment in that case.  The Court of Appeal, considered the  impact
    of an apparent absence of positive evidence  that  the  authorities  of
    Eritrea had the means and inclination to  monitor  activities  such  as
    demonstrations outside their embassy.  Where the Tribunal had before it
    country evidence which painted a bleak picture of  the  suppression  of
    political opponents by a named government,

         "... it requires little or no evidence or speculation to arrive  at
         a strong  possibility  -  and  perhaps  more  -  that  its  foreign
         legations  not  only  film  or  photograph  their   nationals   who
         demonstrate in public against the regime but have  informers  among
         expatriate oppositionist organisations who can name the people  who
         are  filmed  or  photographed.   Similarly,  it  does  not  require
         affirmative  evidence  to  establish   a   probability   that   the
         intelligence services of  such  states  monitor  the  internet  for
         information about oppositionist groups."


15.  The real question, as Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  pointed  out,  is  whether
    information reaching an embassy is  likely  to  show  that  a  claimant
    identified in a photograph is a hanger-on with no  real  commitment  to
    the oppositionist cause.

16.  The country evidence before the judge included the OGN  which,  on  any
    reading, paints a bleak picture  of  the  government's  stance  towards
    those opposed to it.  What is described there is a repressive political
    environment, aided by security agencies  willing  to  put  into  effect
    government reprisals against those who publicly or privately  criticise
    the  government  or  the  President.   The  OGN  also  shows  that  the
    authorities of the Gambia intend to pursue dissidents who  portray  the
    country in a negative light while abroad, seeking to prosecute them  on
    return.  The country evidence included the article  referred  to  above
    from the Jollof News, regarding the questioning of a  Gambian  national
    who took part in a demonstration against the government, while  present
    in Alaska.  At 3.18.12 of the OGN there is material showing that things
    became worse in 2013, with the banning of Skype and Viber and a  report
    from a committee to  protect  journalists  that  penalties  were  being
    applied to individuals living  abroad,  as  well  as  those  living  in
    Gambia.

17.  The judge took the OGN into account, as is clear from paragraph  31  of
    the decision.  She  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  involved  in
    political protest until after he returned from the Gambia in late  2013
    but accepted that he had attended demonstrations  since  2014.   As  Mr
    Jafar pointed out, the judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  be
    recognised from the  photographs.   Her  overall  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was not at risk was based in part upon what she described (at
    paragraph 35) as a  significant  discrepancy  between  the  appellant's
    account and the evidence of his father.   Sir  Andrew  Collins  took  a
    different view of the discrepancy but, in any event, at its highest  it
    formed part of the judge's reasoning towards the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was not a credible witness.  As Mr Jafar submitted,  however,
    the adverse credibility findings  are  insufficient  in  themselves  to
    determine risk on return.  The assessment of that risk must  take  into
    account  the  findings  regarding   the   appellant's   attendance   at
    demonstrations since 2014, the fact that he can be identified from  the
    photographs and the country evidence showing the determination  of  the
    authorities of the Gambia to pursue those who oppose them.

18.  In paragraphs 43  to  48,  the  judge  set  out  both  aspects  of  her
    reasoning, finding that the country evidence fell short showing a  risk
    that the appellant would be traced and reverting to the discrepancy  in
    the appellant's account.  With some reluctance, I conclude that what is
    missing here is an application of the guidance given in  YB  (Eritrea),
    in  the  light  of  the  country  evidence  contained   in   the   OGN.
    Notwithstanding the absence  of  the  appellant's  name  from  articles
    associated with the demonstrations, the photographs show  a  relatively
    small group of people, beneath  and  alongside  slogans  which  clearly
    reveal opposition to the President of the  Gambia  and  the  regime  in
    power there.  Country evidence clearly shows a determination to  pursue
    those abroad, so that if or when they return, they  may  be  questioned
    and prosecuted.  The obvious inference is that steps will be  taken  to
    identify those on demonstrations and in view of the relatively small ex-
    patriot community in the United Kingdom and the relatively small number
    of demonstrators,  this  would  not,  on  any  reasonable  view,  be  a
    particularly onerous task for an embassy or legation.

19.   Notwithstanding  the  characteristic  care  with   which   the   judge
    approached her task, I conclude that the  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application have been made out and that insufficient account  has  been
    taken of the guidance given in YB (Eritrea),  undermining  the  judge's
    assessment of risk on return,  notwithstanding  her  finding  that  the
    appellant was not a credible witness.

20.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  will  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal, at  Taylor  House,  before  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside; it will be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal on the first available date, at Taylor House.   None
of the findings of fact shall stand and  the  decision  will  be  remade  de
novo.

The judge made no anonymity direction and none has been sought.  I  make  no
direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date 20th June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
