
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02574/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 7 June 2013                                |On 9 July 2013               |
|Prepared                                      |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                   Mr J M
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Loughton, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Presenting Office


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 16 August  1991.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 November 2006  and  claimed  asylum
    the  following  day.   That  claim  was  refused  but  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain on the basis that he was an unaccompanied
    minor.  On 29 July 2009 he applied for further leave to remain but that
    application too was refused.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed on asylum and human rights  grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Youngerwood.

 2. On 4 May 2011 First-tier Tribunal Judge  (as  he  then  was)  Kopieczek
    granted the appellant permission to appeal against the decision of FtTJ
    Youngerwood promulgated on 18 July 2012 but on grounds limited  to  the
    issue of asylum.  Subsequent to  that,  the  appeal  came  before  DUTJ
    Digney who concluded that permission to appeal had not been granted  on
    article 8 grounds. He did, however, proceed to consider the grounds  on
    which permission had been granted. He found an error of law, and remade
    the determination by dismissing it.

 3. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal.
    That matter came before me and, for the reasons set out in the decision
    annexed to this, I considered that it was appropriate to set  aside  in
    part the decision of DUTJ Digney.

 4. I gave the following directions as to how this matter was to proceed:


     1. Further to a determination of 23 May  2013,  the  determination  of
        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Digney dated 12 March 2013 is set aside
        in part.
     2. That part which is set aside is listed for hearing on 7  June  2013
        at 2pm before Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul to consider:

          a. Whether the decision of FtTJ Youngerwood involved the making of
             an error of law in respect of article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention
          b. Whether the decision of FtTJ Youngerwood involved the making of
             an error of law in failing to address the  appeal  against  the
             decision made by the respondent pursuant to section 47  of  the
             2006 Act.


     5. The parties to proceed on the basis that if  an  error  of  law  is
        found that the Upper Tribunal will proceed to remake the decision.

 6. In his determination, Judge Youngerwood found:-

      i) that Article 8 of the European Convention is engaged [24];

     ii) that there was a considerable amount  of  documentation  confirming
         the appellant's educational achievements in the United Kingdom  and
         the extent of his other voluntary and sporting activities; that  he
         has succeeded  admirably  in  his  education  and  that  there  are
         extremely positive assessments of his character provided [24];

    iii) that there was no merit in the argument that the  appellant  had  a
         legitimate expectation of being granted  further  leave  to  remain
         [24] as an appellant granted discretionary leave on  the  basis  of
         being an unaccompanied minor is not the recipient of any promise or
         undertaking that he would be granted further leave [24];

     iv) that the appellant's progress and good character was not unusual in
         the past he was a "useful member of society", no more [25] and that
         there was nothing whereby significant weight could be given to  the
         appellant's contribution to society set against the imperatives  of
         immigration control [25];

      v) that the appellant's relationship with his girlfriend may  possibly
         attract significant weight as a factor in itself  and  cumulatively
         [26]  but  that  the  relationship  had  commenced  when  both  the
         appellant was young and they were aware that the appellant's status
         was nothing other than precarious [26]; that there was no  evidence
         that she  as  distinct  from  her  parents  would  be  at  risk  of
         persecution on return although she had referred to the  danger  her
         family faced in Afghanistan [26] but that she claimed that it would
         be unreasonable for her to relocate and she would be perceived as a
         Westernised woman [26] but he was not satisfied that  in  Kabul  as
         distinct from a rural area there would be any  real  problem  in  a
         woman who has spent her first fifteen years of life in  Afghanistan
         returning well educated [26];

     vi) that he did not accept the appellant's account that he did not know
         where his family were; and, he was not satisfied  by  the  evidence
         before him that it would be unreasonable for the girlfriend if  she
         remained sincere about the relationship to live with the  appellant
         in Kabul  or  indeed  in  another  suitable  country  [26]  and  he
         concluded finally [28] that it  was  proportionate  to  expect  the
         appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that decision on  the
    grounds (1) that it was accepted that the appellant has  a  family  and
    private life in the United Kingdom [18] including with  his  girlfriend
    with whom he had been in a relationship for three years [17]; that  the
    judge had erred when considering the issue of proportionality by taking
    into account irrelevant considerations  in  assessing  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the girlfriend to relocate to Kabul [22] and had  failed
    to assess why the appellant and/or his girlfriend could live in a third
    country [23].

 8. Miss Loughton submitted that it appears the judge had  found  that  the
    appellant had established a family life with his partner in the  United
    Kingdom and much of her case is predicated on that.

 9. Contrary to what is submitted in the  grounds  of  appeal,  it  is  not
    evident that the judge did find that there was identified a family life
    existing between the appellant and his girlfriend.   That  he  did  not
    make such a finding is consistent with the evidence that they  had  not
    yet formed a family unit themselves.  The parties did not cohabit.  The
    girlfriend continued to live with and was supported by her family.   It
    was open to the judge on the material before him not to  conclude  that
    this was a relationship which was not yet akin to marriage.

10. While it the references [26] to the possibility that the girlfriend may
    wish to relocate are indicative of a finding that there is family life,
    these references are in the context of maintaining a relationship.   It
    does not follow that every romantic relationship between a young  woman
    and a young man constitutes family life.  I do not consider that it can
    properly be inferred that because  the  judge  made  reference  to  the
    possibility of relocation that he  was  making  a  finding  that  there
    exists a family relationship between the appellant and  his  girlfriend
    which is unsupported by the evidence of how their relationship  is  now
    conducted [13 to 14], I note in particular that whilst they planned  to
    get married, rather than there having been any formal engagement.

11. Whilst it is correct that the judge found that the relationship  was  a
    strong one, I do not consider that his  references  to  the  girlfriend
    relocating are anything other than an illustration as to how a  private
    life relationship could continue.  It is inevitable that  such  private
    life relationships, whilst strong, do not  accept  the  same  level  of
    protection as those which have  a  sufficient  strength  to  constitute
    family life; consequently, less weight is to be attached to them as the
    judge did here and whilst it may be argued that a family life  requires
    substantial justification by way of public interest, the same cannot be
    said for a private life.  For a private life  to  be  interfered  with,
    substantially greater interference must exist.

12. Further support for the indication that the judge considered  this  was
    not a private life can be gleaned from his determination

         "An appellant cannot simply form a relationship,  however  sincere,
         during the currency of discretionary leave and  then  automatically
         expect the authorities to accept that, as a result,  further  leave
         should be granted.  As indicated above, I take special note of  the
         fact the relationship was formed when the appellant  was  extremely
         young and that no sufficient evidence has been  put  before  me  to
         establish that it would be unreasonable for his girlfriend, if  she
         remains sincere about the relationship, to live with the  appellant
         in Kabul, or indeed in another suitable country."

    This is consistent with the judge considering  that  what  is  involved
    here is a private life,  not  family  life.   Clearly,  a  considerably
    greater degree of hardship would be necessary to justify why a  private
    life relationship could not be interfered with.  I  consider  that  had
    the judge considered it was a family life,  his  consideration  of  the
    obstacles facing the appellant's girlfriend would have been subject  to
    greater analysis.

13. For these reasons, I consider that the judge reached  a  conclusion  on
    proportionality which was open to him and that this did not involve the
    making of an error of law.

14. I therefore go on to consider the position in relation to Kizhakudan  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 566.  The factual  situation  here  is  different.
    Here, the Article 8 case was considered by the judge in the  First-tier
    Tribunal whereas it was not considered in  Kizhakudan.  In  that  case,
    unlike here, it was common ground that the First-tier Judge had  erred.
    That is not so here.

15. Further, although an error in respect of the  asylum  appeal  has  been
    found, there was for the reasons set out above, no error of law in  the
    separate issue of article 8.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  issues  are
    severable. While there has been a substantial lapse of time  since  the
    initial decisions, I am  not  satisfied  that  it  would  be  a  proper
    exercise of discretion to reopen the article 8 issue.

Section 47

16. At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow withdrew the  decision  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the 2006 Act.  I am satisfied that it would be proper for
    the Upper Tribunal to accept this. It is therefore unnecessary  for  me
    to consider this matter further.

SUMMARY OF DECISISONS

 1. The determination of the Upper Tier in respect of the asylum  issue  is
    preserved.

 2. The decision made pursuant to section 47 of the 2009 Act is withdrawn.

 3. The determination of the Upper Tier in respect of the article  8  issue
    is to be remade.

 4. I remake the determination by dismissing the appeal on the  basis  that
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
    of an error of law  in  respect  of  the  decision  that  removing  the
    appellant to Afghanistan would be in breach of article 8 of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.




Signed                                  Date:  9 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                                    ANNEX


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02574/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 May 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


Between
                                     J M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Claimants


                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION TO SET ASIDE
     under para 43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

   1. On 29 April 2013 I had the following memorandum and directions issued:


     1. On 4 May 2011 First-tier Tribunal Judge (as he then was)  Kopieczek
        granted the appellant permission to appeal against the decision  of
        FtTJ Youngerwood promulgated on 18 July 2012.  Subsequent to  that,
        the appeal came before DUTJ Digney who concluded that permission to
        appeal had not been granted on article 8 grounds.
     2. It is, however, evident from  the  court  file  that,  contrary  to
        Ferrer limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304(IAC)  ,  the
        grant of permission by FtTJ Kopieczek was not accompanied by a form
        IA86 notifying the appellant that permission  had  been  issued  on
        limited grounds, but rather form 102A.   It appears the DUTJ Digney
        was not made aware of this, and there is accordingly  a  procedural
        error.  There appears also to have been a  procedural  irregularity
        in failing to deal with the appeal against the decision  to  remove
        the appellant pursuant to section 47 of the 2006 Act


     3. It is my preliminary view that it would  be  in  the  interests  of
        justice to set aside that part of DUTJ Digney's determination which
        relates to article 8. Accordingly, unless within five working  days
        of the issue of these directions,  I  receive  submissions  to  the
        contrary supported by cogent and detailed reasons, I  will  make  a
        decision pursuant to  rule  43  (1)  to  set  aside  DUTJ  Digney's
        determination insofar as it relates to article 8 and section 47  on
        the basis that there have been  procedural  irregularities  in  the
        proceedings.


   2. The respondent has not replied to the directions.  The  appellant  has
      indicated by a letter from his solicitors dated 9 May 2013 that he  is
      content for the proposed course  of  action  to  be  taken.  They  do,
      however,  request  that  a  decision  be  taken  in  respect  of   the
      application for leave to appeal on asylum grounds.


   3. Accordingly, for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  consider  that  the
      determination should be  set  aside  in  part,  in  the  interests  of
      justice, as the requirements of rules 43(1) are met.  The  application
      for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal in respect of the part  not
      set aside is stayed pending a fresh decision.


Summary of Conclusions & Directions

   1. The determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Digney dated 12 March
      2013 is set aside.
   2. I direct that the appeal be  listed  before  me  in  order  that  that
      determination may be remade in part.




Signed:                             Date:  23 May 2013
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


