
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02792/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K P Scott, Solicitor of Pickup & Scott
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction for Anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1989.  In 2010 he came
    to the United Kingdom and returned to Sri Lanka in 2013.  He came  back
    to the United Kingdom, arriving on 17 November 2013 and claimed  asylum
    on account of his fear of persecution by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    (GOSL) because of his suspected associations with the Liberation Tigers
    of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).  On 2 February 2015 the Respondent  refused  his
    claim  but  made  no  proposal  or  directions  for  his  removal.  The
    Appellant's parents remain in Sri Lanka.  He has an older sister and an
    older brother and a younger brother.  He does not know where any of his
    siblings live: see interview replies 7-12.

Reasons for the Respondent's Decision

 2. These are contained in Annex A to the Respondent's letter of 2 February
    2015.  The Appellant said he had lived with his family and  his  father
    had worked as a government clerk before opening a grocery shop in  2010
    but was now retired: see interview reply 14.

 3. The Respondent summarised the circumstances leading to the  Appellant's
    claim.  A Tamil employee of his father had told the Appellant the  GSOL
    were mistreating the Tamil people following the end of the  civil  war.
    His own sister and his  friends  had  been  killed  and  many  refugees
    murdered.  This employee returned to Jaffna to celebrate Divali and  on
    return the Appellant detected a change in him.  He showed the Appellant
    a video at the beginning of November which purported to show  the  GSOL
    shooting Tamils who had  been  blindfolded  and  stripped  naked.   The
    Appellant states he went to the local police to inform them he  planned
    to ensure the media were aware of this.   This  had  been  against  his
    father's advice.  As he left the police station he was bundled  into  a
    white van and taken to an unknown location where he was held for a  day
    or a day and a half and physically  and  sexually  assaulted.   In  the
    meantime his father had made enquiries to ascertain his whereabouts and
    was able to find and secure  an  agent  to  obtain  his  release.   The
    Appellant has no recollection whatsoever of the  circumstances  of  his
    release.  After three or four days the Appellant left Sri Lanka by  air
    on 13 November on a false passport.  He remained in France for two days
    and came to the United Kingdom by car, arriving on 17 November.

 4. He stated that  subsequently  the  GSOL  have  questioned  his  family,
    beating one of his brothers with the consequence that  the  family  has
    vacated their home and now stay with an uncle.

 5. The Respondent did not find the Appellant to be credible in his account
    of what had happened to him in Sri  Lanka.   He  had  claimed  to  have
    joined and been active in the TGT  in  the  United  Kingdom,  attending
    meetings,  distributing  leaflets  and  fundraising.   The   Respondent
    doubted this claim because the Appellant  did  not  identify  what  the
    initials TGT stood for and  could  produce  no  evidence  to  show  his
    involvement in the TGT.

 6. The Respondent considered the Appellant would not be at risk on  return
    in the light of the country guidance in GJ and others (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  and  that  he  could
    safely return to Sri Lanka.   For  similar  reasons  his  claims  under
    Article 2 and 3 of the European Convention were rejected.

 7. The Appellant had also made a claim that his removal would  engage  the
    United Kingdom's obligations to respect his private and family life  in
    the United Kingdom protected by Article 8 of the  European  Convention.
    The Appellant did not meet any  of  the  minimum  length  of  residence
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and  there
    were no circumstances justifying a consideration of his  claim  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

 8. Reference was made to the Appellant's claim to suffer from a number  of
    medical conditions.  The Respondent had  considered  an  expert  report
    prepared by Professor Lingam of Harley Street Medical  Express  Clinic.
    The reasons refer to a medical report by Dr Zachariah but there  is  no
    such report in the file.  The file shows he is the Appellant's  general
    practitioner and has supplied a print-out  of  his  practice's  patient
    summary for the Appellant and an open  letter  that  the  Appellant  is
    suffering post-traumatic stress disorder  and  has  been  a  victim  of
    atrocities as well as having "a fear  of  travelling  long  distances".
    The Respondent attached little weight to this letter because no reasons
    were given to support its conclusions.

The Appellant's Appeal

 9. On 18 February 2015 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds assert his claim to be suspected of association
    with the LTTE and his involvement in the TGT in the UK.  They assert he
    has  told  the  truth  and  qualifies   for   international   surrogate
    protection.  He will not be able to relocate in Sri Lanka because he is
    wanted by the GSOL.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

10. By a decision promulgated on 22 September 2015 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Andrew dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  On 15  October  2015
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J  G  White  granted  permission  to
    appeal because it was arguable the Judge had erred in:

       . finding the Appellant was not credible.

       . not adequately engaging with the expert medical report and

       . giving inadequate weight to  the  court  summons  produced  at  the
         hearing.

11. The Appellant attended the hearing and appeared to have  some  English.
    I explained the purpose of the hearing and the procedure to be  adopted
    and other than to confirm his address he took no  active  part  in  the
    proceedings.



Submissions

12. Mr Scott submitted that the Judge had given inadequate  weight  to  the
    expert medical evidence about the Appellant's loss of memory  which  he
    had raised at the interview and elsewhere.  The Judge had  also  failed
    to make it clear whether she had accepted the court summons as genuine.

13. In response Mr Nath submitted that the Judge's treatment of the  expert
    medical  report  at  paragraph  19(E)-(H)  was  sufficient.   She   had
    addressed the court summons at paragraph 19(N)-(Q) of her decision.  In
    so doing she had also referred to the record of the  interview  of  the
    Appellant and was fully entitled to reach her conclusions.

14. Mr Scott replied that the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  expert  medical
    report failed to address the part of it which  spoke  of  his  loss  of
    memory  at  page  7  of  the  report,  notwithstanding  that  he   when
    representing the Appellant at the hearing before the Judge had referred
    to that part of the report in his submissions.  I noted from the Record
    of Proceedings that the  submission  is  recorded  as  being  that  the
    Appellant's memory loss could be the reason why he  could  not  give  a
    proper detailed account, and later on there is a general  reference  to
    Professor Lingam's report.

15. He referred me to the copies of the original  and  translation  of  the
    court summons in the Appellant's bundle and that they were  before  the
    Judge.  The decision contained errors of law and should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

16. At paragraphs 19(E)-(F) the Judge addressed the expert  medical  report
    in respect of the attribution of the Appellant's claimed lack of memory
    to Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE).  The Judge notes there is no
    available evidence to support the diagnosis and therefore little weight
    can be attached to it.  At paragraph 19(H) the Judge  referred  to  the
    expert report's conclusion that the Appellant "has no scars to show  as
    evidence and I was not expecting any as the brain injury  will  not  be
    visible".  There is  nothing  in  the  report  addressing  whether  any
    external signs can be detected visually or by  touch  to  suggest  that
    damage has been caused to the Appellant's skull. There is no comment in
    the report whether the expert has looked for this  or  explanation  why
    there is no point in looking for such  external  signs.   There  is  no
    reference in the report to whether the  Appellant  appeared  to  suffer
    memory loss or difficulty in  the  course  of  his  account;  merely  a
    statement that "he lacks clear descriptions of events what happened and
    memory loss" which in totality indicates that the patient did suffer  a
    concussion of brain ...".  The grounds  for  appeal  do  not  challenge
    other aspects of the Judge's treatment of the expert report.

17. Further, no other challenge was pursued at the hearing  notwithstanding
    the wider terms of the permission to appeal.  The Judge dealt with  the
    other aspect, namely the alleged anal rape of the  Appellant  while  in
    detention at paragraph 19(G).

18. There are serious scientific issues over  the  expert  medical  report.
    Without an adequate explanation it relies on  a  speculative  diagnosis
    which on the expert's own admission is incapable of being verified  and
    is without any predictive  potential.  As  the  late  Sir  Karl  Popper
    explained any theory, hypothesis or diagnosis which  does  not  satisfy
    these criteria is of little use.

19. The Judge made an extensive adverse credibility finding  based  on  the
    Appellant's account.  This included an assessment of the court  summons
    at paragraphs 19(N)-(R) in which she  gave  reasons  to  attach  little
    weight to the summons.  This conclusion was open to her  following  the
    jurisprudence of Tanveer Ahmed* [2002] UKIAT 00439.

20. I am not satisfied that the Appellant has  shown  the  Judge  made  any
    material error of law such that her decision should be  set  aside  and
    therefore it shall stand.

Anonymity

21. There were no submissions on anonymity and in all the circumstances the
    anonymity direction made by the Judge shall continue.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law  and
shall stand.

Anonymity direction continued.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 22. ii. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

