
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02554/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2016                          |On 6th April 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                   mr R K
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  In a decision promulgated  on
    28th October 2015, his appeal against a decision to remove him from the
    United Kingdom (described as a decision to refuse his asylum claim) was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes ("the judge").

2.   The appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka as a  person
    of adverse interest to the authorities.  Part of the evidence he relied
    on consisted of reports from  a  country  expert,  Dr  Chris  Smith,  a
    medical expert, Professor C Katona and a statement made by  Ms  Frances
    Harrison, from the International Truth and Justice Project.  All  three
    reports were made in mid-September 2015 and were relevant to the extent
    of the risk that the appellant would face on return.

3.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred in law by failing to  refer  to  or  assess  this  body  of
    evidence.  As a result, his adverse credibility findings  were  fatally
    undermined.  It was also contended that  the  judge  erred  in  several
    other respects, including his assessment of the weight to be  given  to
    the appellant's  involvement  in  diaspora  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a member of the British Tamil Forum ("BTF"), an organisation
    which is proscribed in Sri Lanka.  In his decision,  the  judge  merely
    referred to the appellant's attendance at BTF events and failed to take
    into account his membership.  This failure undermined  the  finding  at
    paragraph 39 of the decision that attending BTF events would  not  lead
    to the appellant being identified as a person of  adverse  interest  on
    return.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 25th November 2015.  In a  Rule  24
    response made on 10th December 2015, the appeal was opposed.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Rothwell said that the main ground  of  challenge  was  the  judge's
    failure to take into account pertinent evidence in making his  findings
    of fact.  He accepted that the appellant worked for the  LTTE  but  did
    not  accept  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  arrested  on  two
    occasions.  The evidence before the judge included  a  report  from  Dr
    Chris Smith, which bore on several aspects  of  the  appellant's  case.
    These included his marriage to an LTTE commander's daughter,  his  work
    for the LTTE, the approach  to  him  to  become  an  informer  and  his
    diaspora activities in the United Kingdom.

6.   Also before the judge  was  a  report  from  Dr  Katona  regarding  the
    appellant's ill-health and a report from Ms Frances Harrison  regarding
    what emerged from a statement taken from the appellant.

7.   The reports were not considered in the decision at all.  There  was  no
    engagement with them.

8.   Amongst other errors was the judge's decision to  rely  on  an  earlier
    decision  made  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge,   dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal, notwithstanding directions from the Upper  Tribunal
    that the hearing was to be de novo.  So far as diaspora activities were
    concerned, the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's membership of the BTF.

9.   Ms Pal agreed that the judge had not mentioned  the  reports  from  the
    experts and made no findings in relation to  them.   The  Secretary  of
    State accepted that this  was  a  material  error.   The  decision  was
    unsustainable.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  The decision makes no  mention  of  the  three  reports  on  which  the
    appellant relied.  The reports contained important evidence which  bore
    on the particular features of the appellant's case and on  the  overall
    credibility of his claims.  The representatives  were  agreed  that  in
    failing to engage with the reports, the judge materially erred in  law.
    The decision must be set aside.  Taking into account  the  Presidential
    Practice Statement and the extent of  the  fact-finding  that  will  be
    required when the decision is remade, I find that the appropriate venue
    is the First-tier Tribunal.  As the appellant has now moved  to  London
    and has solicitors here, I direct that the decision shall be remade  at
    Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.  It will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal, at
    Taylor House, before a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes.  Further case management may be made at Taylor House.  Overall,
    three hours will be sufficient to dispose of the appeal.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
