

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02347/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 August 2013                             |On 21 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                                 RINZIN LAMA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mrs Daly, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen, HOPO


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This is the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Saffer made following a hearing at Bradford on  the  11
      April  2013,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent made on 26 February 2013 to refuse to grant him  asylum  in
      the UK.


   2. The appellant challenged the decision on the grounds  that  the  judge
      had erred in failing to make clear findings of  fact  on  the  central
      issue in the appeal, namely the  appellant's  nationality,  failed  to
      make a finding as to whether the appellant is a Tibetan ordained  monk
      as  claimed,  erred  in  his  approach  to  his  credibility  findings
      generally and did not apply the relevant country guidance case  of  SP
      and others (Tibetan - Nepalese departure -  illegal  -  risk)  PRC  CG
      [2007] UKAIT 00021.

   3. Permission was granted for the reasons stated in the grounds by  Judge
      Blandy on 13 May 2013.

   4. Mrs Pettersen, although the respondent had served  a  reply  defending
      the determination, acknowledged the deficiencies in it. At  first  she
      submitted that the errors were not material because the judge had made
      a sustainable decision that the appellant was  Nepalese.  However  she
      accepted that it had been argued by him that he was not safe in  Nepal
      because  of  the  danger  of  refoulement,  and  this  aspect  of  the
      appellant's case had not been addressed at all in the determination.

   5. The judge erred in failing to make clear and reasoned  findings.  With
      respect to the issue of nationality, he accepted  that  the  appellant
      had a genuine Chinese id card, and that China and Nepal do not  accept
      dual nationality but that the appellant had failed to  establish  that
      the Nepalese passport was not genuine. He made no findings on  whether
      the appellant was a Tibetan ordained monk nor whether he would  be  at
      risk  in  Nepal.  It  is  also  arguable  that  his  approach  to  his
      credibility findings were flawed, as set out in grounds 3 and 4

   6. The decision is set aside.

   7. This appeal will be heard at Bradford  on  1  October  2013  when  the
      decision will be remade by a judge other than Judge Saffer  under  7.2
      of the Senior President's Practice Statement dated 25  September  2012
      because of the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which is
      necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade.


Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
