

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/02335/2014

                                                   AA/04830/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Determination Promulgated      |
|On 23rd December 2015                     |  On 20th May 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     MB
                                     SB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Wortley; Wortley Legal Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The First-tier Tribunal has made an  anonymity  order  and  for  the
       avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.   The  appellants  are
       granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report  of  these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.   This
       direction applies both to the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Manyarara promulgated on 3rd September 2015 in  which
       she dismissed the appeals by the two  appellant's  herein,  both  of
       whom are Bangladeshi nationals.  The second appellant ("SB") is  the
       daughter of the first appellant ("MB").   MB  appealed  against  the
       decision of the respondent dated 9th April 2015 to remove  her  from
       the United Kingdom by way of directions  under  section  10  of  the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. SB appealed against the decision of
       the respondent dated 9th March 2015 to refuse to  grant  her  asylum
       and to give directions for her removal from the United Kingdom. On 9
       March 2015, a decision was also made to refuse to vary SB's leave to
       remain in the United Kingdom and to  remove  by  way  of  directions
       under section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
       2006.


    3. Borrowing from the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I
       summarise the background:


           "2.   The appellants entered the United  Kingdom  on  18  August
           2008 following successful appeals against the refusal  of  their
           visit  visa  applications.  Both  appellants  were  subsequently
           issued with visit visas which were valid from 30 July 2008 to 30
           January 2009. On 31 December 2008, the first  appellant  applied
           for Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) and  the  second  appellant
           applied for ILR as a child of a settled  person  in  the  United
           Kingdom, albeit that the first appellant was not  settled  given
           her own application for ILR. The appellants' appeals against the
           subsequent refusals were dismissed on  23  September  2009.  The
           appellants then  became  Appeal  Rights  Exhausted  (ARE)  on  1
           February 2010  and  were  notified  as  being  overstayers,  and
           therefore liable to removal, on 4 February 2014.


           3.    On 14  March  2014,  the  appellants  claimed  asylum.  In
           essence, the appellants claimed to  be  refugees  whose  removal
           from the United Kingdom would be a  breach  of  its  obligations
           under the 1951 Geneva  Convention  relating  to  the  status  of
           refugees ("the Refugee Convention"); the basis of  their  claims
           being that they are at risk from an individual known as  .......
           as a result of the refusal of the first appellant  to  sell  her
           business consisting of a fisheries business, cattle and  farming
           land to him. ...... is suspected  of  having  killed  the  first
           appellant's son,..., who  had  remained  in  Bangladesh  looking
           after the first appellant's business during  her  visit  to  the
           United Kingdom.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara


    4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge identifies the documents  and  evidence
       before her, at paragraphs [5] to [7] of her decision.  At  paragraphs
       [10] and [11] she summaries the appellants' claims and at  paragraphs
       [12] and [13] of the decision, she summarises the matters relied upon
       by the respondent.  The Judge had the benefit  of  hearing  the  oral
       evidence of the appellants and the evidence of  MB's  daughter.   The
       evidence is set out at paragraphs [17] to [27] of the decision.   The
       Judge's findings and conclusions as to the appeal against the refusal
       of asylum and humanitarian protection are to be found  at  paragraphs
       [41] to [69] of the decision.  The findings and conclusions as to the
       appeal on ECHR grounds are to be found at paragraphs [70] to [76]  of
       the decision.


 The grounds of appeal and the hearing before me


    5. The appellants' grounds of appeal contended that the Judge erred  in
       a number of respects in the assessment  of  whether  the  appellants
       would face inhuman and degrading treatment, the  assessment  of  the
       risk upon return to Bangladesh and whether the  appeal  should  have
       been allowed on Article 8 grounds.


    6. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Robertson  on  29th  September  2015.   First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
       Robertson noted that the grounds at paragraphs 1-12,  lack  arguable
       merit and are no more than an attempt to re-argue the merits of  the
       case. I agree.  Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
       it is arguable that given  the  witness  statements  of  the  family
       members which were submitted  in  support  of  the  appeal,  it  was
       necessary to conduct a proportionality assessment.


    7. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not  the  decision
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara  involved  the  making  of  a
       material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision if I can do
       so, without having to hear oral evidence.


    8. At the hearing before me, Ms Wortley, rightly in my view,  confirmed
       that the appeal against the substantive asylum decision is no longer
       maintained.   The appellants maintain that the Judge  erred  in  her
       consideration of the Article 8 claim.  Ms Wortley concedes that  the
       appellants cannot succeed under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of
       the immigration rules.   She  submits  that  there  are  exceptional
       circumstances  in  this  case  that  required  a  full  and   proper
       consideration of the Article 8 claim outside the immigration  rules.
       She submits that both the appellants are  vulnerable  and  that  the
       Judge failed to make any assessment of whether they enjoy  a  family
       life in the UK.  She submits that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  any
       assessment of whether the relationships enjoyed by  the  appellants,
       go beyond normal emotional ties between adults such as to amount  to
       a family life.  Ms Wortley submits that there has been no assessment
       of the impact that the removal  of  the  support  network  that  the
       appellants enjoy in the UK would have upon the appellants, and there
       has been no proper assessment as to whether the appellants'  removal
       from the UK would be disproportionate to the legitimate  aim  sought
       to be achieved.


    9. The appellants have made an application in line with Rule 15(2A)  of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to admit a letter
       from Dr Karen Stanley regarding the mental  health  of  MB.   It  is
       submitted that MB's mental health has deteriorated since the hearing
       before the First-tier Tribunal.


   10. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 9th  October  2015
       that was adopted by  Mr  Whitwell.     The  respondent  opposes  the
       appeal and submits that the Judge properly considered the appeal  on
       Article 8 grounds.  It is submitted that at paragraph  [73]  of  her
       decision,  the  Judge  accepted  that  the  appellants  would   have
       established family life in the UK, however they lived in  Bangladesh
       whilst the first appellant's elder son and daughter were  living  in
       the UK, and they were able to maintain their relationships.


   11. Mr Whitwell submits that the appellants  simply  disagree  with  the
       conclusions reached by the Judge. He submits that at paragraph  [76]
       of her decision the Judge made a finding that the appellants  cannot
       meet the requirements of the immigration rules and that there are no
       exceptional circumstances to go outside of  the  rules.  He  submits
       that that was a finding that was properly  open  to  the  Judge.  He
       draws my attention to paragraph 2 of the  witness  statement  of  MB
       dated 15th January  2015  from  which  it  is  clear  that  the  the
       appellants live with MB's sister, brother-in-law and their children.
       They do not live with MB's  children that are settled in the  United
       Kingdom.   Mr  Whitwell  submits  that  there  are   a   number   of
       unchallenged findings made by the Judge, all  of  which  inform  the
       Judge's decision at paragraph [76] of her decision. The Judge  found
       that the the  appellants  have  lived  for  a  number  of  years  in
       Bangladesh, they have family in  Bangladesh,  MB  was  a  successful
       businesswoman and upon  return,  the  appellants  will  be  able  to
       continue to enjoy their family life together.   He submits that even
       if the living  arrangements  are  compelling  and  exceptional,  the
       appellants would fail under s117 of the 2002 Act because  they  have
       remained in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  since  2010,  and  any
       private or family life established, has been established  when  they
       have had no lawful basis to be in the United Kingdom.


 Discussion


   12. It is useful to begin by setting out the conclusions that  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Manyarara came to.  In her decision she states:


           "71.  In  relation  to  Article  8,  it  is  of  note  that  the
           appellants have only been in the United Kingdom since 2008,  and
           have spent by far the majority  of  their  lives  in  Bangladesh
           where I am satisfied they have family to whom they  can  return.
           The first appellant has lived in Bangladesh as a widow since her
           husband died in 2002. The first appellant's daughter  refers  to
           the family home being in her father's village and  this  is  the
           same place that ..... (referred to as ....... cousin) refers  to
           other relatives being present. I have also had  the  benefit  of
           seeing the letter from ...... (the first appellant's brother-in-
           law).  It is also of note that the appellants' in laws travelled
           to Bangladesh in 2011 to attend the wedding  of  their  own  son
           (the first appellant's nephew). The previous  Immigration  Judge
           did not accept that the first appellant did not have any  family
           remaining in  Bangladesh  (see  paragraph  26  of  the  previous
           determination). I too have found that the appellants have family
           in Bangladesh.


           72.   Despite initially being granted a  visa  to  come  to  the
           United Kingdom by virtue of the fact that she was  a  successful
           business woman, the first appellant has  been  presented  as  an
           illiterate and vulnerable woman. I do not accept  that  this  is
           the case. It is clear that having been able  to  single-handedly
           run her farm for six (6) years  after  her  husband's  death  in
           2002, and being a single mother during that  period,  the  first
           appellant cannot be  considered  to  be  someone  who  would  be
           vulnerable as  a  woman  living  in  Bangladesh.  I  accept  the
           distress that has undoubtedly been caused to the appellants as a
           result of the murder  of  the  first  appellant's  son.  I  have
           considered the letter from the first appellant's GP.  The  first
           appellant is stated to be suffering from depression  and  is  in
           receipt of regular medication. This letter expressly states that
           the first appellant's age is not a factor.


           73.   I acknowledge the fact that  the  second  appellant  is  a
           young woman however the appellants would be  returning  together
           to Bangladesh where I am satisfied they have  family.  I  accept
           that the appellants would have established a family life in  the
           United Kingdom.  The  appellants  however  lived  in  Bangladesh
           whilst the first appellant's elder daughter and son were  living
           in the United Kingdom and they  maintained  their  relationships
           then.


           74.   I have considered the report of Khaleda Rabbani.  He  does
           not set out  which  sources  he  referred  to  in  reaching  his
           conclusions and does not state the capacity in which he has been
           campaigning for equality in Bangladesh. Despite the statement of
           truth included in his report, he does not refer to his  duty  to
           the court in preparing this report. Mr Rabbani refers to a  lack
           of education which deters  women  from  equal  participation  in
           socio-economic activities. This cannot be used to  describe  the
           first appellant who, as a  widow,  ran  a  farming  business  in
           Bangladesh.


           75.   I have seen the money transfers included at pages 35 to 37
           of the appellants' bundle. These were from the appellant's other
           son (.....) to ...... It therefore lies within  the  ability  of
           the family members in the United Kingdom to send remittances  to
           assist the appellants with living and other expenses.


           76.   In respect of family life,  I  find  that  the  appellants
           cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  there
           is nothing that warrants consideration of these appeals  outside
           the provisions of the Rules. I however acknowledge the  distress
           that has arguably been caused to the appellants by the murder of
           the first appellant's son."


   13. It is  uncontroversial  that  the  appellants  cannot  succeed  under
       Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.   In  SSHD
       -v- SS (Congo) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the Court of Appeal in a
       judgment handed down by Lord Justice Richards, stated;


           "..The proper approach should always be to identify, first,  the
           substantive content of the relevant Immigration Rules,  both  to
           see if an applicant for LTR or LTE satisfies the conditions laid
           down in those Rules (so as to be entitled to LTR or  LTE  within
           the Rules) and to assess the force of the public interest  given
           expression in  those  rules  (which  will  be  relevant  to  the
           balancing exercise under Article 8, in deciding whether  LTR  or
           LTE should be granted outside the substantive provisions set out
           in the Rules). Secondly, if an applicant does  not  satisfy  the
           requirements in the substantive part of the Rules, they may seek
           to maintain a  claim  for  grant  of  LTR  or  LTE  outside  the
           substantive provisions of the Rules, pursuant to Article  8.  If
           there is a reasonably arguable case under Article  8  which  has
           not already been sufficiently dealt with by consideration of the
           application under the substantive provisions of  the  Rules  (cf
           Nagre  ,  para.  [30]),  then  in  considering  that  case   the
           individual interests of the applicant and others whose Article 8
           rights are in  issue  should  be  balanced  against  the  public
           interest, including as expressed in the Rules, in order to  make
           an assessment whether refusal to grant LTR or LTE, as  the  case
           may be, is disproportionate and  hence  unlawful  by  virtue  of
           section 6(1) of the HRA read with Article 8."; [44]


   14. The Judge found at paragraph [76] of her decision that the appellants
       cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  there  is
       nothing that warrants consideration  of  these  appeals  outside  the
       provisions of the Rules. However, at paragraphs [71] to [75]  of  her
       decision, the  Judge  makes  a  number  of  findings,  that  are  not
       challenged, and which are relevant to an assessment of an  Article  8
       claim outside the immigration rules.


   15. If one were to consider the findings of the Judge by reference to the
       decision of the House of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and the step-
       by-step approach of Lord Bingham, the Judge appears  to  accept  that
       the first four of  the  Razgar  questions  can  be  answered  in  the
       affirmative.  That is, the proposed removal  of  the  appellant  will
       amount to an interference with the exercise of the appellant's  right
       to respect for her family and private life.  The  Judge  accepted  at
       paragraph [73]  of  her  decision  that  the  appellants  would  have
       established a family life in the United Kingdom.  Although the  Judge
       does not  expressly  state  as  much  in  her  decision,  taking  the
       appellants  case  at  its  highest,  the   interference   will   have
       consequences   of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation
       of Article 8.  There can be little doubt that the interference is  in
       accordance with the law  and  the  interference  is  necessary  in  a
       democratic society in the interests of immigration control.


   16. The issue that remains is one of proportionality, namely whether  the
       interference with the appellants' family life is disproportionate  to
       the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  To  that  end,  the
       Judge noted at paragraph [71] of her  decision  that  the  appellants
       have only been in the United Kingdom since 2008, and  have  spent  by
       far the majority of their lives in Bangladesh.  She found, as  had  a
       Judge previously, that the appellants have family in Bangladesh.  The
       Judge did not accept, at paragraph [72], that MB is an illiterate and
       vulnerable woman.  She noted the evidence from MB's  GP  that  MB  is
       stated to be suffering from depression and is in receipt  of  regular
       medication. The Judge noted that the letter expressly states that the
       first appellant's age is not a factor.  At paragraph [73]  the  Judge
       acknowledged the fact that SB is a young woman, but  noted  that  the
       appellants would be returning to Bangladesh together, where they have
       family.  The Judge also noted at paragraph [75] the  money  transfers
       previously made by MB's son in  the  UK,  to  MB's  son  who  is  now
       deceased.  The Judge noted that it therefore lies within the  ability
       of the family members in the UK to send  remittances  to  assist  the
       appellants with living and other expenses.


   17. In this appeal, the appellants do not challenge those findings.  They
       were right not to do so.  In R & ors (Iran) v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
       982, he Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be  set  aside
       for error of law on the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.  The findings made  by  the  Judge  were
       plainly open to her.


   18.  The  Judge  does  not  formally   carry   out   an   assessment   of
       proportionality, and to  that  extent  there  is  an  error  of  law.
       However, in my judgement that is not a material error of law  capable
       of affecting the outcome because all of  the  findings  that  I  have
       identified at paragraph 16  of  this  decision  are  relevant  to  an
       assessment of proportionality and weigh against the appellant.


   19. In my judgement, although the Judge states  at  paragraph  [76]  that
       there is nothing that warrants consideration of these appeals outside
       the provisions of the rules, she has in  fact  made  findings  as  to
       matters that would be  relevant  to  a  consideration  of  Article  8
       outside the immigration rules.


   20. In any event, in any proportionality assessment  the  legitimate  aim
       set out in Article 8(2) must now also be read in the light  of  s117B
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and  particularly  sub-
       paragraph  (1)  which  holds  that  the  maintenance   of   effective
       immigration control  is  in  the  public  interest.   The  Judge  was
       required to carry out a balancing exercise taking  into  account  all
       the facts and factors of the case, but also giving regard to s117B of
       the 2002 Act. Of potential relevance were sub-paragraphs (4) and  (5)
       which required the Judge to give little  weight  to  a  private  life
       established at a time when the appellants were in the UK  unlawfully,
       and to the private life established by the appellant at a  time  when
       their immigration status was  precarious.   These  are  matters  that
       again, weigh against the appellants.


   21. In reaching my decision I have had regard to the report of  Dr  Karen
       Stanley, dated 1st December 2015 that is now relied  upon  by  MB  as
       evidence that her health has deteriorated since  the  hearing  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.  Dr Stanley states that she has  been  asked
       to provide a letter of support with  regard  to  MB's  case  to  seek
       asylum in the UK and that  she  reviewed  MB  on  4th  November  2015
       following a referral from  her  GP  with  concerns  over  her  mental
       health.  Her impartiality and ability to assist the  Tribunal  as  an
       independent expert is far from clear from the content of the  letter.
       In any event, her impression is that MB is suffering from a  moderate
       to severe depressive episode following the murder of her  son,  which
       is perpetuated by the threat of deportation and ongoing  uncertainty.
       It  is  said  that  MB  is   currently   receiving   treatment   with
       antidepressants and her GP is monitoring her  response.   Dr  Stanley
       feels  there  is  a  strong  risk  of  self-neglect  and  a   further
       deterioration in her mental health  if  she  is  unable?to  seek  the
       support from her family and health professional that she  needs.   Dr
       Stanley is plainly unaware that the Judge has previously  found  that
       MB has family in Bangladesh.  There is no suggestion  in  the  letter
       that any support that MB might  require  from  health  professionals,
       would not be available to her in Bangladesh.   In  my  judgement  the
       letter adds nothing to MB's claim.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had
       already noted at paragraph [72] of her decision that MB is stated  to
       be suffering from depression and is in receipt of regular medication.
        That remains the position now.


   22. In my judgment, whilst the Judge stated at paragraph [76] that  there
       is nothing that warrants consideration of these appeals  outside  the
       provisions of the Rules, the Judge makes a number of  findings,  that
       are not challenged, and which are relevant for  the  purposes  of  an
       assessment of an Article  8  claim  outside  the  immigration  rules.
       Although the reasoning given in the Judge's decision could have  been
       better expressed, any error in the  approach  of  the  Judge  is  not
       material since  the  appeal  permits  of  no  other  outcome  than  a
       dismissal on the facts of this case. I  am  therefore  not  satisfied
       that the First-Tier  Tribunal  decision  involved  the  making  of  a
       material error of law and I uphold the Decision. Taking the  positive
       findings made by the Judge that weigh in the appellants'  favour  and
       the findings made by Judge that are  relevant  to  an  assessment  of
       proportionality, the appeal could not succeed even if I were  to  set
       aside the decision and remake it.


Notice of Decision


   23. In my judgment any error of law in the Judge's approach  is  not  one
       that is material or affected the outcome of the appeal.


   24. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       stands.


   25. An anonymity direction is made and I have not identified the names of
       individuals in this decision.





Signed                                             Date 20 May 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


   26. As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


       Signed


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



