
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02111/2013
                                                               AA/02112/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued on      |
|on  29 October 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                   XL & SS
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:      Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The procedural position is somewhat confused in the  First-tier  Tribunal
   determination.  Correctly, it is this.  XL, born on 15  August  1975,  is
   the first appellant.  Her son, SS, born  on  19  November  2008,  is  the
   second appellant, having filed a separate notice of  appeal.   Her  other
   son, born on 28 June 2010, is not an appellant, not having filed a notice
   of appeal.

2) The husband of XL is the father of both children and is a  failed  asylum
   seeker, who remains in the UK without status.  All  four  family  members
   are citizens of China, and not of any other country.


3) The first appellant says that she entered the UK  in  2007.   She  sought
   asylum on 6 October  2008.   The  respondent  refused  that  claim  on  3
   December 2012.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Blair dismissed her  appeal  by
   determination  promulgated   on   21   January   2013   (case   reference
   AA/11090/2012).   Having  rejected  the  asylum   claim   for   lack   of
   credibility, the judge took the view that the  respondent  had  erred  by
   deciding issues under Article 8 of the ECHR by reference to  Appendix  FM
   of the Rules, whereas they should have been dealt with under "the law  on
   Article 8 as it stood before these changes were made" (paragraphs 33  and
   34  of  the  determination).   The  judge  thought  that  he  should  not
   substitute his own decision under Article 8 but should remit the issue to
   the respondent.  (That might have been a debatable outcome,  from  either
   side, but neither party disputed it.)

4) By letter of 19 February 2013, at paragraph 16,  the  respondent  refused
   the appellant's claim under reference to Appendix FM of  the  Rules.   At
   paragraph 17 the respondent said it was unnecessary to consider the  case
   outside the Rules, because they struck the balance in relation to Article
   8 in the majority of cases and this case was not exceptional.

5)  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Kempton   dismissed   both   appeals   by
   determination promulgated on 25 April 2013, referring in her  conclusions
   to Article 8 only, without reference to the Rules.

6) That was in line with the approach taken by  the  appellants'  solicitor.
   It was not suggested in the First-tier Tribunal or in the Upper  Tribunal
   that this case  turns  to  any  extent  on  whether  Article  8  requires
   consideration both within and outwith the Rules, nor that anything  turns
   on any difference between the law as it stood before  and  after  9  July
   2012 (when the major amendments to the Rules were made).

7) Mr Caskie referred firstly to the grant of permission to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal, which is on the lines that the judge arguably  needed  to
   deal "with the Article 8 effect of the Home Office delay of  4  years  in
   refusing [the first appellant's] asylum claim in terms of the  principles
   set out in EB (Kosovo) [2009] UKHL 41  rather  than  the  facts  of  that
   case."   He said that the issue is whether "the EB principles"  regarding
   delay were properly taken into account by the  judge.   It  was  accepted
   that she did have regard to the building up of family  and  private  life
   during the period of delay.  The grounds went to the  "third  aspect"  of
   EB, namely whether delay, in  this  case  of  over  4  years  in  a  case
   involving Article 8, when the Secretary of State was aware that  a  child
   or children were involved, should properly reduce the weight to be  given
   to the  interests  of  immigration  control.   At  paragraph  34  of  her
   determination the judge made it plain  that  the  first  4  questions  of
   Razgar were readily answered in the appellant's favour.  At paragraph  36
   the judge found that she was "not able to say for sure that  there  would
   be a disproportionate result for these  children  on  return  to  China."
   That was not an appropriate phrase.  It suggested that the judge  wrongly
   thought that the burden of proof at that stage might be on the appellant.
    The judge went on at paragraph 36 to say that the situation "may not  be
   so bleak as the appellant would wish to paint it", again suggesting  that
   she was unclear as to where the onus lay.  It was plain from Quila in the
   Supreme Court that the onus of justifying a breach of Article 8 rights is
   on the respondent.  Mr Caskie accepted my comment that there is authority
   that once a case arrives at the stage of  assessing  proportionality  and
   weighing the balance, the incidence of the burden of  proof  may  be  not
   important.  However, he argued that the judge plainly found this to be  a
   finely balanced case, and so where the burden lay might be crucial.   The
   two passages quoted suggested that the judge was looking  incorrectly  to
   the appellants to make their case.  In a marginal instance, that  was  an
   error of such importance as to require a fresh decision.

8) If a fresh decision were to  be  made,  Mr  Caskie  sought  to  introduce
   further evidence, updating the  position  regarding  private  and  family
   life.  This goes  mainly  to  show  that  the  second  appellant  is  now
   attending primary school.  Mr Mullen had no  objection  to  admission  of
   further evidence, if that stage were to be reached, and  its  nature  was
   not contentious.  I asked for Mr.  Caskie's  further  submissions,  under
   reservation of the error of law issue.

9) Mr Caskie submitted that it was significant  that  the  second  appellant
   has now moved into primary education, so that his removal  would  involve
   not only removal to another culture and society, he having lived his life
   to date in the UK, but also to another  educational  system.   He  termed
   this as a "double  transition".   He  said  the  case  was  significantly
   stronger for the  second  appellant  than  in  relation  to  the  younger
   sibling.  He relied on IE [2013] CSOH 142 at paragraph 14 :

            Nevertheless, I consider that the respondent has erred  in  law.
        In my opinion, there is force in the submission on  behalf  of  the
        petitioner that the respondent erred in her approach  in  paragraph
        18 to evaluation of the best interests of the children, in that she
        treated the petitioner's immigration status, and in particular  her
        removal from the UK, as a factor in answering the question of  what
        was in the children's best interests. In the light of the  decision
        of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) and the decision of the Upper
        Tribunal in MK (India), it seems to me that as a matter of law,  as
        well as logic, the respondent was not entitled to  proceed  upon  a
        factual assumption  that  the  petitioner  would  be  removed  when
        assessing what was in the best interests of the  children,  with  a
        view to deciding whether or not the petitioner should be removed. I
        have considered  carefully  whether  paragraph  18  can  simply  be
        regarded, as  counsel  for  the  respondent  submitted,  as  poorly
        expressed, but I have concluded that  it  cannot.  The  process  of
        reasoning described in  it  is  quite  clear,  and  clearly  wrong.
        Moreover it seems to me that the error is significant,  given  that
        the respondent  began  paragraph  18  by  stating  "Your  complaint
        appears to be that life would be better for your client's  children
        in the UK as opposed to Nigeria. That may be correct,  but..."  (My
        emphasis.) The implication of these words, as I read paragraph  18,
        is that if the respondent had not had regard to the fact  that  the
        petitioner had no right to remain in the UK and was to be  removed,
        she might well - and I need not put it  higher  than  that  -  have
        reached  a  different  conclusion  as  regards  what  was  in   the
        children's best interests.

10)   He submitted that the impact on the children, in particular the  older
   one, taken along with the delay of 4� years, where there was  a  duty  to
   have  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
   consideration, was such that removal would now be disproportionate, and a
   decision should be substituted in favour of the appellants.

11) Mr Mullen submitted that the judge's wording at  paragraph  36  did  not
   suggest a misunderstanding of the burden of  proof.   These  were  simply
   comments on the shortcomings of the evidence presented by the  appellants
   to support their assertions.  The judge undertook the final  decision  on
   proportionality as a balancing exercise.  She found that the delay by the
   respondent strengthened the case for the appellants, but  concluded  that
   it did not tip the balance in her favour.  That conclusion  was  properly
   open to her.  The judge had been entitled to hold that this case did  not
   come close to the circumstances of EB in respect of delay.  The court  in
   EB was at pains to point  out  that  delay  by  itself  would  rarely  be
   determinative.  The judge's decision should not be interfered with.   The
   appellants had not drawn to the attention of  either  Tribunal  to  cases
   such as AG Nigeria and MK India in which the facts relating  to  children
   were significantly stronger than in the present case.

12) As to remaking the decision, if that were to arise, Mr Mullen  submitted
   that it should be found proportionate to require the appellant's  removal
   under current  circumstances.   The  second  appellant  has  now  entered
   primary education and is integrated in the  UK,  but  he  is  of  Chinese
   nationality and background, and of a young age, when his major ties  must
   still be in the home and family.  It is established that in  the  earlier
   years of a child's life the focus is inevitably on his parents.   IE  was
   not authority for a presumption that an appellant should be treated as if
   having lawful status in the UK.  The possibility of removal of the parent
   could not be excluded from consideration of the  best  interests  of  the
   child.

13) Mr Caskie in reply emphasised that the appellants  did  not  argue  that
   the decision reached was not open to the First-tier Tribunal, rather that
   the decision was flawed by an error of legal approach.  The case  was  so
   finely  balanced  that  the  error  required  a  fresh  decision  to   be
   substituted, and  that  could  properly  be  reached  in  favour  of  the
   appellants.  While the early years of  a  child's  life  were  of  lesser
   significance in terms of integration into the UK,  that  contradicts  the
   respondent's "bright line" of 7 years in the Rules.  If the first 4 years
   of life count for little there are cases where  4  years'  residence  (eg
   from age 8 to age 12) are more significant than a full 7, and the  bright
   line envisaged  by  the  Rules  disappears.    In  this  case,  residence
   throughout a life of almost 6 years is a significant  factor,  and  taken
   along with the unusual and unexplained delay is sufficient for the appeal
   to be allowed.  His point in relation  to  IE  was  not  that  the  first
   appellant had to be deemed to have  been  here  lawfully,  but  that  the
   nature of her residence was a neutral factor  in  assessing  the  child's
   best interests.

14) I reserved my determination.

15) It is undisputed in this case that both the date and  the  substance  of
   amendments of the Rules are of no  significance,  and  that  whether  the
   issue is thought to arise under the Rules or under the general law as  to
   Article 8, the same proportionality test, as required by  the  Strasbourg
   jurisprudence, applies - cf. MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192,
   paragraphs 43-46.

16) The first issue is whether Judge Kempton erred in  law  in  relation  to
   the respondent's  delay  in  decision  making.   Neither  party  referred
   directly to what was said in EB, which is reported at [2008] Imm AR 713.

17) Lord Bingham said at paragraphs 13-16:
   Delay
   1. In Strbac v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ
      848, [2005] Imm AR  504,  para  25,  counsel  for  the  applicant  was
      understood  to  contend,  in  effect,  that  if  the  decision  on  an
      application for leave to enter or remain was made after the expiry  of
      an unreasonable period of time, and if the application would  probably
      have met with success, or a greater chance of success, if it had  been
      decided within a reasonable time, and if  the  applicant  had  in  the
      meantime established a family life  in  this  country,  he  should  be
      treated when the decision is ultimately made as if  the  decision  had
      been made at that earlier time. For reasons  given  by  Laws  LJ,  the
      Court of Appeal rejected this submission, for which it  held  Shala  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 233, [2003]
      INLR 349 to be no authority. While I consider that Shala was correctly
      decided on its facts, I am satisfied that  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
      right to reject this submission. As Mr Sales  QC  for  the  respondent
      pointed out, there is no specified period within which, or  at  which,
      an immigration decision  must  be  made;  the  facts,  and  with  them
      government policy, may change over a period, as they did here; and the
      duty of the decision-maker is to have regard to  the  facts,  and  any
      policy in force, when the decision is made. Mr  Drabble  QC,  for  the
      appellant, did not make this submission, and he was right  not  to  do
      so.
   1. It does not, however, follow that delay in the decision-making process
      is necessarily irrelevant to the decision. It may,  depending  on  the
      facts, be relevant in any one of three ways. First, the applicant  may
      during the period of any delay develop closer personal and social ties
      and establish deeper roots in the community than he could  have  shown
      earlier. The longer the period of the delay, the likelier this  is  to
      be true. To the extent that it is true, the  applicant's  claim  under
      article 8 will necessarily  be  strengthened.  It  is  unnecessary  to
      elaborate this point since the respondent accepts it.
   1. Delay may be relevant in a second, less  obvious,  way.  An  immigrant
      without leave to enter or remain is in a  very  precarious  situation,
      liable to be removed at any time. Any relationship into which such  an
      applicant enters is likely to be, initially, tentative, being  entered
      into under the shadow of severance by administrative  order.  This  is
      the more true where the other party to the relationship  is  aware  of
      the applicant's precarious position. This has been treated as relevant
      to the quality of the relationship. Thus in R (Ajoh)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 655,  para  11,  it  was
      noted that "It was reasonable to expect that both [the applicant]  and
      her husband would be aware of her precarious immigration status". This
      reflects the Strasbourg court's listing of  factors  relevant  to  the
      proportionality of removing an immigrant convicted of crime:  "whether
      the spouse knew about the offence at the time when he or  she  entered
      into a family relationship" see Boultif v Switzerland (2001)  33  EHRR
      50, para 48;  Mokrani  v  France  (2003)  40  EHRR  123,  para  30.  A
      relationship so entered into may  well  be  imbued  with  a  sense  of
      impermanence. But if months pass without a decision  to  remove  being
      made, and months become years, and year succeeds year,  it  is  to  be
      expected that this sense of impermanence will fade and the expectation
      will grow that if the authorities had intended to remove the applicant
      they would have taken steps to do so. This result depends on no  legal
      doctrine but on an understanding of how, in some cases, minds may work
      and it may affect the proportionality of removal.
   1. Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight otherwise to be
      accorded to the requirements of firm and fair immigration control,  if
      the delay is shown to be the result of a  dysfunctional  system  which
      yields unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes. In the present
      case the appellant's cousin, who entered the country and  applied  for
      asylum at the  same  time  and  whose  position  is  not  said  to  be
      materially different, was granted exceptional leave to remain,  during
      the two-year period which  it  took  the  respondent  to  correct  its
      erroneous decision to refuse the appellant's application on grounds of
      non-compliance. In the case of JL (Sierra Leone), heard by  the  Court
      of Appeal at the same time as the present case, there was  a  somewhat
      similar pattern of facts. JL escaped from Sierra Leone with  her  half
      brother in 1999, and claimed asylum. In 2000 her claim was refused  on
      grounds of non-compliance. As in the appellant's  case  this  decision
      was erroneous, as the respondent recognised eighteen months later.  In
      February 2006 the half brother was  granted  humanitarian  protection.
      She was not. A system so operating cannot be said to be  "predictable,
      consistent and fair as  between  one  applicant  and  another"  or  as
      yielding "consistency of treatment between one aspiring immigrant  and
      another". To the extent that this is shown to be so,  it  may  have  a
      bearing  on  the  proportionality  of  removal,  or  of  requiring  an
      applicant to apply from out of country. As  Carnwath  LJ  observed  in
      Akaeke v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
      947, [2005] INLR 575, para 25:
           "Once it is accepted that unreasonable delay on the part of  the
           Secretary of State is capable of being a relevant  factor,  then
           the weight to be given to it in the particular case was a matter
           for the tribunal."

18) Lord Hope agreed with Lord Bingham and put the matter of delay  thus  at
   paragraph 27:

    I draw attention to this history in order to  emphasise  my  noble  and
    learned friend's point that the weight which would otherwise  be  given
    to the requirements of firm and fair immigration control may be reduced
    if the delay is shown to be due to a  system  which  is  dysfunctional.
    There is, of course, no right to a decision within any given period  of
    time. Article 8 claimants ought not to be advantaged merely because  of
    deficiencies in the control system, as my noble and learned friend Lord
    Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood points out. Allowance must  also  be  made
    for the administrative burden that is unavoidable if the system  is  to
    be fair, and a case ought not to succeed merely because it  might  have
    been stronger if it had been determined earlier. But  the  shortcomings
    that have affected the appellant's case cannot be explained or  excused
    on these grounds. On the  contrary,  the  balance  in  the  appellant's
    favour is significantly strengthened by the fact that  the  explanation
    for the delay is so unsatisfactory.

19) Lord Scott would have allowed the appeal outright rather than  remitting
   the case to the AIT, on the view that the  unfairness  to  the  appellant
   through having been deprived of the benefit of the same policy as applied
   to his cousin was overwhelming.

20) Baroness Hale said at paragraph 32:

    For the reasons given in the opinions of my noble and learned  friends,
    Lord Bingham of Cornhill and Lord  Hope  of  Craighead,  with  which  I
    agree, I would allow this appeal and make the order which Lord  Bingham
    proposes. In particular, I agree that prolonged and  inexcusable  delay
    on the part of the decision-making authorities must,  on  occasion,  be
    capable of reducing the weight which would normally  be  given  to  the
    need  for  firm,  fair  and  consistent  immigration  control  in   the
    proportionality exercise. That is a legitimate aim which will  normally
    carry great weight  in  immigration  cases.  The  heavy  administrative
    burdens which such a system entails are well understood. But in article
    8 cases, one is always  concerned  with  whether  the  correct  balance
    between the legitimate aim and the means employed has  been  struck  on
    the facts  of  the  particular  case.  Where  the  aim  has  failed  as
    spectacularly as it did here, the general importance which is  normally
    attached to it must to some extent be diminished. But it has  still  to
    be weighed in the balance along with everything else.

21) (Lord Brown disagreed with Lord Bingham on the  question  of  delay,  as
   explained at paragraph 42.)

22) Judge Kempton found that the delay in the first and second of  the  ways
   mentioned by Lord Bingham significantly strengthened these appeals.  That
   is  very  plain  at  paragraphs  20  and  23,  in  particular,   of   her
   determination.  It is as to the third aspect of delay that she is said to
   have erred.

23) At paragraph 35 Judge Kempton distinguished EB (Kosovo)  on  its  facts.
   I do not think there is a sharp line to be drawn between comparing  facts
   and deriving  principle  from  such  cases.   Lord  Bingham  derived  his
   decision partly from comparison of the facts of EB with those of JL.   It
   was highly significant in both EB and JL  that  a  close  relative  under
   similar circumstances gained  protection  through  an  earlier  decision,
   disclosing inconsistency and unfairness in the system.  There is no  such
   point of comparison in this case.  Nor has it been said that other  cases
   involving young children (of Chinese or any other origin) have  succeeded
   because of similar delay.

24) The present case is not one which ought  to  succeed  because  it  might
   have been stronger if determined earlier.  If a prompt decision had  been
   made, the case would have been much weaker.

25) The judge took it very much into account that there had been  inordinate
   delay by the respondent in deciding the  case.   She  thought  that  went
   quite strongly in favour of the appellants,  but  she  correctly  treated
   that as only one of the factors in the proportionality outcome.

26) I find no error of law in the judge's  approach  to  the  delay  by  the
   respondent.

27) Some subsidiary criticisms were made  of  the  wording  of  passages  at
   paragraph 36 of the determination, reading these  as  implying  that  the
   burden lay on the appellants rather than on the  respondent.   I  do  not
   think that is a fair overall reading.  There was nothing wrong with being
   less than sure about some aspect of the evidence, or with observing  that
   the appellants sought to paint a  bleaker  picture  than  was  justified,
   provided that the eventual result was a balancing  exercise.   The  judge
   found that the evidence did not show a significantly  adverse  impact  on
   the children on return.  Her decision was ultimately reached on balancing
   all relevant factors, not on where the onus lay.

28) Although no direct criticism was made, the  determination  is  unhappily
   worded at paragraph 38 as to the  appellant  not  having  discharged  the
   burden of proof on Article 8, and at paragraph 39 as to the appellant not
   having engaged Article 8.  What the  judge  should  have  said  was  that
   although Article 8 was engaged, as she had found with  no  difficulty  at
   paragraph 34, removal was in the end a proportionate measure.

29) In the alternative, I would have substituted a decision to  dismiss  the
   appeals.  The submission related to IE was (I thought) put  in  a  rather
   complicated way, but if its essence is that the  immigration  history  of
   the parents is  left  out  when  assessing  what  would  best  serve  the
   interests  of  the  children,  and   becomes   relevant   only   at   the
   proportionality stage, I agree.  However, there is nothing  very  unusual
   or extraordinary about young children moving far around the modern world,
   and the evidence does  not  show  that  anything  seriously  against  the
   children's interests would arise from the family moving to China.   As  a
   fairly typical case of a Chinese family with two young  children  and  an
   adverse immigration history, it would not  be  disproportionate  for  the
   respondent to remove the  appellants,  notwithstanding  that  the  second
   appellant has entered the first year of primary school.   The  additional
   factor  of  delay  is  in  the  appellants'  favour,  but  there  is   no
   inconsistency or  unfairness  of  outcome,  reducing  the  weight  to  be
   accorded to immigration control to an extent which requires  the  appeals
   to be allowed.

30) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

31) An anonymity direction, made in the First-tier  Tribunal,  continues  to
   apply.





                               [pic]
                               31 October 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
