
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02850/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 23rd October 2015                 |On 13th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     tk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vijay Jogadeshan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes,  promulgated  on  31st  March  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 12th March 2015.  In the determination, the
    Judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on 2nd March  1982.
    He appealed against a decision of the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    dated 7th March 2013, following his representations, made  nearly  five
    years ago, in relation to his right to remain in this  country  on  the
    basis of Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE, arising from  his  relationship
    with his stepchild M, although  it  was  accepted,  as  DNA  tests  had
    proved, that he was not the natural father of the child of his wife.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his  removal  from  the  UK  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights  based  on  the
    rights of others, and in  particular,  on  M,  a  child  with  whom  he
    maintains a parental relationship, and that his removal would not be in
    her best interest.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The Judge observed that although the Appellant was not the father of M,



         "... to the Appellant's credit,  the  evidence  suggests  that  the
         Appellant's interest in M has been consistent over time and in line
         with the geographical limitations imposed by their  living  so  far
         apart and his limited means.  This is not a case where his interest
         is waxed and waned in line with the threat of  removal"  (paragraph
         9).

    However, the Judge held that in  applying  Section  117B  of  the  2014
    Immigration Act,

         "... the problem for the Appellant is that his  removal  would  not
         disturb the living arrangements of M, she  would  remain  with  her
         mother and family in North Somerset and there is nothing about  the
         Appellant's removal that would lead  to  her  being  'expected'  to
         leave the UK" (paragraph 11).

 5. The Judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the Judge failed to  have  regard
    to the fact that under Section 117B(6) the Appellant had a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship "with a qualifying child" and this had
    never been  considered  by  the  Judge.   Secondly,  Judge  Parkes  had
    proceeded on the basis  that  the  Appellant's  role  in  M's  life  is
    "limited" and that it was "not so strong" (see paragraph 20)  but  this
    failed to take into account  critical  evidence.   One  such  piece  of
    evidence was a special educational needs coordinator at M's school  who
    had expressly stated that, "it is very certain that M's father provides
    an important role in her upbringing which cannot easily  be  replaced".
    The family centre worker  also  described  M's  relationship  with  the
    Appellant as "source of respite ... M also shows an improvement in  her
    behaviour when she sees her father.  If contact ceases an  increase  in
    problem behaviour and child difficulties is expected ...".

 7. On 3rd July 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

 8. On 23rd July 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Secretary  of
    State.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing  before  me  on  23rd  October  2015,  Mr  David  Mills,
    appearing on behalf of the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  submitted
    that he would have to accept at the outset, that although this was  the
    appeal of the Appellant, there was an error of law in the Judge  having
    failed to consider Section 117B(6), and particular in the light of  the
    fact that he had  already  accepted  at  a  number  of  places  in  the
    determination, that the Appellant performed  parental  responsibilities
    in relation to the child M, who was a qualifying child.   Once  it  was
    accepted   that   the   Appellant   was   exercising   such    parental
    responsibilities, then the statutory presumption under Section 117B(vi)
    was now in favour of not removing a qualifying child because the public
    interest did not require it.

10. For his part, Mr Jogadeshan wisely agreed.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  Judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that I should set  aside
    the decision,  (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA  2007),  and  remake  the
    decision.  My  reasons  are  two-fold.   First,  the  Judge  below  has
    accepted that,

         "... the Appellant's interest in M has been  consistent  over  time
         and in line with the  geographical  limitations  imposed  by  their
         living so far apart and his limited means.   This  is  not  a  case
         where its interests are waxed and waned in line with the threat  of
         removal" (paragraph 9).

12. Second, the Judge was wrong thereafter to conclude that,  just  because
    their living arrangements were such that they were  living  separately,
    or that the Appellant was not the biological father of  the  Appellant,
    that this would somehow detract from the role that  the  Appellant  was
    playing.  For example, he states that, "whilst the Appellant does  play
    a part in M's life provides some support for her his role  is  limited,
    he is not her biological father and she inevitably will  come  to  know
    that ..." (paragraph 20).

13. Third, the Judge does not take into account the fact that the child, M,
    is a "qualifying child", as from the Appellant's point  of  view,  this
    was the most important provision in Section 117B.

Re-Making the Decision

14. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    Judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons I  have  already  set
    out above.  In  particular,  I  note  the  Judge's  findings  that  the
    Appellant's interest has been consistent and has  not  waxed  or  waned
    even when things were getting tough for the Appellant.

15. Second, there is evidence in the form of the report  from  the  special
    education needs coordinator which shows that the Appellant  is  playing
    "an important role in her upbringing which cannot easily be  replaced".
    The family centre worker has also  said  that  "if  contact  ceases  an
    increase in problem behaviour and child difficulties is expected  ...".



16. Thirdly, however, as Mr Mills had made clear, the Appellant's child, M,
    is a British citizen child, and her mother is a British citizen, and  M
    is a "qualifying child" under  Section  117B(6)  in  that  there  is  a
    genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  her  from   the
    Appellant's side.

17. Additionally, it would not be reasonable to expect  her  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom which is a prospect that will be thrust upon her if  the
    Appellant is removed back to Zimbabwe and cannot then meet  M,  bearing
    in mind that the family centre  worker  was  clear  that  "M  shows  an
    improvement in her behaviour when she sees her father ...".  In such  a
    case the public interest consideration is  plainly  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant and not against him.  I allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that it  falls  to  be  set  aside.   I  set  aside  the
decision of the original Judge.  I remake the  decision  as  follows.   This
appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    2nd November 2015

