
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02749/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination sent           |
|on 1 August 2013                              |On 05 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              QUDRATULLAH SADIQ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitor
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, of uncertain age.

2)  The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for   reasons
   explained in a letter dated 8 March 2013.

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski dismissed the appellant's appeal  by
   determination promulgated on 7 May 2013.

4) These are the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

   Ground (1) effect of the judge's assessment of age:


   1. Issue: Immigration Judge held that the appellant's date of  birth  was
      21 March 1995.  He had entered the UK as an unaccompanied  minor.   He
      was still under 18 years old as at the  date  of  the  decision  being
      appealed (8 March 2013).  In these circumstances an obligations  arose
      on the part of the respondent to endeavour to  trace  members  of  the
      appellant's family  (Reg  6  of  the  Seekers  (Reception  Conditions)
      Regulations 2005) in addition to that to take into  account  the  best
      interests of the appellant (Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009).  Such a duty would not arise if  the  appellant
      had not established that  he  had  no  relatives  in  Afghanistan  (HK
      Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (2012)  Imm
      AR 1054 (paragraph 25)).  The first question that has to be considered
      is whether the Immigration  Judge's  findings/  observations  in  this
      respect are safe.  It is submitted that they are not.


   2. Paragraph 37: the Immigration Judge observes that the  appellant  gave
      answers she considered unsatisfactory in relation to question  by  her
      about the  appellant  attending  the  mosque.   These  questions  (and
      answers) may be relevant in relation to the  appellant's  practice  in
      attending worship, but  they  are  not  in  relation  to  whether  the
      appellant had relatives in Afghanistan to whom  he  could  return  and
      with whom he could be expected to live (per the test  set  out  in  HK
      (supra) before the Upper Tribunal.) The fact that  the  appellant  may
      have relatives who attend a mosque does  not  justify  the  conclusion
      that he  could  live  with  them.   Therefore  any  finding  that  the
      appellant could live with these people is not justified.

   3. Conclusion: that means that the obligation referred  to  in  paragraph
      2.1 (above) arises.  There  was  no  discussion  of  how  or  in  what
      circumstances  the  duty  to  endeavour  to  trace   the   appellant's
      relatives.  Any conclusion that the obligation ceases as soon  as  the
      appellant reached 18 years (21 March 2013) is not correct (KA,  supra,
      paragraph 25); there is no automatic or "bright line" rule whereby  an
      appellant, one day, (before his/her eighteenth birthday)  is  entitled
      to expect the respondent to observe these statutory duties,  then  the
      next (after he attains 18 years) not to  do  so.   The  appellant  was
      under 18 years old at the time of the decision.  He was a minor.   The
      respondent has not discharged her statutory duty.

2. Ground (2) - assessment of credibility:  The Immigration Judge  does  not
   believe the appellant's evidence that (i) the Taliban knew he had  access
   to an American base (paragraph 29) and (ii) that he was attacked by  them
   (paragraph 36).  She assesses this evidence  (or  at  least  (i))  having
   regard to country information (see paragraphs 32-35).  She has  erred  in
   holding that his evidence:

   1. Visit to American army base: The Immigration  Judge  states  that  she
      does not accept as credible that this would have happened (or that the
      appellant was ever at a army base (paragraph 31)).  The basis for this
      reasoning is speculation.  She states that she "... would have thought
      that perimeter controls would have noticed anyone ... taking  pictures
      ..." paragraph 29).  There was no evidence about how an American  army
      base would be protected.  Nor was there any  detailed  evidence  about
      the nature of the appellant's father's job which  might  entitled  the
      Immigration Judge not to accept that someone like him "... would  have
      had permission to bring in extraneous  persons  ..."  (paragraph  29).
      Speculation  is  justified  in  some  circumstances,  but  not   these
      circumstances.


   2. Malign attention of the Taliban: the Immigration Judge does not accept
      that the appellant came to the attention  of  the  Taliban  (paragraph
      31).   This  finding  is  inconsistent  with  her  acceptance  of  and
      reference to objective evidence as to how the  Taliban  operated  (see
      paragraphs 32-34).  She accepts in these paragraphs that  the  Taliban
      inter alia want to recruit young persons as suicide bombers.  There is
      no " ... tension ..." between such recruitment and wanting to use  the
      appellant to try and enter the American army  base:  the  Taliban  may
      have wanted to use the appellant in this way in order to  gain  access
      to the base.  In any event, the relevant findings in  this  connection
      assume a knowledge about the activities of the Taliban  that  was  not
      open to the Immigration Judge to reach.

   3. Attack by the Taliban: The findings at paragraph 36 were not  open  to
      the Immigration Judge to reach.   The  Immigration  Judge  appears  to
      reach the conclusion that the Taliban would not have been deterred  by
      the reaction by neighbours to screams from the  appellant  on  account
      what is said between paragraphs 32-34 as to how the  Taliban  operate.
      Nothing in what is  there  said  justifies  the  conclusion  that  the
      Taliban would not have been deterred by the activities of persons (the
      appellant's neighbours) who had been made aware of their presence.

5) Mr Mullen conceded that the determination erred in law, in particular  by
   failing to deal with how KA might bear on the case (that authority having
   been cited to the judge) and also by having no regard to  EU  and  others
   (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32 (not  cited,  but  reported  well
   before the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal).   It  is  unnecessary  to
   consider the other alleged errors in detail, because it was common ground
   between representatives that the case could be properly resolved only  by
   an entirely fresh hearing.

6) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   No  findings
   in the determination are to stand.  Under s.12(2)(b)(i) of the  2007  Act
   and Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial fact finding
   necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s) of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are  not  to  include  Judge
   Mozolowski.

7) (No order for anonymity has been requested or made.)





                               [pic]
                                1 August 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
