
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02881/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 5 August 2013                                |On 21 October 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           Hammad Ur Rehman Talha
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Vaughn, Barry Clark, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wardle, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Hammad Ur Rehman Talha, was born on 17 April 1985 and is
    a male citizen of Pakistan.  By a determination dated 16 October  2012,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law and set aside its determination dated 24  April  2012.
    Judge Davey directed that none of the findings of fact  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should stand.

 2. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard  of  proof  is
    whether there is a real risk the appellant will  suffer,  respectively,
    persecution or treatment contrary to the ECHR (in particular,  Articles
    2 and 3) if he is returned to Pakistan.   I  have  considered  all  the
    documentary and oral evidence together as a  totality  before  reaching
    any findings of fact.  I have sought to identify "core  parts"  of  the
    appellant's evidence to distinguish these from more peripheral  aspects
    of the evidence.  I have examined the account which the  appellant  has
    given of past  events  in  Pakistan  against  the  background  material
    relating to that country.

 3. I had the papers which the appellant has adduced by way of  documentary
    evidence  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  together  with  the  new   and
    additional letter from the Ahmadiyya and Muslim Association UK is dated
    14 July  2013.   I  have  considered  carefully  the  country  guidance
    relating to Ahamdis in Pakistan, in particular MN  (Ahmadis  -  Country
    Conditions - Risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 000389 (IAC) .

 4. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  14  September  2007  as  a
    student.  He remained with leave as a student until 28 April 2011  when
    his leave expired.  HE Then remained without  leave  until  15  October
    2011 when he contacted Croydon Asylum Screening Unit.   His  claim  for
    asylum was not registered by the respondent until 23 January 2012.

 5. The appellant has been accepted by the respondent as a follower of  the
    Ahmadi religion.  The appellant claims  to  fear  persecution  or  ill-
    treatment in Pakistan at the ands of non-Ahmadis.  The appellant claims
    to have had a relationship with a woman who used to teach at  the  same
    school as the appellant.  Her name is Hina.   The  appellant  discussed
    the Ahmadi faith with Hina in  private.   The  appellant  also  held  a
    position within a youth organisation working for the Ahmadi  community.
    In May 2004, the appellant was threatened and warned to stop preaching.
     He continued to preach in defiance of the  warning  and,  on  13  June
    2004, he was attacked by mullahs.  The appellant  attempted  to  report
    the incident to the police but they refused to register it or take  any
    action.  Thereafter, mullahs came to the appellant's house and  started
    throwing stones at it and, on 14 July 2004, the appellant was beaten up
    by mullahs. His brother was seriously injured  in  the  same  incident.
    The appellant moved to Faisalabad in September 2005 but could not  stay
    there because the mullahs continued to search for him.   The  appellant
    started to work in a school in his home area again in February 2006 but
    was again threatened.  By this time, Hina had decided that  she  wished
    to convert to the Ahmadi faith.  In January  2007,  the  appellant  met
    Hina at the school and continued to preach to her.  The appellant  told
    Hina that he could not marry her until she had converted to the  Ahmadi
    faith.  The appellant thought that it would be sensible if she were  to
    apply for a student visa to come to the United Kingdom.  On  14  August
    2011, the appellant claims to have received a telephone call from  Hina
    as her family had found out that she had tried to convert to the Ahmadi
    faith and her brothers now intended  to  kill  the  appellant.   On  24
    August 2011, the appellant claims that he was told by his  father  that
    mullahs had attacked the house and broken down  the  front  door.   The
    appellant has continued to  preach  the  Ahmadi  faith  in  the  United
    Kingdom including to a friend who is now in the process of  converting.
    He has distributed leaflets in public places.

 6. The respondent did not accept  the  appellant's  account  as  credible.
    Although she did accept that he was a low level member  of  the  Ahmadi
    community, the specific incidents to which I have referred  above  were
    not accepted as credible by the respondent.  The respondent also relied
    on Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004, the appellant having reasonably delayed making a  claim
    for asylum after he had been refused  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student in 2011.

 7. The  appellant  gave  evidence  in  Urdu  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter.  He adopted his  written  statement  as  his  evidence-in-
    chief.  He was asked about the most recent Ahmadiyya Association letter
    which had been provided.  He said  that  he  had  contacted  the  local
    president of the Association in Huddersfield in  order  to  obtain  the
    letter.

 8. Cross-examined by Mr  Wardle,  the  appellant  was  asked  whether  the
    Ahmadiyya Association UK had been aware of the incidents in  2004  when
    the appellant had been threatened.  The appellant replied,  "they  must
    have been able to find out.  But I am not sure."

 9. The appellant confirmed that he is living with a cousin in  the  United
    Kingdom  although, when pressed on this point, he said  "[We]  are  not
    like blood relations."  He then said that the person with  whom  he  is
    living in the United Kingdom is not his cousin but had accommodated him
    when he came to the United Kingdom on his student visa.   He  indicated
    that he and the individual accommodating him were "distant relations."

10. The appellant had been in fear of his life since 2004.   He  was  asked
    why he had only  applied for a visa to come to the United  Kingdom  (by
    his own account in  order  to  seek  refuge)  in  December  2005.   The
    appellant said that his financial situation had not  been  good  before
    2005 so he had been unable to apply sooner.

11. The appellant was asked by Mr Wardle how long before  he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2007 had mullahs attempted to abduct him in Pakistan.
     The appellant replied that it had been about one year before  he  came
    here, that is in 2006.  Mr Wardle referred the appellant to his witness
    statement in which he stated that he had met  Hina  in  2007  and  then
    began to preach to her.  I asked the appellant to explain why he should
    have been the target for abduction in 2006 for preaching to  Hina  when
    that incident had occurred a year before he had actually met her.   The
    appellant stated that he had met Hina in 2006;  the  witness  statement
    indicates that he met her on 14 January 2007.  The appellant sought  to
    explain the difference by saying that he was referring to the  time  he
    had begun preaching to Hina; before January  2007,  she  had  not  been
    "mentally ready" to receive the preaching.

12. The appellant was asked why he had left Hina behind in Pakistan if  she
    was in danger of being killed for her interest  in  the  Ahmadi  faith.
    The appellant said "Hina is now a prisoner in her own house."  She  had
    not (as the appellant anticipated would be the case) been killed by her
    family or others.

13. At paragraph 4.2 of his screening interview,  the  appellant  had  been
    asked when Hina's parents and family  became  aware  of  his  religious
    activities with her.  The appellant had  replied,  "on  13/07/2011  the
    last time I spoke to this girlfriend I was hoping to  marry,  she  said
    that her parents are now against me and after my life."  In his written
    statement at [15] the appellant wrote,

         "In the meantime I was always in contact  with  Hina  and  she  now
         wanted to become an Ahmadi as soon as possible.  My life is now  in
         danger  there  [in  Pakistan]  because  on  14  August  2011   Hina
         telephoned me and told me that her family now knew that I had  been
         preaching my religious beliefs to her and tried to convert her into
         an Ahmadi and we wanted to get married."

     Mr Wardle asked the appellant to explain this apparent  discrepancy  in
    his  evidence.   The  appellant  acknowledged  that  the  "dates   were
    different".  The appellant said that July 2011 had been the  last  time
    when he had spoken with Hina.   The  appellant  was  then  referred  to
    question 127 of the asylum interview when the  appellant  had  replied,
    "14 August  2011  I  received  a  telephone  call  from  Hina..."   The
    appellant said there had been a "misunderstanding with the dates."   He
    claimed that he had been "really depressed" and that this had  affected
    his memory.

14. The  appellant  was  asked  about  his  activities  within  the  Ahmadi
    community in the United Kingdom including the distribution of leaflets.
     In his asylum interview [question 157] the appellant had  been  unable
    to produce a copy of one of the leaflets because he had said that "next
    week I will be starting distributing leaflets in  North  London."   The
    asylum interview is dated  15  February  2012.   Mr  Wardle  asked  the
    appellant why, since he had been in the United Kingdom since 2007,  the
    appellant had waited until 2012 before beginning to distribute leaflets
    and actively engaging in the propagation  of  the  Ahmadi  faith.   The
    appellant said that this  was  incorrect.   He  claimed  to  have  been
    preaching in the United Kingdom ever since he arrived.

15. The Tribunal reserved its determination.

16. I have considered  all  the  documentary  evidence  and  oral  evidence
    together and find that the appellant is not  a  witness  of  truth.   I
    accept (as does the respondent) that the appellant is  an  adherent  of
    the Ahmadi faith but I do not accept anything that he has told me about
    incidents which he claims occurred in Pakistan before he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2007.  I do not find that he has attempted to convert
    Hina or any other individual to the Ahmadi faith.  I find that he is  a
    thoroughly unreliable witness.

17. I have reached these findings for the following reasons.  The appellant
    was unable to give a proper explanation for the  discrepancies  in  his
    evidence which I have referred to above and which were  exposed  during
    cross-examination.  I  have  no  medical  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant (who may be suffering from mild depression)  is  so  mentally
    ill such that his illness  interferes  with  his  memory  or  cognitive
    functions.  I find that the appellant should have  been  able  to  have
    remembered the salient dates in his account when asked to  repeat  that
    account on different occasions; his failure to be able to do  so  is  a
    strong indicator that his account is untrue.  He has singly  failed  to
    give a consistent account even in his written evidence, and was  unable
    to provide any credible  explanation  for  discrepancies  under  cross-
    examination.  I consider the discrepancies to be serious  because  they
    penetrate to the very core of  the  appellant's  account  (his  claimed
    conversion of the woman Hina).  I find  that  had  the  appellant  been
    telling the truth, he would have been able to have given  a  consistent
    account of these events.  It follows that I find that  the  events  did
    not occur as the appellant describes them or at all.

18. The appellant's credibility is also seriously undermined  also  by  his
    immigration history.  I find that it is significant that the appellant,
    who has been in the United Kingdom for a number of years,  should  only
    have  considered  claiming  international  protection  here  when   his
    application for further leave to remain as a student was refused.   The
    appellant claims that he had suffered serious threats and  intimidation
    in 2004 and he has not provided any proper explanation as to why he did
    not claim asylum upon arrival in the United Kingdom or soon thereafter.
     I find also that an indication of the appellant's lack of interest  in
    proselytising or preaching his Ahmadi faith is  provided  by  the  fact
    that he waited several years (indeed, until after the  commencement  of
    his asylum claim) before assisting the Ahmadi community by distributing
    leaflets.

19. I have had regard to the letters from the Ahmadiyya Association.  I  am
    aware from the Upper Tribunal decision in MN that such letters  may  be
    of important probative value.  I do not consider that to be the case in
    the present appeal.  Two letters sent by the Ahmadiyya  Association  to
    assist this appellant.  The first letter was sent on  26  January  2012
    and confirmed that "according to the information received on 21/12/2011
    from our headquarters in Pakistan the person whose details are set  out
    below is an Ahmadi by birth and a bona fide member of  the  Ahmadi  and
    Muslim  community.   His  reputation  in  the  society,  general  moral
    character, conduct and contact with the community were good and he used
    to participate in its activities.  He was a  member  of  our  auxiliary
    organisation Kauddamul Ahmadyya (Ahmadi Youths) in Jahang Sadar Branch.
     He served voluntarily as the organiser for the Ahmadi children of  the
    Jahang district."

     The second letter dated 14 July  2013  noted  that  the  appellant  was
    "connected" to the Kauddamul Ahmadyya  and  makes  no  mention  of  the
    Jahang Sadar Branch.  It refers to his having worked  as  an  organiser
    for Ahmadi children (Nazin Atfal) and says also that he worked with the
    Saiq (assistant guide of Khuddam).

20. Whilst I note that there is some similarity in the contents of the  two
    letters, it is not clear why, for example, the appellant's  involvement
    with the Saiq is not referred to in the first letter.   Further,  there
    was no mention made in either of the letters regarding the  appellant's
    claimed  difficulties  in  Pakistan.   I  find  that  this  is   rather
    surprising given the roles  within  organisations  connected  with  the
    Ahmadi community the appellant claims to have occupied.   Both  letters
    are written  in  a  standard  format;  paragraph  4  dealing  with  the
    appellant's activities in Huddersfield reads very much like a  verbatim
    repetition of information provided  either  by  the  appellant  or  the
    president  of  the  Huddersfield  North   Branch   of   the   Ahmadiyya
    Association.  Indeed, if the appellant is as active as he claims to  be
    in his local branch of the Ahmadi community, one might have expected  a
    witness statement or possibly live evidence from the president or other
    official of the Huddersfield branch of the Association.  I am very much
    left with the impression that  both  the  letters  from  the  Ahmadiyya
    Association, no doubt written in good faith, do little more than repeat
    evidence provided by the  appellant  himself;  the  evidence  does  not
    assist the appellant whom I find to be an unreliable witness.

21. I have  to  consider  the  cumulative  effect  of  these  findings  and
    observations upon my assessment of the totality  of  the  evidence.   I
    have to formulate a factual matrix upon which to base  my  conclusions.
    I find that this  appellant  has  claimed  asylum  for  reasons  wholly
    unconnected with a fear of being persecuted in Pakistan.  I  find  that
    he is a member of the Ahmadi faith but that he has not been  persecuted
    or ill-treated in Pakistan as he claims or at all.  I  accept  that  he
    may have belatedly become active on behalf of the Ahmadi  community  in
    the United Kingdom but I find that there is  very  strong  evidence  to
    show that his motivation for doing so is not spiritual or religious and
    is instead as a direct consequence of his need to  support  his  asylum
    claim/appeal.  I find that the appellant  will  not  be  persecuted  in
    Pakistan as an Ahmadi  at  least  in  part  because  the  preaching  or
    proselytising of his religion is of no importance to him.  I  make  the
    specific finding that he has not and will not  in  the  future  refrain
    from open discourse of the Ahmadi faith in Pakistan for a fear of being
    persecuted for doing so.  I find that it is of no or little concern  to
    him that the threat  of  persecution  may  constrain  many  Ahmadis  in
    Pakistan from an open expression of their faith.

22. I have to consider whether this appellant, bearing the  characteristics
    which I find he possesses, may safely return to Pakistan.   I  consider
    the findings which I  have  made  in  the  context  of  the  background
    evidence in the country guidance.  As the Tribunal in MN  acknowledged,
    "it is and has long been, possible in general for Ahmadis  to  practise
    their faith on a restricted basis either in  private  or  in  community
    with other Ahmadis without infringing domestic  Pakistan  law."   As  I
    have noted above, this appellant will not find it remotely  distressing
    to return to practise his faith "on a  restricted  basis"  because  the
    open expression of his faith is not "of particular  importance  to  his
    religious identity".  In those circumstances,  I find that he does  not
    face a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  persecution  upon  return  to
    Pakistan on account of his religious faith or  for  any  other  reason.
    His appeal is dismissed accordingly.









DECISION

23. This appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

24. This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

25. This appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.






Signed                              Date 10 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
