
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02883/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 18 September 2015                 |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                SHAMEEN SAIFI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnrose for Broudie Jackson and Cantor.
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Austin promulgated on 30 June 2015  which dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision dated 3  February  2015  refusing
    the Appellant's application dated 17 September 2014 for asylum.

Background

 3. The Appellant was  born  on  1  January  1977  and  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan..

 4. On 17 September 2014 the Appellant applied for asylum claiming to  have
    fled Kabul as a result of  persecution  arising  from  her  role  as  a
    schoolteacher in Kabul where she was threatened  and  attacked  by  the
    Taliban.

 5. On 3 February 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) It was accepted that the Appellant was a teacher in Afghanistan.

      b) There have been improvements in education and teacher numbers  have
         increased particularly in urban areas such as Kabul  and  therefore
         it was not accepted that the Appellant was at risk solely for being
         a teacher.

      c) The Appellant's claim that the people who sent  their  children  to
         the school where she taught were in reality members of the  Taliban
         in order to get money for the  school  was  inconsistent  with  the
         background material which suggested that  the  Taliban  have  taken
         direct action to prevent girls attending school and made no  secret
         of their opposition to education.

      d) The four attacks suffered by the Appellant, non of  which  resulted
         in hospital treatment, is in contrast to the many fatal attacks  by
         the Taliban on schoolchildren and education officials. Therefore it
         is not accepted that  the  Appellant  had  any  problems  with  the
         Taliban.

      e) Neither the Appellant's husband or children have been targeted as a
         result of her work.

      f) The Appellant never reported any of the attacks to the  police  and
         the security forces have demonstrated willingness  and  ability  to
         take action against the Taliban.

      g) The Appellant could relocate with her family  to  another  area  of
         Afghanistan.

      h) Neither Articles 2, 3 or 8 assist the Appellant.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  J  Austin  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

      a) While country wide girls education had been hard hit by the Taliban
         the situation was far better in urban areas such as Kabul where the
         Appellant taught.

      b) The Judge did not accept that the school  at  which  the  Appellant
         taught was effectively controlled by the  Taliban  as  it  was  not
         accepted that female children of Taliban would be sent to a  school
         where they were taught by a female.

      c) It was not accepted that the attacks suffered by the  Appellant  on
         the way to and from school were carried out by  the  Taliban  as  a
         result of her teaching role.

      d) It was not credible that if the attacks were by  the  Taliban  they
         would be such low level attacks.

      e) There is sufficiency of protection available.

      f) The Appellant would not be returning as a lone female as she has  a
         husband and family.

      g) The Appellant was not assisted by Articles2,3, or 8 of ECHR.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued that :

      a) The Judge failed to take into account material evidence in that the
         Appellant's daughter was receiving counselling  and  this  was  not
         considered in the decision.

      b) The Judge failed to take into account the hearsay evidence  of  the
         Appellant's daughter.

      c) The Judges approach to the evidential value of the  warning  letter
         was flawed.

      d) The Judge incorrectly imposed in  paragraph  37  a  requirement  of
         corroboration.

      e) The background evidence that women cannot rely on the protection of
         the state authorities was contradicted by the Judges  finding  that
         she would have sufficiency of protection.

      f) The Judge failed to take into account that the claim was  a  gender
         based one.

      g) The Judge failed to engage with the argument that requiring her  to
         stop teaching was inconsistent with the principles in HJ Iran.

      h) The Judge has applied the wrong standard of proof.

 8.  On 23 July 2015 First-tier tribunal  Judge  Ford  gave  permission  to
    appeal on all grounds.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnrose on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) She relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) The Judge failed to take into account material evidence that is the
         evidence of the letter from her daughter's counsellor in  which  he
         or she recorded the daughter's account of what her mother had  told
         her about being attacked by the Taliban and  this  was  potentially
         corroborative of the Appellant's account.

      c) The Judge's assessment of the warning letter was flawed in that  it
         was confused: stating firstly that the Judge gave some  weight  but
         then finding that he gave it no weight.  The Judges approach to the
         warning  letter  was  fundamentally  flawed  in  that  he  made  an
         assessment of credibility first then he went  on  to  consider  the
         letter and reject it.

      d) The Judge wrongly suggested at  paragraph  37  that  there  was  no
         corroboration of her account of the attacks on her by  the  Taliban
         on the way from school when there was material before him  at  page
         93 of the bundle showing that other teachers had been attacked.

      e) The Judge applies the wrong  standard  of  proof  on  a  number  of
         occasions referring to his assessment being 'on balance.'

      f) The Judge fails to engage with the core of the Appellant's claim in
         stating at paragraph 40 that  it  was  not  a  gender  based  claim
         whereas the core of her case was that  she  was  a  female  teacher
         teaching girls and was targeted on that basis. There was  no  clear
         assessment of whether she was at risk for that reason.

      g)  There  are  confused  findings  in  relation  to  sufficiency   of
         protection in paragraph 43 accepting that the Appellant  could  not
         rely on state protection and at paragraph 46 that  there  would  be
         sufficient protection.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Ms Johnstone submitted that :

      a) The Judge took into account the counsellors report making  specific
         reference to it at paragraph 53 of the  decision.  The  report  was
         hearsay and there was no statement from the daughter. In the  light
         of the evidence before him his findings were open to him.

      b) The Judge considered the Taliban letter in the  chronology  he  set
         out in the case. He took a holistic approach to  the  evidence  and
         made conclusions about the weight he gave to the  letter  that  was
         open to him.

      c) There was nothing in the report at page 93 of the bundle  that  was
         inconsistent with the material before the Judge.

      d) In relation to the Judges explanation of the standard of  proof  it
         was clear  from  paragraphs  7  and  32  that  this  was  correctly
         understood. There was nothing  objectionable  about  the  term  'On
         balance.'

      e) There was no error in paragraph 40 in stating that this was  not  a
         gender based claim as the Judge stated it was based on her claim to
         be a female teacher. The assertion that it was  a  claim  based  on
         political opinion was also accurate in that this  was  one  of  the
         grounds of appeal.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

12. I find no merit in  the  ground  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
    material evidence in that he failed in his findings,  which  appear  to
    start at paragraph 32, to make specific reference to the letter at page
    20 of the bundle from a school counsellor to the  Appellant's  15  year
    old daughter. The Judge at paragraph 32 stated that he had  'considered
    very carefully all the available evidence in this appeal' and there can
    be no suggestion that he overlooked the existence  of  the  counsellors
    letter as he specifically refers to it at paragraph 53 in  the  context
    of  his  assessment  of  Article  8.  The  Judge  is  not  required  to
    specifically refer to every piece of evidence in the case and I  accept
    does not refer to  this  letter  in  the  context  of  his  credibility
    findings but I am satisfied that in  relation  to  those  findings  the
    letter could not have made any difference to the outcome. The first and
    obvious point is that the contents of the letter are  entirely  hearsay
    and there was no explanation  or  indication  of  why  the  Appellant's
    daughter had not herself provided a witness statement even if she  felt
    unable to attend court: this would  inevitably  have  impacted  on  the
    weight given to the report as it was impossible on  the  basis  of  the
    report to determine what parts of it were based on personal  ,  direct,
    eye witness evidence and what was based on information provided to  the
    daughter by her mother . The report was written on 22 April 2015  seven
    months after their arrival in the UK: there is  no  indication  in  the
    letter of the basis of the contents of the  letter,  was  it  based  on
    contemporaneous notes of meetings with the  daughter,  when  did  these
    meetings occur, was it one or more meetings.

13. It was argued that in concluding that he  did  not  attach  significant
    weight to  the  threatening  letter  that  the  Appellant  claimed  she
    received from the Taliban the Judge fell into error. Ms Johnrose argued
    that the Judges approach to the evidence was  fundamentally  flawed  in
    that he stated in paragraph 39:

         "However due to the fact that the Tribunal declined to find to  the
         relevant standard of proof, the  lower  standard,  the  Appellant's
         claim of having endured a period of 9 years of  harassment  by  the
         Taliban was credible , it was led to the conclusion that this was a
         document which did not carry any significant weight."

14.  Ms Johnrose argued that whilst other evidence may well have a  bearing
    on the reliability of the document the Judge was required not  to  'put
    the cart before the horse', as the Tribunal said  in  MT  (Syria)  2004
    UKIAT 000307.  In that case the Adjudicator had stated: "In view of  my
    findings on the Appellant's credibility, I  give  no  weight  to  these
    documents" which is, in essence, what the Judge has said in this  case.
    The Tribunal  concluded  that  the  Adjudicator  had  not  weighed  the
    document as part and parcel of the process of looking at  the  evidence
    in the round to assess credibility  but  had  effectively  reached  his
    credibility  findings  without  reference  to  the  document  and  then
    assessed the document on the basis of those flawed  findings.   He  had
    fallen into the trap identified by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Ex  parte
    Virjon B 2002 EWHC 1469, a case in which the Adjudicator had assessed a
    medical report on the basis of his  credibility  findings  rather  than
    reaching his findings on the basis of all the  evidence  including  the
    medical report. I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge's  approach  to  this
    document was fundamentally flawed as it was  clear  from  paragraph  38
    that  he  had  reached  a  conclusion  about  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's claim  before  considering  the  letter  in  the  following
    paragraph. This error I consider to be material since had the  Tribunal
    conducted  this  exercise  the  outcome  of  the  assessment   of   the
    credibility of the claim could have been different.

15. The grounds argue that the  Judge  erred  in  the  application  of  the
    standard of proof in his decision because  in  addition  to  repeatedly
    stating 'on balance' in his findings at paragraph 38 he concluded: "The
    Tribunal therefore did not accept that the Appellant could be  said  on
    the balance of probabilities to be  unable  to  return  to  Afghanistan
    owing to fear of persecution." This of course is a misstatement of  the
    standard of proof in an asylum appeal, an issue fundamental to the fair
    assessment of the claim.

16.  I have considered the argument carefully. The Judge set out the burden
    and standard of proof at paragraph 7 of the decision  and  Ms  Johnrose
    accepted that it was accurately summarised. He expounded on it again at
    paragraph 32 and referred to the requirement for a  'reasonable  degree
    of  likelihood'  that  events   occurred   which   she   accepted   was
    unobjectionable. It is  of  course  not  enough  to  simply  state  the
    standard of proof accurately it must also  be  the  standard  that  the
    Judge applied to his findings.

17.  In the absence of the very clear misstatement of the burden  of  proof
    at paragraph 38 I would have considered whether in using the  term  'on
    balance' the Judge was merely using an idiomatic expression that  means
    taking all of the evidence into account: however paragraph 38 is in  my
    view his conclusion in relation to the  risk  of  persecution  and  the
    standard he has applied is wrong in law. This error I  consider  to  be
    material since had the Tribunal conducted  this  exercise  the  outcome
    could have been different.

18. The Judge's findings in relation to sufficiency of protection were also
    challenged in that they were contradictory and confused. I do not  find
    that this ground is made out: paragraph 43 quotes the OGN which draws a
    distinction between the position of lone females and women with a  male
    support network and in  paragraph  46  the  Judge  finds  that  as  the
    Appellant would return to  her  husband  she  would  not  be  at  risk.
    Moreover given that the Judge did not find that the Appellant's account
    of her difficulties in Kabul was credible his assessment of sufficiency
    of protection  was  unnecessary  and  therefore  not  material  to  the
    outcome.

19. It was also argued that the Judge had failed to grasp the basis of  the
    Appellant's claim in  that  at  paragraph  40  (under  the  heading  of
    Sufficiency of Protection )he stated: "It is important to note that the
    Appellant was not claiming they (sic) need for protection on the  basis
    of gender but on the basis of her activity as a female teacher."  I  am
    satisfied that the Judge throughout the decision  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant's claim was based on her risk as a  female  teacher  and  was
    simply , if unnecessarily, stating that her  claim  was  not  based  on
    gender alone.

20. I nevertheless found that errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination cannot stand and must be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety given in particular the error in relation to the  standard  of
    proof applied infected all of the credibility findings. All matters  to
    be redetermined afresh.

21. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
         the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity  for
         that party's case to be put to and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

22. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to the application of the
    incorrect standard of proof which is  fundamental  to  the  credibility
    findings overall. In this case none of the  findings  of  fact  are  to
    stand and the matter will be a complete re hearing.

23. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before  any  First-tier
    Immigration Judge other than Judge Austin.


Signed      Date 6.10.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
