
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02095/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                   M S M H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Wamadi, M & S Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Sri  Lanka.  His  application  for
    international protection was refused by the Respondent  on  22  January
    2015. He appealed against that decision and his appeal was dismissed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Stott in a determination  promulgated  on  15
    April 2015. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal but subsequently  granted  on  renewal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker on 28 July 2015.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider  the  evidence  in  the
    round when making its  findings  of  fact.   The  grant  of  permission
    specifically cites paragraph 19 of the determination where  the  First-
    tier Tribunal stated "Consequently in view of my view of my findings as
    to the Appellant's credibility I do not  accept  the  validity  of  the
    arrest warrant or the evidence of the second solicitor".

The Grounds

3.   The Appellant advanced a number  of  grounds  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  Those grounds allege that there was a failure to
    make reasoned findings in respect of the country  guidance  in  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) (2013) UKUT 319; there was a failure
    to consider the relevance of the  appellant's  diaspora  activities  by
    reference to established case law;  there  were  erroneous  credibility
    findings and an erroneous credibility assessment; there was  a  failure
    to place appropriate weight on supporting documents in the  Appellant's
    claim; a failure to substantially consider the claim  for  humanitarian
    protection and a failure to make findings in relation to Article 3.

The Rule 24 Notice

4.   The Respondent drafted a response to the grounds of appeal  under  Rule
    24 contending that the First-tier Tribunal directed itself  appropriate
    and that  although  the  determination  was  brief  the  Judge  had  at
    paragraphs and 17 adequately considered the evidence in the round.

The Hearing

5.   I heard from both representatives.  Mr  Nath  asked  for  time  at  the
    hearing to discuss the grounds with Mr Wamadi. Mr  Nath  then  said  he
    agreed  with  the  Appellant  that  there  were  erroneous  credibility
    findings  and  an  erroneous  credibility  assessment.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's treatment of the arrest warrant was erroneous and the  error
    was material.

Findings and conclusions

6.   I have come to the conclusion that there was a material  error  of  law
    in the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  following
    reasons. The findings of fact are  at  recorded  at  paragraphs  12  to
    paragraph 19 of the decision. It is clear from the reasoning  in  those
    paragraphs that the First-tier Tribunal concluded that the  Appellant's
    immigration history rendered his claim incapable of belief without  any
    assessment of the material facts of his claim in relation to  the  risk
    in Sri Lanka. The First-tier Tribunal found at  paragraphs  15  and  16
    that the Appellant had only made a claim after being  caught  in  Tesco
    whilst in possession of a forged visa.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  then
    concludes at paragraph 16 that the Appellant did not make a claim at an
    earlier stage because the events on which he relied did not take place.
    In paragraph 17 the Judge states that in view of that finding  he  does
    not attach weight to the documentation that has been  produced  and  at
    paragraph  19  that  in  view  of  his  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's credibility that he does not  accept  the  validity  of  an
    arrest warrant or the evidence of  the  Appellant's  second  solicitor.
    This leads him to conclude that the Appellant's name will not be  on  a
    stop list which would result in him being detained and  handed  to  the
    authorities on return to Sri Lanka.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  failure  to
    claim asylum earlier meant that his account was incredible. The  First-
    tier Tribunal then rejected  the  documentation,  including  an  arrest
    warrant on this basis. This approach was unlawful.  Although  paragraph
    15 and 16 of the decision do not make explicit reference to  section  8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 it
    is clear that the Tribunal takes the behaviour described in  section  8
    (5), namely the failure to make an asylum or human rights claim  before
    being notified of an immigration decision, as fatal to the  Appellant's
    credibility. In SM (Section 8 judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT  00116
    the Upper Tribunal held that the evidence must be assessed in the round
    and that section 8 should not be the starting point for the  assessment
    of credibility.  The behaviour identified in that section is  a  factor
    to be taken into account in the overall assessment of  credibility  and
    its importance will  vary  from  case  to  case.   Although  section  8
    requires the  deciding  authority  to  treat  certain  aspects  of  the
    evidence in a particular way it  was  not  intended  to  and  does  not
    otherwise affect the general process of deriving facts from evidence.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal did not assess the evidence in  the  round  and
    treated  section  8  as  a  starting  point  for  the   assessment   of
    credibility.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach   to   credibility
    discloses a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

In those circumstances I conclude that there was a material error of law  in
the determination. All the findings in relation to credibility are  vitiated
by that error and the extent of judicial fact  finding  is  such  that  this
matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   complete
rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
