
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02602/2012
     AA/02606/2012

                                                           AA/01158/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 30th September 2013                          |On 23rd October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED SHAH
                        SHAFIKA ABDURRAHIM ABDULJALIL
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These are the Appellants' appeals against the decision of Judge  Fisher
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 14th May 2012.

Background

 2. The Appellants claim to be citizens of Myanmar. The Secretary of  State
    accepts that the second Appellant is  Burmese  but  believes  that  the
    first Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.

 3. The first Appellant's immigration history is as  follows.   He  applied
    for a UK visa on 13th November 2007 in the name of Mohammed Shah with a
    supporting Bangladeshi passport which had been issued in Bangladesh and
    was valid from  22nd  December  2003  until  21st  December  2008.   He
    travelled to the UK in 2008 and 2009 and 2010 and also  to  Switzerland
    on that passport, obtaining valid visas on each occasion and each  time
    returning to Saudi Arabia.

 4. On 17th October 2011 the first Appellant arrived in the UK and  claimed
    asylum on 1st November 2011 with his dependent spouse.

 5. On 27th February 2012 a decision was made to refuse to grant him asylum
    under paragraph 336 of HC 395 as  amended  and  to  remove  him  as  an
    illegal entrant from the UK by way of directions under paragraphs 8  to
    10 of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The  basis  for  the
    refusal was that he was a national of Bangladesh and  could  safely  be
    returned there and his claim to be a Rohingya originating from  Myanmar
    was rejected.

 6. Judge Fisher concluded that although there were points in favour of the
    first Appellant's claimed Burmese nationality, the fact that he was  in
    possession  of  a  valid  Bangladeshi  passport  and  the   significant
    inconsistencies in the evidence, especially between him and  his  wife,
    and the implausibility of aspects of his account, led him  to  conclude
    that the entire account had been fabricated. On that basis he dismissed
    the appeals.

 7. The Appellant filed lengthy Grounds of  Appeal.   The  application  was
    initially refused by Designated Judge Manuel on  21st  June  2012  but,
    upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal, permission  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Latter on 9th August 2012.

 8. This matter first came before Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President of  the
    Upper Tribunal, Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  and  myself  on  28th
    November 2012.  The appeal was adjourned on that occasion in  order  to
    permit the second Appellant, whose nationality was not in  dispute,  to
    make an application for asylum in her own right. She  subsequently  did
    so and was refused on 29th  January  2013.   Her  appeal  against  that
    decision comes before us today.

 9. Accordingly, unusually, the Tribunal is sitting as both the  Upper  and
    First-tier Tribunal to determine both whether Judge Fisher erred in law
    in dismissing the appeals of the first Appellant and his dependent wife
    and whether the Respondent's decision to refuse the second  Appellant's
    independent claim in her own right

10. So far as the latter appeal is concerned, it is adjourned to be  listed
    For Mention before Judge Hemingway in twelve weeks.

Submissions

11. Both  parties  agreed  that  the  question  of  the  first  Appellant's
    nationality was determinative of this appeal  and  if  found  to  be  a
    Rohingyan from Myanmar the Appellants would succeed in their claim.

12. Mr Diwnycz accepted that there were material errors in  Judge  Fisher's
    assessment of the evidence, stated that  he  did  not  wish  to  cross-
    examine either the first Appellant  or  his  dependent  wife,  made  no
    submissions save to rely on the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  and  said
    that he was content to leave the matter in the Tribunal's hands. He did
    not challenge the evidence that the first  Appellant  has  written  and
    published articles highlighting the fate of  the  Rohingya  people  and
    criticising the Burmese government and his children are notable players
    in the Free Rohinga Campaign.

Consideration of whether there is an error of law

13. We conclude that Judge Fisher did err in that he failed  to  take  into
    account material evidence,  in  particular  an  education  certificate,
    found to be genuine by a specialist document examiner at  the  National
    Document Fraud Unit, from the London Chamber of Commerce  and  Industry
    in Burma in 1987 in the name of Ba Sein (a) Mohammed  Sha.   The  first
    Appellant placed considerable reliance on the certificate  as  evidence
    that he had lived in Burma as per his account but Judge Fisher made  no
    reference to it in the determination. Moreover the judge failed to take
    account of the fact that the road names given by  the  first  Appellant
    were highly consistent with the claim that he had lived in  Burma  some
    time ago, in that he gave old names of roads rather  than  the  current
    names.

14. The judge failed to take into account relevant evidence in reaching his
    decision.

15. Furthermore, there were a number of undisputed facts  which  the  judge
    referred to but stated that they were not "conclusive evidence" of  the
    first Appellant's nationality which indicates an  improper  application
    of the lower standard of proof, namely reasonable degree of likelihood.



16. Accordingly the decision is set aside.

Findings and Conclusions

17. It is the first Appellant's case that he fled from Burma to  Bangladesh
    in 1993 having been told by a friend who had  been  arrested  and  then
    released that his name was on a government list.

18. The Respondent relies on the fact that the first Appellant travelled to
    the UK on a genuine Bangladeshi passport, a passport which he had  used
    frequently to apply for visas in various countries and make a number of
    visits to them.

19. The first Appellant accepts that the document could be  legitimate  but
    that it was obtained fraudulently through an agent.  The Bangladesh COI
    Report which states that:

         "The Canadian High Commission in Dhaka in  July  2005  advised  the
         Canadian IRB as follows, inter alia; many  false  documents  exist;
         ... the content of genuine documents is  often  questionable.   The
         rampant corruption in various levels of the government weakness the
         integrity and the credibility of officially  issued  documents  ...
         similarly it is relatively easy to obtain a passport  under a false
         identity."

20. We accept the submission from Mr O'Ryan that the Respondent's  case  is
    significantly undermined by her own evidence that corruption is rife in
    Bangladesh.

21. The Respondent also considers that the first  Appellant's  evidence  in
    respect of his identity card was inconsistent.  The translation of  the
    identity card states  that  the  original  was  issued  in  1982.   His
    occupation on the translation was described as "student" and the  first
    Appellant confirmed that he was a student when it was  issued.  In  his
    interview the first Appellant said that he thought he had to  wait  two
    years to be issued with the card which would have meant that he applied
    for the identity document in 1980. However by then he was no  longer  a
    student.

22. The Appellant says that he made a mistake when he told the officer that
    he waited for  two  years  but  he  said  that  he  did  not  have  the
    opportunity to correct it because the record was not read back to  him.
    However he went to his solicitors and, in their further representations
    sent before the decision was made, they corrected the  error  and  said
    that he had waited for nine years to get his ID card.   The  Respondent
    refers to legislation passed in 1974, namely the Emergency  Immigration
    Act which required all citizens to carry ID cards. The  fact  that,  on
    the Appellant's evidence, he  applied  for  the  document  before  that
    legislation came into force is  not  inconsistent  with  the  objective
    evidence since that evidence is silent as to whether  citizens  had  to
    apply for identity cards.   It simply requires all  citizens  to  carry
    them.  We accept that the fact the first Appellant  had  to  wait  nine
    years for an  identity  card  is  consistent  with  the  evidence  that
    Rohingas found it difficult to obtain them and were eligible  only  for
    foreign registration cards.

23. Clearly the initial response by the  Appellant  at  interview  shows  a
    potential discrepancy in his account. Moreover the  fact  that  he  was
    able to use a Bangladeshi passport on a number of occasions  is  strong
    evidence of his nationality of that country. However we  consider  that
    the evidence in favour of the Appellant strongly outweighs  the  doubts
    raised by the Respondent in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  for  the
    following reasons.

24. It is not disputed that the dependent wife is a national of Burma.  Nor
    is it  disputed  that  the  adult   children  have  been   accepted  as
    nationals of Burma by the US authorities and  granted  asylum  on  that
    basis. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that  the  first  Appellant's  daughter,
    Susu Lwin, was accepted by the  US  authorities  as  having  been  born
    there.  It is reasonable to assume that the US authorities to  have  in
    place  robust  procedures  for  checking  the  nationality  of   asylum
    applicants and the fact that the Appellant's daughter and son have been
    accepted as nationals of Burma by the US authorities and granted asylum
    is strong evidence of their father's  nationality.   The  two  children
    made applications for asylum which included addresses  where  they  had
    lived in Burma and the schools which they  had  attended  and  an  exit
    stamp on a passport  showing that the daughter left Burma  in  November
    2002.

25. We also consider that the  first  Appellant's  knowledge  of  Burma  is
    highly significant.  In the reasons for refusal letter  the  Respondent
    criticised the first Appellant's knowledge of Rangoon and in particular
    stated that the location of the Institute of  Economics  was  on  Prome
    Road although the map states it was on Pirami Road.  He also said  that
    the former High Court building was on Barr Street near the  US  Embassy
    but there was no Barr Street listed near to the High Court building  on
    the map. The first Appellant was able to demonstrate that he had  given
    the old names for the roads which is persuasive evidence that he  lived
    there until 1993 as claimed. It would not have been  possible  for  the
    first Appellant to prepare in any way for the highly specific questions
    which were asked of him at interview.

26. There is other evidence that the first Appellant is Rohinga from  Burma
    in  that  he  speaks  standard  Burmese,  Rohingya  and  Rakhine.   The
    Respondent does not challenge the Appellant's evidence that Bangladeshi
    speakers speak Bomang, a dialect of Burmese and not standard Burmese.

27. We see no reason to discount the oral evidence given by Maung Tun  Khin
    who gave evidence at the first hearing. He  is  the  President  of  the
    Burmese Rohingya Organisation UK and gave evidence to the  effect  that
    the first  Appellant  was  born  in  the  same  place  as  him,  namely
    Buthidaung Township Arakan State, Burma and saw and spent time with him
    whilst they lived there.  The fact that Mr Khin was only 13  years  old
    when the first Appellant left Burma is not relevant to the question  of
    whether he knew him when he was a child and no basis for placing little
    weight on that evidence.

28. We consider that this is outweighed by the  strength  of  the  evidence
    relied  upon  by  the  first  Appellant  and  conclude  that   he   has
    established, to the lower standard of proof, that he is a Rohingya from
    Burma.

Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appeals are allowed on asylum grounds.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
