
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02750/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 11 November 2014                           |12 November 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               DOMINGOS ORLANDO DE SOUZA LOKO (or TATI MAKAYA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms N Underdown, of Brown & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as Tati Makaya.  The respondent thinks
    that identity is false, and that he is Domingos Orlando De Souza  Loko.
    The latter is the identity on an Angolan national passport on the basis
    of which he made two visa  applications.   He  now  appeals  against  a
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns dated 17 June 2014.

 2. The first significant point in the grounds is that although  there  has
    never been a question of the appellant being from anywhere but  Angola,
    the judge at paragraph 54 related his case to the  Democratic  Republic
    of Congo and to guidance on that country.

 3. The next significant point in the grounds is that  although  the  judge
    referred to the UNHCR handbook on the obligations on  an  appellant  to
    furnish evidence, there was no consideration  of  UNHCR  guidelines  on
    child asylum claims.

 4. Mrs O'Brien observed  the  appellant  has  been  granted  discretionary
    leave, and this was an "upgrade" appeal only against rejection  of  the
    asylum claim in terms of section 83 of the 2002 Act.  It did not  raise
    Article 8 issues, but the judge devoted much of  the  determination  to
    them.  The point is not in the grounds (and the  judge  seems  to  have
    been led by the appellant into treating this as  a  case  raising  live
    Article 8 issues) but this was another defect.

 5. Mrs O'Brien said that while the reference to the  wrong  country  might
    not have been fatal on its own, because it comes after  comprehensively
    adverse credibility findings, the determination as a whole was  unsafe.



 6. Representatives agreed that the case should be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 7. Going wrong towards the end of the determination about the  country  of
    origin might have been immaterial, if the general  adverse  credibility
    conclusion were to stand.

 8. While judges do not have to cite all (or  any)  relevant  guidance,  it
    does appear one-sided to mention a UNHCR statement of the obligation on
    an appellant to establish his case, but  not  guidance  about  evidence
    from minors.  (The appropriate reference  might  have  been  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive Appellant Guidance.  It is easily available to parties and to
    judges on the public website  of  the  HMCTS,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber.)

 9. The grounds  of  appeal  also  allege  failure  to  evaluate  the  best
    interests of the appellant, being a child, as a primary  consideration.
    I do not think there could be anything in that, as  the  appellant  has
    discretionary leave, it is not proposed to remove him as a  child,  and
    the grounds of appeal are limited to section 83.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  No findings
    are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial fact finding  necessary
    for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate  to  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  members  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are not to include Judge Burns.

11. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


            [pic]
            12 November 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

