

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number:     AA/02199/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 27th February 2015                        |On: 17th March 2015          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     KG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, Broudie Jackson and Cantor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka date of  birth  11th  February
    1985. He appeals with permission[1] the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Malik[2] to dismiss his appeal against the Respondent's  decision
    to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[3].  That  decision  had  followed  the
    Respondent's  rejection  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  international
    protection.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he was a Tamil  who  had  a
    history of perceived personal and family involvement with the LTTE.  As
    such he was a person likely to be viewed by the Sri Lankan  authorities
    as someone who would present a risk to the unitary state of Sri  Lanka.
    He gave a history of displacement  and  persecution,  including  having
    spent some time in India as a registered refugee there.

 3. In a letter dated the 20th March 2014 the Respondent accepted  some  of
    the factual basis of the Appellant's claim.  It was accepted  that  the
    Appellant is a Sri  Lankan  Tamil  (paragraph  9  reasons  for  refusal
    letter) who was displaced and subsequently  gained  refugee  status  in
    India (paras 10-13).  The Appellant's claim that he was able to  return
    to Sri Lanka passing through the airport without difficulty is found to
    be inconsistent with the claim that two days later the authorities were
    looking for him. The Respondent did not accept the Appellant's  account
    of being arrested and detained for two years: if the  authorities  were
    actually interested in him he would have been apprehended at port.  The
    Appellant had produced photographs depicting physical scars but in  the
    absence of an Istanbul Protocol compliant medical report the Respondent
    was not prepared to attach any weight to these.  These  latter  matters
    were all rejected and the asylum claim refused.

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  At paragraphs 16-18
    of the determination a number of reasons  are  given  for  finding  the
    Appellant's evidence not to be credible and the Tribunal dismisses  the
    appeal. The grounds of appeal now submit that in doing so the  Tribunal
    made the following errors of law:

        i) The finding at  paragraph  16  of  the  determination  that  the
           Appellant is (generally) not credible is inconsistent  with  the
           Respondent's concessions in the  refusal  letter.  The  Tribunal
           should not have gone behind the refusal letter to make  findings
           on matters that were not in dispute between the parties.


       ii) Failure to  assess  the  medical  evidence  in  the  round.  The
           Appellant relied on a detailed medical report which found, inter
           alia, that he had cigarette wounds diagnostic of cigarette burns
           on the back of his legs, and ligature marks  around  his  wrists
           and ankle.  The  determination  fails  to  take  these  relevant
           findings into account. In finding there to be "equally plausible
           reasons"  for  the  Appellant's  injuries   the   Tribunal   has
           misunderstood the terminology of the Istanbul Protocol  and  has
           arguably applied the wrong standard of proof.

      iii) Took points against the  Appellant  that  he  did  not  have  an
           opportunity to respond to. In particular it  is  submitted  that
           the determination makes negative credibility  findings  about  a
           number of Sri Lankan documents relied upon by the Appellant when
           he had not been asked anything about  those  documents  nor  had
           been given an opportunity to respond to the  forensic  challenge
           made.

 5. The Respondent opposes the appeal on all grounds.


    Error of Law


 6. On the 3rd November 2014  this  matter  came  before  me  to  determine
    whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  errors  such
    that it should be set aside. On the date the Appellant was  represented
    by Mr Schwenk of Counsel and the Respondent  by  Ms  Johnstone,  Senior
    Home Office Presenting Officer.    Having  heard  their  submissions  I
    found, in a written decision on the same day, that the decision  should
    be set aside.  The reasons were as follows.




    Ground 1


 7. Paragraphs 2-7 of the Grounds - not drafted by Mr Schwenk - submit that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to have regard to  the  agreed
    facts including "that the Appellant's sister had joined the LTTE,  that
    the Appellant and his family had been accused by the army of supporting
    the LTTE and that they had been told to leave Sri Lanka by  the  army".
    It is said that this failure to consider these  agreed  facts  led  the
    Tribunal into error in its overall credibility assessment, and that the
    failure to conduct a discrete risk assessment amounted  to  a  material
    omission.


 8. The main difficulty in this ground is that there was no  concession  by
    the Respondent that the Appellant's sister had been in the LTTE or that
    he or any other member of his family had been suspected of  involvement
    in the Tigers. Paragraph 10 of the reasons for refusal reads:

         "you have given a detailed account of your families  experience  in
         India as a displaced person, following your  family's  decision  to
         leave Sri Lanka in 2006..."


    It continues at 13:


         "It is considered that on  the  basis  of  your  evidence  of  your
         experience in India your family were granted some form of leave and
         that you were formally habitually resident there as a displaced Sri
         Lankan..."


    No mention is made of the Appellant's sister or accusations against him
    or any other family member.


 9. Mr Schwenk submitted that it was implicit  in  paragraph  10  that  the
    Respondent accepted the reasons that the Appellant gave for why he  and
    his family fled to India in 2006. That is simply not  so.  There  could
    have been many reasons why this particular family fled Jaffna  in  2006
    and sought sanctuary in India.   There is no  agreement  -  implied  or
    express - about these facts. It follows that  there  was  no  error  in
    Judge Malik proceeding to make her own  credibility  findings  on  each
    aspect of the Appellant's case from the point at which he  returned  to
    Sri Lanka from India.




    Ground 2


10. The medical evidence is dealt with at paragraph 17 (i).   The reasoning
    begins by recording that the Appellant has a number of scars  which  he
    does not attribute to ill-treatment. It then reads:


         "In relation to a scar on  the  appellant's  chin  Dr  Lord  states
         '....it is much more likely to be as a result of a blow from a hard
         object such as the butt of a gun' yet the  appellant  says  in  his
         statement of 29 April 2014 that he was hit  with  a  baton  on  his
         chin. No reference is made to having been hit by a gun. Further  Dr
         Lord attributes general pigmentation due to previous  bruising  the
         appellant sustained when he was diving for a catch  whilst  playing
         cricket. Dr Lord states that when playing  cricket  he  would  have
         worn pads, but I can find no reference  to  this  contained  in  Dr
         Lord's summary  of  the  appellant's  history  or  in  any  of  the
         appellant  statements.  Further  whilst  the  appellant  says  that
         scarring on his leg resulted from a blow that in turn  resulted  in
         fracture, no x-ray was taken to  establish  whether  this  was  the
         case. Whilst I have regard  to  the  findings  of  Dr  Lord,  I  am
         satisfied that there are equally  plausible  reasons  for  injuries
         highlighted in the report".


11. I find there to be two material errors of law in this paragraph.


12. First is the failure to  address  specific  conclusions  in  Dr  Lord's
    report including:

        i) That the scar below the right knee was diagnostic  of  a  healed
           laceration and in that position would be likely to be due  to  a
           blow;
       ii) A scar above the right knee being diagnostic of a incised wound;
      iii) Scars on the  back  of  the  right  thigh  being  diagnostic  of
           cigarette burns;
       iv) The finding that the pigmentation and scarring to  both  wrists,
           and to the right ankle, are as one would expect to  see  if  his
           hands (or feet) had been tied tightly and the  rope  had  either
           rubbed on or had bitten into the skin.


    These were all important findings that  merited  consideration  in  the
    context of the evidence as a whole.


13. The second error arises from the first.  In  making  the  finding  that
    there were "equally plausible" reasons for the injuries highlighted  by
    Dr Lord the First-tier Tribunal appears to have failed to  have  regard
    to the repeated use of the term "diagnostic of" which is defined in the
    Istanbul Protocol as "the appearance could not have been caused in  any
    way other than that described".  It further suggests  a  misapplication
    of the standard of proof. If  the  injury  could  "equally"  have  been
    caused in the manner claimed the Appellant has discharged the burden of
    proof.


14. Since the medical evidence went to the heart of  the  Appellant's  case
    that he was detained and ill-treated in Sri Lanka for a period  of  two
    years it follows that the credibility  findings  in  the  determination
    must be set aside in their entirety.  I need not  then  deal  with  the
    other detailed criticisms of the approach taken to the medical evidence
    save to note that the finding in respect of  the  chin  injury  may  be
    flawed for lack of clarity.  Dr  Lord  found  that  the  scar  was,  in
    appearance and position, "diagnostic of a healed laceration  likely  to
    have been caused by blow from a hard object such as the butt of a  gun"
    (my emphasis). The fact that the Appellant attributed  it  to  a  baton
    (arguably a hard object such as the butt of a gun) would appear to be a
    consistent explanation: it is not clear what the First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusions on this matter were.


    Ground 3


15. The grounds of appeal set out  a  number  of  instances  where,  it  is
    alleged, the First-tier Tribunal  took  points  against  the  Appellant
    without him having had an opportunity to respond. Not all of these  are
    made out. It was clear from the refusal letter that  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's claim - that he was captured and held  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities - was rejected as not credible and in  those  circumstances
    he understood that his account was generally  being  challenged.  I  do
    however have some concerns about the approach taken to the  documentary
    evidence.   Mr Schwenk tells me, without contradiction by Ms  Johnstone
    (although neither were present before Judge Malik) that these documents
    were produced on the day by the Appellant and that his Counsel had  not
    had an opportunity to take instructions or produce a statement  setting
    out  the  background  to  their  introduction.  Counsel  was  therefore
    inhibited from asking questions in examination-in-chief that might have
    assuaged any concerns that the  Tribunal  had.  Even  if  he  had  been
    prepared to ask questions to which he did not know the answer, Tribunal
    was not alerted to those concerns. The  grounds  state,  again  without
    contradiction, that the specific criticisms made of  the  documents  at
    paragraph 17 (iii) were not put in cross-examination and  that  neither
    the Appellant nor his representative were invited to respond to them in
    submissions.  If this  is  so,  I  would  find  there  to  be  material
    unfairness in the points being taken.




    Adjourning the Re-making


16. In the course of her submissions on the 3rd November 2014 Ms  Johnstone
    came close to suggesting that the cigarette burns to the  back  of  the
    Appellant's legs may have been 'self-inflicted  by  proxy'  (SIBP).  As
    this has never been the Respondent's case I asked her  to  clarify  and
    she indicated that the Secretary of State would like time  to  consider
    whether to issue a supplementary refusal letter. I  agreed  to  adjourn
    the matter in order for the Respondent to consider her position and the
    medical evidence of Dr Lord, produced only after the  original  refusal
    letter was written. I directed that the Respondent should bear in  mind
    that there must be some evidential basis for suggesting that any of the
    Appellant's injuries were SIBP:  in the words of  the  Tribunal  in  KV
    (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC)  "there
    must be a presenting feature that raises SIBP as more than  a  fanciful
    possibility".  A further issue arose in that the Appellant had produced
    five original documents said to emanate from Sri Lanka, which were  now
    missing. Neither party could tell me where they were. They were:


                 a) A receipt issued by the Human Rights Commission  of  Sri
                    Lanka on the 14th February 2011;
                 b) A letter from the Human Rights Commission of  Sri  Lanka
                    dated 23rd March 2011
                 c) A Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka letter dated 14th
                    February 2011
                 d) A letter from Police Headquarters,  Colombo  dated  21st
                    January 2014
                 e) A letter from the Red Cross  concerning  family  tracing
                    and dated 16th May 2014


    I issued further directions that the documents were to be  located  and
    produced at the next hearing.


17. The matter was listed for a case management review on the 9th  December
    2014. On that date the Respondent was represented by Mr Harrison, and a
    supplementary refusal letter was filed. The letter raised the issue  of
    SIPB, with no reasons advanced as to why the evidence might suggest, as
    more than a fanciful possibility, this to be  the  cause.  Mr  Harrison
    agreed that in light of my clear directions, and the  guidance  of  the
    Tribunal in paragraphs 286-287 of KV, this was not good enough.   After
    some discussion between the parties it was agreed between them that the
    case would proceed on the  basis  that  SIPB  was  not  in  fact  being
    alleged.   As to the missing documents, the search had been fruitless.


18. The matter next came before me on the 27th February 2015.  It  was  set
    down for a full hearing  and  an  interpreter  requested.  For  reasons
    unknown to me, no interpreter was in fact available. The parties agreed
    that in view of the contested evidence the matter could  not  therefore
    proceed.  There had been some development in that the missing documents
    had been located on the solicitor's file, and  had  been  sent  to  the
    Respondent for verification checks. Mr Harrison accepted that this  was
    the case. Unfortunately they could not be  now  traced.    He  believed
    that they would be in the Presenting  Officer's  Unit  somewhere:  they
    would be found and produced for the next hearing.   If  the  Respondent
    wished to conduct verification checks this would be done before then.

19. Given that the case management issues now appeared to be resolved,  and
    in light of the extensive fact finding required[4] in  this  case,  the
    parties and I agreed that the most appropriate course would be for  the
    matter to be remitted for full re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.



    Decisions

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that it must be set aside.


21. Having regard to the alleged facts in this case, and having  regard  to
    the Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and
    the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders,  I  make
    an order for anonymity:


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".

22. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              9th March 2015


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Omotosho on the 24th
July 2014
[2] Determination promulgated on the 29th June 2014
[3] Decision dated 25th March 2014
[4] Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper
Tribunal paragraph 7 (b) provides that an appeal may be remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal where "the nature or extent of any judicial fact
finding which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal".

