
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA024362014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2017                                |On 30 May 2017                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                                   Between

                                     CL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Meredith of Counsel, instructed by Anti-
Trafficking Labour
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal must [be]  allowed  because  Mr  Bramble  has  very  fairly
    recognised that the judge erred in the manner in which  he  dealt  with
    the issue of  trafficking,  in  particular  the  vulnerability  of  the
    appellant having regard to her present condition and the  circumstances
    set out in  the  expert's  report  in  relation  to  the  situation  in
    Indonesia in the area from which she comes. It was  accepted  that  she
    had a need to obtain sufficient money, which she would not be  able  to
    get in Indonesia, by working abroad and inevitably having regard to all
    the circumstances that would  engage  in  domestic  service.  There  is
    undoubtedly a risk of trafficking inasmuch  as  domestic  servants  are
    frequently employed in the Middle East or by, as occurred in this case,
    those who come from the Middle East and sadly their treatment  of  such
    as the appellant has been shown to be exploitative and thus  to  engage
    Article 4 of the Convention.  I have been asked to indicate, and I know
    that when the matter is reheard it will be on the basis that  there  is
    no issue but that she has been the victim of trafficking and the issues
    that will have to be considered are whether there is a real risk if she
    were returned that she would be re-trafficked and thus there would be a
    breach of Article 4 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  it
    being clear that paragraph 339C of the Rules is limited  to  Article  3
    treatment and not treatment contrary to  Article  4.   Furthermore,  it
    will be necessary for reconsideration to be given to the effect of  the
    expert report and it may be two years on but it is desirable (but  this
    is a matter for those advising  the  appellant)  to  obtain  a  further
    report  which  deals  with  her  present   mental   condition   because
    vulnerability may be an important aspect.   Equally  she  has  a  claim
    under Article 8 and that also will have to  be  reconsidered  when  the
    matter is reheard.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]



Signed                                  Date: 10 June 2017


Mr Justice Collins







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

If a fee has been paid, a fee award should be made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 10 June 2017


Mr Justice Collins

