
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02975/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16th July 2015                             |On 20th August 2015            |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                FAHMIDA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Q Ahmed, legal representative of Joules Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. On 8th June 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Matthews  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellant, an adult  female  citizen
    of Pakistan.

 2.  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  granted  permission  because  she  thought  it
    arguable that the judge had  misdirected  himself  by  misapplying  the
    country guidance in MN and Others [2012] UKUT 00393 and by  failing  to
    assess the appellant's claimed behaviour as  a  member  of  the  Ahmadi
    faith.  She also thought it arguable  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the evidence of the appellant's niece, Saba Mirza, had  failed
    to consider the appellant's UK based religious activities and  had  not
    considered and assessed  the  present  situation  for  Ahmadis  in  the
    appellant's home town of Gujranwala.   However,  Judge  Grant-Hutchison
    thought the claims that the judge had misdirected himself by failing to
    consider the principles set out in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31  and  the
    weight attached to a  letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association
    letter less persuasive.

Submissions

 3. At the hearing before me I heard submissions as to whether or  not  the
    grounds gave rise to an arguable error on a point  of  law.   Mr  Ahmed
    expanded upon the grounds.  He contended that, if the judge  had  given
    proper consideration to MN and Others, this  would  automatically  have
    included consideration of the principles set  out  in  HJ  (Iran)  upon
    which the Upper Tribunal relied when giving its country  guidance.   He
    also argued that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    comments in interview (for examples questions  91  and  92)  about  her
    inability to practice her faith in Pakistan and had failed to  consider
    the appellant's claimed preaching activities.

 4. Mr McVeety reminded me that the respondent had entered a response under
    Rule 24 in which it was argued that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    directed  himself  appropriately  setting  out  clear   instances,   in
    paragraphs 18 to 26, of evidence which was inclusive or  contradictory.
    His conclusion in paragraph 27  that  the  appellant's  account  lacked
    credibility was open to him.  Further, the judge had correctly directed
    himself as to the guidance set  out  in  MN  in  paragraph  30  and  in
    paragraph 32 applied his mind to the question of whether the  appellant
    might be at risk on return despite his adverse credibility findings.

 5. Mr McVeety also drew attention to paragraph 19 of the decision in which
    the judge had concluded that the appellant had admitted, in  interview,
    that she had not been an  official  in  her  local  organisation.   The
    appellant had simply taught people how to sew and was not  a  preacher.
    He contended that the guidance in HJ (Iran) had  no  relevance  to  the
    appellant's non-religious activity.  The judge was right to  find  that
    the appellant did not have a raised profile.

 6. Mr  Ahmed  contended  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    consideration to the  appellant's  alleged  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom when paragraphs 6 and 9 of the head note to MN  made  it  clear
    that a careful evidential analysis was required.   He  maintained  that
    the judge should have considered the Ahmadi letter in the light of  the
    country guidance.  The judge had also failed to give  reasons  for  the
    conclusions as required by MK (Duty to give  reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]
    UKUT 00641 (IAC).

Conclusions

 7. After hearing submissions I announced that I was not satisfied that the
    decision of the First-tier Judge showed a material error on a point  of
    law.  My reasons for that conclusion follow.

 8. The judge's credibility findings are key to his conclusions about  risk
    on return for the appellant accepting that she is  an  Ahmadi.   It  is
    clear that the judge was fully aware of the need to consider  not  only
    the appellant's activities in Pakistan in relation  to  her  faith  but
    also in the United Kingdom.  The judge's copious reasons for concluding
    that the appellant's claims lacked credibility are set out in paragraph
    15 of the decision. The judge commenced  with  an  examination  of  the
    conflicting information from the UK Ahmadiyya Muslim Association  which
    stated, on the one hand, that the appellant  taught  sewing  to  female
    members of the community whilst in, another, described  her  activities
    as involving preaching to non-Ahmadi friends.  The judge  was  entitled
    to conclude that not only did the letters not support  the  appellant's
    claim to have been an active preacher  in  Pakistan  but  also  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. The judge was also able to call upon  inconsistencies  and  a  lack  of
    evidence to support his conclusions.  In particular I note the  judge's
    comments about the absence of evidence  from  the  appellant's  younger
    son, despite him also claiming persecution in  Pakistan,  and  who  had
    delayed his departure from Pakistan for two years despite  the  claimed
    risk.  The judge was also entitled to comment upon the possibility that
    the appellant had a pre-existing plan  to  leave  Pakistan  before  the
    claimed incident in  August  2012.   The  appellant  also  contradicted
    herself in  evidence  about  where  she  was  living  before  she  left
    Pakistan.  The judge was also entitled to reject the appellant's  claim
    that she did not know how to claim asylum in the  United  Kingdom  when
    she was  familiar  with  international  travel  and  had  children  and
    siblings who had settled in other countries.

10. For all the cogent reasons given by the judge the conclusion  that  the
    appellant was a member of the Ahmadi community  but  was  not  actively
    preaching or organising meetings as she claims was properly open to the
    judge.  It was also open  to  him  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
    community activities in her home area showed that she was able to  live
    without difficulty after her husband's  death.   In  this  respect  the
    judge was also able to reach the conclusion that the appellant had  not
    suffered the two mob incidents claimed by her.

11. The conclusions, in paragraph 29, that the appellant  would  return  to
    her former practice of simply observing her own faith as she  had  done
    for many years without adverse interest showed that the  judge  had  in
    mind the guidance in HJ (Iran).  The judge does so in the context of MN
    and Others in paragraph 30.  Where, as in this case,  the  judge  found
    that the appellant would continue to practice  her  faith  as  she  had
    before did not require examination of  any  reason  for  the  appellant
    behaving discretely because the judge had evidently concluded that  she
    had not behaved in that way but had simply followed her  faith  as  she
    wished without attracting any adverse attention.

12. As to the allegation  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return simply because she is an Ahmadi is
    not supported by the conclusions of the Tribunal in MN and Others. That
    is particularly  so  where  the  judge  had  properly  found  that  the
    appellant was happy to practice her faith in such a way  as  would  not
    attract any adverse attention.  In the guidance it  is  concluded  that
    Ahmadis who have practiced their faith  in  Pakistan  on  a  restricted
    basis are, in general, unlikely to be able to show that  their  genuine
    intentions or wishes are to practice and manifest their faith openly on
    return.  It cannot be said that the judge did not conduct  the  careful
    evidential analysis required of the appellant's "sur place"  activities
    taking into consideration, as he was entitled to do, inconsistencies in
    the appellant's evidence.

13. No material error on a point of law is shown.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
