
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02761/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th February 2016                         |On 28th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [n k]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J H Thrumpingham (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Brockleby-Weller (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M R Oliver, promulgated on 24th July 2015, following a hearing at
    Hatton Cross on 19th  June  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant, whereby  the  appellant  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Grant of Permission

 2. On 23rd October 2015, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in this case on two specific matters.  First, the  judge  took
    the appellant's case "at its highest" but made no findings  as  to  the
    credibility of her account to be involved with the Kurdish parties, the
    BDP and HDP in Turkey.  Had the judge done so, it was  clear  that  the
    relevant CG case law and up-to-date evidence submitted at the  hearing,
    assists the appellant's claim.  It said, the judge simply  referred  to
    the "political landscape" which had "dramatically  changed"  since  the
    events complained of in 2013, and the assertion that  the  judge  makes
    was not supported by any reasoning based upon  the  evidence  submitted
    before the Tribunal.  Second, with respect to Article 8  of  the  ECHR,
    the judge wrongly failed to find that the appellant's husband,  despite
    being a refugee from Turkey, would not have been able  to  return  with
    the appellant to Turkey were she to have to go there.

Submissions

 3. At the hearing before me on 15th February 2016,  Mr  Thrumpingham  made
    the following submissions.

 4. First, the judge observed how:

         "Dr Alison Mason met the appellant for six hours spread over  three
         meetings.  She took a detailed history of the  appellant's  history
         which  accords  with  the  consistent  story  from  the   screening
         interview, asylum interview, witness statement and  oral  evidence"
         (paragraph 30).

 5. Mr Thrumpingham submitted that this showed that the appellant's account
    was consistent at every level of the proceedings.

 6. Second, the judge  observed  that  the  appellant's  evidence  did  not
    demonstrate "an inconsistency" (paragraph 32).

 7. However, as against these positive findings, which expressly related to
    an asylum claim, the judge then took into account the way in which  the
    appellant's son's British passport was obtained and went on to  observe
    that, "If the appellant was a party to this misrepresentation  it  must
    have considerable bearing on her credibility generally" (paragraph 32).
     This did not follow at all because the application for a  passport  is
    entirely different, especially  when  it  is  in  connection  with  the
    application for the appellant's child, to the appellant's asylum, which
    had been determined  by  the  judge  to  be  entirely  consistent  (see
    paragraph 30).

 8. Third, the judge does not in any event determine what  the  nationality
    of the appellant's child is.  Had it been determined that the child was
    indeed a British citizen as alleged then this should have gone directly
    to what the Supreme Court held  in  ZH  (Tanzania),  namely,  that  the
    significance of nationality, although not a trump card,  it  cannot  be
    underestimated.

 9. Fourth, the respondent had invited the Tribunal to depart from existing
    country guidance (see Appendix A where the respondent was stating  that
    country guidance should not be followed because  the  appellant's  case
    was her membership of the HDP but an HDP member  had  been  elected  to
    parliament, which presumably demonstrated that there was a wider degree
    of acceptance of HDP members).  However, the  article  that  is  relied
    upon, which is an  article  from  the  Guardian  newspaper,  and  which
    appears at Appendix A expressly shows  the  prime  minister  of  Turkey
    referring to the leader of the HDP as an "infidel"  and  as  bad  as  a
    member of the "PKK".  Therefore, it simply  did  not  stand  to  reason
    that, on the basis of what the respondent proposed, that departure from
    the country guidance case was a  sensible  thing  to  do,  because  the
    evidence relied upon by the respondent showed quite the opposite,  with
    HDP leaders being referred to as "infidel" and "as bad as the PKK".

10. Finally, the judge goes  on  to  deal  with  the  appellant's  husband.
    Curiously the  judge  states  that,  "I  have  been  provided  with  no
    information indicating the appellant's husband cannot return  with  her
    to pursue their family life in Turkey, save for the assertion  that  he
    has been granted refugee status" (paragraph 36).  However, the grant of
    refugee status in itself is proof that persecution awaits a person who,
    by virtue of having a  "well-founded  fear  of  persecution"  has  been
    granted sanctuary in this country.

11. For her part, Ms Brockleby-Weller submitted  that  she  would  have  to
    accept that there were difficulties with the  determination.   However,
    she would add that the child is not the child of the husband,  who  has
    been granted refugee asylum status, but is the  natural  child  of  the
    appellant with another person.  She would also have to say  that  there
    may be difficulties with the appellant having to get  travel  documents
    to return to Turkey in her circumstances.  What ill-treatment  she  had
    suffered was purely historical and it may be that the judge was correct
    in the way that he had made findings of fact.

12. In reply, Mr Thrumpingham submitted that there was no consideration  of
    what the appellant could do if she returned back to  Turkey.   She  was
    bound to attract adverse attention and risk ill-treatment.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

14. First, the appellant has, on  the  judge's  own  account,  provided  an
    entirely consistent story.  It has been consistent at  every  level  of
    the asylum process (see paragraph 30).

15. Second, the judge sets out to impugn that credibility by  reference  to
    the appellant's  son  having  procured  an  alleged  British  passport.
    However, the judge makes no finding as to whether  a  British  passport
    was actually procured.  In any event, its relevance to the asylum claim
    is difficult to see.

16. Third, the judge avoids having to make a finding on crucial aspects  of
    the case.  He observes that, "Because of the consistency and detail  of
    the appellant's account of her treatment I do not reject her story  but
    instead make no finding ..." (paragraph 33).  It is difficult  to  make
    sense of this statement.

17. Finally, the conclusion that the appellant can return to  Turkey,  with
    her husband accompanying her, in circumstances where  the  husband  has
    been given full refugee asylum status, is plainly incorrect given  that
    this conclusion is arrived at by the judge on the basis that,  "I  have
    been provided with  no  information  indicating  that  the  appellant's
    husband cannot return with her to pursue their family  life  in  Turkey
    ..." (paragraph 36).

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This matter is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than  Judge  M
A Oliver under Practice Statement 7.2(b) because the  nature  or  extent  of
any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for  the  decision  in
the appeal to be remade is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
objective and Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-tier
Tribunal.  All positive findings in  favour  of  the  appellant  must  stand
intact.  I give directions that the appellant furnish  further  evidence  in
relation to what passport has been procured by the appellant's  son  and  in
what manner insofar as there is an  allegation  that  misrepresentation  was
used and that the appellant was complicit in it.  The matter is  to  be  set
down for a two hour hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

No anonymity direction is mad


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 27th April 2016


