
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02152/2014
                                                               AA/02116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 24th April 2015                            |On 5th May 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                           T O i (FIRST appellant)
                         F I C O (SECOND APPELLANT)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms N Patel of Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal De Haney, promulgated following a hearing on 2nd May 2014.

 2. The Appellants are children born in  December  2009  and  October  2011
    respectively on whose behalf asylum claims were  made  on  14th  August
    2012.  The Appellants are Nigerian citizens.

 3. The claims were refused by letters dated 11th  February  2014  and  the
    Respondent issued Notices of Immigration  Decisions  dated  19th  March
    2014 which indicated that  decisions  had  been  taken  to  remove  the
    Appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  if  they  did  not   leave
    voluntarily, directions would be given for their removal to Nigeria.

 4. The appeals were heard together by the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) on 2nd
    May 2014 and dismissed on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

 5. The Appellants were granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds who found that the sole  arguable  Ground
    of Appeal related to the judge's consideration of the country materials
    when considering the risk on return to Nigeria of the  two  Appellants,
    whom he accepted were  brought  up  in  different  religions.   It  was
    arguable that the judge had not set out or analysed  the  evidence  and
    given reasons.  Judge Reeds found that  the  judge  had  not  erred  in
    finding that the Appellants did not face a risk of FGM.

 6. At a hearing on 23rd January 2015, after hearing  representations  from
    both parties, I set aside the decision of the FtT, and the hearing  was
    adjourned for further evidence to be given, so that the decision  could
    be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  In brief summary, I found  that  the
    judge had not adequately analysed  the  background  evidence  to  which
    reference had been made on behalf of the Appellants, and had not  given
    adequate reasons for his decision.  The full reasons for setting  aside
    the FtT decision are contained in my decision dated 28th January  2015.
    Although the FtT decision was set aside, the  findings  made  that  the
    Appellants would not be at risk of FGM were preserved.

Re-making the Decisions

The Law

 7. The Appellants would be entitled to asylum if they  are  recognised  as
    refugees, as defined in Regulation 2 of the Refugee or Person  in  Need
    of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as persons
    falling within Article 1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The  onus  is
    on the Appellants to prove  that  they  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for  a  Convention  reason  (race,  religion,  nationality,
    membership of a particular social group or political opinion) and  they
    are outside their country of nationality and are unable  or,  owing  to
    such fear, unwilling to avail themselves  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.

 8. If not  entitled  to  asylum  the  Appellants  would  be  eligible  for
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of the  Immigration  Rules
    if they establish substantial grounds for  believing  that  if  removed
    from the United Kingdom, they would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm, and they are unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling  to
    avail themselves of the protection of the country of return.

 9. The Appellants claim that to remove them from the United Kingdom  would
    breach Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention).  In relation to Articles  2  and  3,  the
    Appellants must  establish  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that returning them to Nigeria would create a real risk  that
    they would be killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment.

10. In relation to Article 8 the Appellants must satisfy  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM in relation to family life, or paragraph 276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to private life, or show that  there  are
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the  rules,
    for Article 8 to be considered outside the  rules.   If  Article  8  is
    considered outside the rules, the Appellants must prove that they  have
    established a family and/or private life in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    that the Respondent's decision would have consequences of such  gravity
    as to engage Article 8, and the Respondent  must  then  show  that  the
    decision is lawful, necessary and proportionate.

11. In considering the Appellants' claim to  be  at  risk  if  returned  to
    Nigeria, the burden of proof is on the Appellants, and the standard  of
    proof is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.   I  must  consider  the
    circumstances as at the date of hearing.

The Appellants' Claim

12. The claim made on behalf of the Appellants is that  they  would  be  at
    risk if returned to Nigeria.  It is accepted  that  both  are  Nigerian
    citizens, but T is being brought up as a Christian, and F as a Muslim.

13. K is the mother of both Appellants.  The first  Appellant  has  had  no
    contact with her biological father.  The second Appellant was  born  in
    the United Kingdom and Z, who is a Pakistani citizen, is her father.  Z
    is the stepfather of T.

14. Z and K, who is a Nigerian  citizen,  met  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    February 2010.  Z has a daughter  from  another  relationship  born  in
    August 2012.

15. Z and K married in the United Kingdom on 29th January 2013.  Z  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in 2002 and made a claim for asylum in  2006  but
    did not pursue the claim and no decision was  ever  made.   He  has  no
    immigration status in the United Kingdom.

16. K arrived in the United Kingdom as a  visitor  in  September  2009  and
    overstayed without leave.  She claimed asylum on 1st March  2011.   The
    claim was refused on 31st March 2011 and her appeal heard on  12th  May
    2011 and dismissed on all grounds.  K has no immigration status in  the
    United Kingdom.

17. It is claimed on behalf of the Appellants that they would be at risk of
    harm from Boko Haram if returned to Nigeria.  Both  also  claim  asylum
    based upon their religion.  It is claimed that they would  be  at  risk
    because if returned the family would  be  living  with  Christians  and
    Muslims in one household.  In relation to F, it  is  claimed  that  she
    would be at risk because of her ethnicity or race, as she is  of  mixed
    race, her father being  a  Pakistani  citizen,  and  her  mother  being
    Nigerian.  It is contended  that  she  would  be  regarded  as  a  non-
    indigene.

The Refusal

18. The Respondent issued reasons for refusal letter  dated  11th  February
    2014 in relation to each Appellant.  In each case the  letter  runs  to
    seventeen pages.

19. In brief summary the Respondent accepted the ages  and  nationality  of
    the Appellants.  It was not accepted that being in a mixed faith family
    would put the Appellants at  any  risk.   The  Respondent  referred  to
    background information, and contended the evidence did not disclose any
    risk on that basis.

20. It was  not  accepted  that  Boko  Haram  posed  a  real  risk  to  the
    Appellants, as that organisation operated in  northeast  Nigeria.   The
    Respondent submitted that there was no evidence of risk in other  areas
    of Nigeria and the Appellants could relocate to those other areas.   It
    was pointed out that the Appellants' mother originates  from  Lagos  in
    the south of Nigeria.

21. The Respondent believed that there was within Nigeria a sufficiency  of
    protection from the authorities, and a reasonable option of  relocation
    to an area other than northern Nigeria.

22. The Respondent did not  accept  that  the  second  Appellant  would  be
    persecuted as a result of having a father who is not a Nigerian.

23. In relation to Z, the Respondent took the view that although  he  could
    not be removed to Nigeria, it was open to him to accompany  his  family
    to Nigeria by  making  the  appropriate  application  to  the  Nigerian
    authorities.

24. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellants would be at  risk  in
    Nigeria and therefore took the view that they were not  entitled  to  a
    grant of asylum or humanitarian protection, and  did  not  accept  that
    Articles 2 or 3 of the 1950 Convention would be breached.

25. In relation to Article 8, the Respondent contended that the  Appellants
    could not satisfy  either  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and took the view  that  removal  would  not  breach
    Article 8.







The Hearing

Preliminary Issues

26. Both Z and K attended the hearing.  I  was  told  that  they  would  be
    giving  oral  evidence  and  would  not  need  the  assistance  of   an
    interpreter.

27. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  I had received
    Respondent's bundles with Annexes  A-F  for  both  Appellants.   I  had
    received four separate bundles served  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.
    Bundle A related to the first Appellant and comprised 80 pages,  bundle
    B related to the second Appellant and  comprised  71  pages,  bundle  C
    related to both Appellants and comprised 24 pages, and  bundle  D  also
    related to both Appellants and comprised 61 pages.

28. Ms Patel confirmed that the first Appellant claimed asylum  based  upon
    her religion as a Christian, while the second Appellant claimed  asylum
    based upon her religion as a Muslim, and  her  race  and  ethnicity  as
    being a child of a non-Nigerian father.

29. In the alternative the Appellants claimed humanitarian protection,  and
    relied upon Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the 1950 Convention.

30. Ms Patel stated that it was accepted  that  the  Appellants  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM in relation to family life, but
    relied upon paragraph 276ADE(vi) in relation to private life, and  also
    relied upon Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

31. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

32. I firstly heard evidence from Z  who  adopted  his  witness  statements
    dated 25th April 2014, 29th April 2014, and 17th April 2015.

33. I then heard evidence from K who adopted her witness  statements  dated
    25th April 2014, 29th April 2014, and 17th April 2015.

34. Both witnesses were questioned by the representatives.  I have recorded
    all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings  and  it  is  not
    necessary to reiterate them here.

35. In brief summary, Z confirmed that he took F to  the  mosque  with  him
    every Friday for prayers and that she was being brought up as a Muslim.
     He had no difficulty with his wife and stepdaughter being  Christians.
    Z denied when cross-examined that he  had  recently  started  attending
    prayers at the mosque, stating that he had always attended.   Z  stated
    that he feared that his daughters would not be able to  practise  their
    religion in Nigeria and that he could not live in Nigeria as he did not
    have any relatives there, and had never lived in  that  country.   When
    asked who he feared in Nigeria he replied "people around there".

36. In relation to his daughter from another  relationship  Z  acknowledged
    that he did not have any contact with  her,  stating  that  her  mother
    would not  allow  this,  and  he  was  unable  to  afford  to  instruct
    solicitors to apply for contact proceedings and could not obtain  legal
    aid.  Z  accepted  when  cross-examined  that  he  had  been  having  a
    relationship with another partner at about the time that K was  due  to
    give birth to their child.

37. By way of clarification I asked how  long  Z  had  been  attending  the
    mosque, and he said it was more than  a  year  although  he  could  not
    remember the name of the mosque.

38. K, in summary, said that she was bringing up T as a Christian and  they
    prayed every morning and went to church on  Sunday.   She  believed  it
    would be very difficult for her children to practise their religion  in
    Nigeria.  When cross-examined and asked why this was the case, she said
    it would be difficult  because  Christians  and  Muslims  do  not  live
    together in Nigeria.

39. I noted that in her initial witness statement K had indicated that  she
    intended to convert to Islam and I asked if this was  still  the  case,
    and she said it was not.

The Respondent's Submissions

40. Mr Harrison relied upon the reasons  for  refusal  letters  dated  11th
    February 2014 in submitting that the appeals should  be  dismissed.   I
    was asked to find that there would be no risk to the Appellants if they
    returned to Nigeria and that they could  live  safely  in  an  area  of
    Nigeria other than the north.  For example, they  could  live  in  very
    large cities such as Lagos or Abuja.

41. Mr Harrison submitted that Z could  obtain  entry  to  Nigeria  as  the
    spouse of a Nigerian citizen if he wished.

42. Mr Harrison submitted that the objective and  background  evidence  did
    not identify a specific risk of persecution for children of mixed faith
    marriages.  I was asked to note that the background evidence  indicated
    that approximately 50% of  the  Nigerian  population  are  Muslim,  and
    approximately  40%  Christian.   Nigerians  are  legally  entitled   to
    religious freedom.

43. It was accepted that the background evidence indicated that some states
    in Nigeria had adopted laws which  were  discriminatory  in  some  ways
    towards non-indigenes, but that did not amount to persecution.

44. Mr Harrison submitted that these appeals  were  a  further  attempt  to
    frustrate immigration law and prevent the removal of  this  family  who
    had no right to be in the United Kingdom and who had no valid claim  to
    international protection.



The Appellants' Submissions

45. Ms Patel relied upon the skeleton arguments contained in bundles A  and
    B.  I was asked to accept  as  credible  the  evidence  given  by  both
    witnesses.  I was also asked to accept that the  Appellants  are  being
    brought up in different religions, and the second Appellant is of mixed
    race and would be at risk on that basis.

46. I was referred to background material and in particular bundle B, pages
    18-20, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 33, 44 and 45.  I was  asked  to  find  that
    this background material indicated that the second Appellant  would  be
    at risk because she is a non-indigene and the Appellants  would  be  at
    risk because they are of different religions, and would be at risk from
    Boko Haram.

47. I observed that the background  evidence  in  relation  to  Boko  Haram
    appeared to relate in the main to the northern part of Nigeria, and  Ms
    Patel accepted that she could  not  refer  me  to  background  evidence
    showing a real risk in either Lagos or Abuja.

48. In relation to Article 8 Ms Patel submitted that the  Appellants  would
    face very significant obstacles if they were  removed  to  Nigeria  and
    therefore the appeals  were  entitled  to  succeed  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).

49. I was also asked to allow the appeal in relation to Article  8  outside
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  take  into  account  that  removing   the
    Appellants would separate the  family,  as  the  Respondent  could  not
    remove  Z  to   Nigeria   and   therefore   the   decision   would   be
    disproportionate.

50. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

51. I have taken into account all the evidence and submissions,  both  oral
    and documentary, placed before me, even if I do not specifically  refer
    to a particular piece of evidence.   I  take  into  account  the  lower
    standard of proof that applies in a case such  as  this  which  can  be
    described as a reasonable degree of likelihood.  I have considered this
    appeal in the  light  of  the  provisions  of  paragraph  339L  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and have considered the evidence in  the  round  and
    with anxious scrutiny.  I accept that great care must be  taken  before
    making adverse findings of credibility in asylum cases.

52. I do not accept Z and K as credible witnesses in all respects.  I  note
    what was said about K's credibility in  the  determination  promulgated
    following her appeal hearing on 12th  May  2011.   K  is  described  in
    paragraph 11.1 of that decision as being a person  who  is  willing  to
    deceive the authorities in order  to  achieve  her  own  ends,  and  in
    paragraph 11.2, she is described as not being a  witness  of  truth  in
    respect of the factual basis upon which she seeks to rely.  The core of
    her account is described as a fabrication  designed  to  gain  her  the
    right to remain in the United Kingdom.

53. In relation to Z, his evidence is that he is a devout  Muslim,  but  he
    accepted having entered into a sexual  relationship  with  K  prior  to
    marriage as the second Appellant was born in October 2011, and Z and  K
    did not marry until 29th  January  2013.   Z  also  accepted  having  a
    relationship with another  woman,  to  whom  he  was  not  married,  at
    approximately the same time as K was due to give birth.

54. Although Z claimed to attend his local mosque every Friday and to  have
    done so in excess of one year, he was unable to recall the name of  the
    mosque.

55. I accept that Z is a citizen of Pakistan and K a citizen of Nigeria and
    that both children are Nigerian citizens.

56. I also accept that Z has  another  daughter  currently  in  the  United
    Kingdom who was born on 9th August 2012 but that he has no contact with
    her, and he is not pursuing any legal proceedings in  order  to  obtain
    contact.

57. I accept that Z and K are married and that they live together with  the
    two Appellants in a family unit.  They have decided  to  bring  up  one
    child as a Christian and one as a  Muslim,  although  I  find  that  no
    reasonable  or  adequate  explanation  has   been   given   for   this,
    particularly as K was, according to her initial witness statement dated
    25th April 2014, intending to convert to Islam.  She  has  subsequently
    confirmed that she no longer plans to  convert,  and  that  she  has  a
    strong Christian faith.  In my view it is not necessary to consider why
    a decision has been made  to  bring  up  two  very  young  children  in
    different faiths, and it  is  sufficient  for  the  purposes  of  these
    appeals, to accept that this is being done.

58. I firstly consider whether the Appellants would be at  risk  from  Boko
    Haram which is an Islamist militant group waging a campaign of violence
    in northeastern Nigeria.   Background  evidence  contained  within  the
    Appellants' bundles contains numerous  articles  relating  to  acts  of
    violence carried out by Boko Haram.  The vast majority of  the  violent
    acts take place in the north of Nigeria although there are some acts of
    violence in other areas of the country.  For example, page 45 of bundle
    A contains an account of an explosion at a  bus  station  in  Abuja  in
    April 2014 which killed 71 people, and which had the hallmarks of  Boko
    Haram.

59. I do not find that the background  evidence  proves  that  there  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that the Appellants would  be  at  risk
    from Boko Haram if returned to Nigeria.  It is not suggested that  they
    would live in the northeastern part of Nigeria.  The Appellants' mother
    was born in Lagos and lived in Lagos.  If the  Appellants  lived  in  a
    part of Nigeria other than the northeast, I do not find that there is a
    risk that they would be targeted by Boko Haram.  It would not be unduly
    harsh for the Appellants to live in Nigeria, in an area other that than
    the northeast.

60. I next consider whether the Appellants would  be  at  risk  because  of
    their religion.  I find that the  background  evidence  indicates  that
    approximately 50% of the  Nigerian  population  are  Muslim,  and  that
    Christians amount to between 40% and 45%.  The Respondent has  produced
    the Country of Origin Information response in answer to  the  questions
    as to whether there are reports  of  people  of  mixed  race  or  mixed
    religion marriages being targeted for  violence  or  discrimination  in
    Nigeria.

61. The response refers to a UN Commission on Human Rights Report which  is
    of some age, dated 7th October 2005, which confirms that many  families
    in  Nigeria  include  members  from  both  the  Muslim  and   Christian
    communities as a result of interfaith marriages.  The report at page 16
    indicates that  Article  38  of  the  Nigerian  Constitution  expressly
    provides for the right to change religion or  belief,  and  that  as  a
    fact, in many places in Nigeria Christians and Muslims mix to  a  great
    extent and interfaith marriages are very common.

62. I have considered all  of  the  background  evidence  to  which  I  was
    referred by Ms Patel, and I do not  find  that  any  of  that  evidence
    proves to a reasonable degree of likelihood, that the Appellants  would
    be at risk because one parent is a non-Nigerian, and a Muslim,  whereas
    the other parent is a Christian and Nigerian citizen.  This would  only
    be apparent of course, if Z decided to leave the United Kingdom,  where
    he has no status, and to apply to reside in Nigeria with his  wife  and
    the Appellants.

63. I was referred by Ms Patel to page 18 of bundle B, which is a report by
    Roy Chikwem, and in the first paragraph of that report  Yorubas,  which
    is the ethnic group of the Appellants' mother, are described as being a
    mixture of Muslims and Christians.

64. Both Z and K in their oral evidence expressed fear that the  Appellants
    would be at risk because one is a Muslim and the other a Christian, and
    would be at risk because of the mixed religion and mixed race marriage,
    but the background evidence  produced  does  not  provide  evidence  to
    support that fear.  I do not find that the Appellants would be at  risk
    by reason of their religion, or the religion of Z and K.

65. Much of the background evidence relates to  non-indigene  status.   The
    COI response dated 29th November 2014 refers to a  Human  Rights  Watch
    Report headed 'Government Discrimination Against Non-Indigenes'.   This
    report is contained within the Appellants' bundle B at pages 22-28.  It
    confirms that an indigene of a place is a person who can trace  his  or
    her ethnic and genealogical roots back to the community of  people  who
    originally settled there.  Everyone else, no matter how long they  have
    lived there, will always be a non-indigene.  The report by Roy  Chikwem
    at page 19 of the bundle records that the state of Lagos is composed of
    65%  of  non-indigenes,  who  have  contributed  to  the   growth   and
    development of the state.

66. The  Human  Rights  Watch  Report  has  indicated  that  there  may  be
    discrimination  against  non-indigenes,  even   though   the   Nigerian
    Constitution states that there should  be  no  discrimination.   It  is
    recorded that some states refuse to employ non-indigenes in their state
    civil services, and most of the 36 states deny non-indigenes the  right
    to compete for academic  scholarships.   In  some  states  non-indigene
    parents allege that while secondary school fees are technically  equal,
    local officials routinely waive  school  and  exam  fees  for  indigene
    students while non-indigenes are made to pay.

67. The Human Rights Report at page 23 of the  bundle  records  that  state
    governments generally  failed  to  articulate  any  objective  sets  of
    criteria that should be used by local officials in determining  whether
    a person is an indigene of their community, and Nigerian  law  contains
    no clear definition of indigeneity.  In my view it is not clear that  F
    would be described as a non-indigene, and even if she  was,  while  the
    background evidence indicates that there may be some discrimination, it
    does not amount to persecution.  For example,  at  page  28  the  Human
    Rights Watch Report records that non-indigenes are able to vote in  the
    communities they live in, but often face formidable obstacles including
    outright intimidation should they seek to participate more directly  in
    local politics.  This is an  example  of  discrimination,  but  not  of
    persecution.

68. I was also referred to an article  written  by  Ebere  Onwudiwe  headed
    'Communal Violence and the Future of Nigeria'.  I do not attach  weight
    to this article, as it was published in 2004, and therefore  is  in  my
    view out of date, and is in any event a general article  and  does  not
    add anything relevant to the Appellants' case.

69. I was also referred to an article by  Aaron  Sayne  headed  'Rethinking
    Nigeria's Indigene-Settler Conflicts" at pages 38 to 47.  This  relates
    to conflicts between indigenes and settlers.  This is a general article
    and does not relate to either Abuja or Lagos, and refers at page 44  of
    the bundle  to  conflicts  in  Jos,  Warri,  Kaduna,  and  Benue.   The
    Appellants could safely live in cities such as Abuja or Lagos, and I do
    not find that this report indicates that  they  would  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Nigeria.

70. Having considered all of the background evidence, I  do  not  find  any
    satisfactory evidence that the Appellants would be at  risk  from  Boko
    Haram, or because they live  in  a  household  where  there  are  mixed
    religions.  If F is  found  to  be  a  non-indigene  then  she  may  be
    subjected to discrimination  in  some  areas  of  her  life,  but  this
    discrimination does not reach the threshold of  persecution.   Being  a
    non-indigene does not entail a risk of physical violence, or  treatment
    that would breach Articles 2  or  3  of  the  1950  Convention.   If  Z
    accompanied his family to Nigeria then it appears clear that  he  would
    be a non-indigene and therefore subjected to  some  discrimination  but
    not persecution.

71. I do  not  find  that  the  presence  of  a  non-indigene  would  cause
    difficulties for the family, particularly if they lived in one  of  the
    large cities such as Abuja  or  Lagos.   K  confirmed  in  her  witness
    statement dated 25th April 2014 that while in  Nigeria  she  was  in  a
    relationship  with  an  American  man,  and  after  that  she   had   a
    relationship with a British man.  There were  no  adverse  consequences
    for her due to her relationships with foreign men.

72. The Appellants are not at risk if returned  to  Nigeria  and  therefore
    they are not entitled to a grant of asylum or humanitarian  protection,
    and returning them to Nigeria would not breach Articles 2 or 3  of  the
    1950 Convention.

73. In considering Article 8 I take into account that it is  accepted  that
    the Appellants cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  in
    relation to family life.

74. I find that the Appellants cannot satisfy paragraph 276ADE in  relation
    to their private lives.  They cannot satisfy  subsection  (vi)  because
    they are under the age of 18.   They  cannot  satisfy  subsection  (iv)
    because although they are under the age of  18,  they  have  not  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least seven years.

75. As I accept that Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE are  not  a  complete
    code, it is appropriate for  me  to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  I do so taking into account the guidance  given  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 which  indicates  that  the  following  questions
    should be considered:

          a) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
         (3)      If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4)      If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
         (5)       If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate   to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?

76. The decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 means that if  I  find  that
    family life is engaged, I must consider the family lives of all members
    of the family, not only the Appellants.

77. I find that the Appellants have established family life with Z  and  K.
    However, if the Appellants were removed from the  United  Kingdom  they
    would be removed together with their mother, as she  has  no  right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  Although Z has no  right  to  remain  in
    this country, because he is a citizen of Pakistan, the Respondent could
    not remove him to Nigeria.  I therefore conclude that  removal  of  the
    Appellants may be an interference with their family  life  as  well  as
    their private life, and engages Article 8.

78. I find that the proposed interference would be in accordance  with  the
    law as the Appellants are not at risk in Nigeria and therefore are  not
    entitled to a grant of asylum or  humanitarian  protection,  and  there
    would be no breach of Articles 2 or  3  of  the  1950  Convention.   In
    addition the Appellants cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules  in  order
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

79. I then have to decide whether the proposed  interference  is  necessary
    and proportionate.  In considering this issue, the  best  interests  of
    the  children  are  a  primary  consideration.   As  explained  in   ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, the best interests of a child  broadly  means
    the well-being of the child, and a consideration of  where  those  best
    interests lie will involve asking whether it is  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to live in another country.  The best interests of  a  child,
    while a primary consideration, can  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative
    effect of other considerations.

80. In this case the children  are  not  British,  but  they  are  Nigerian
    citizens.  Because of their young age, I find that their best interests
    would be served by remaining with their parents.   I  have  taken  into
    account the principles outlined in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC)
    and set out below paragraph 1 of the head note to that decision:

         (1)  The  case  law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
             following principles to assist in the determination of appeals
             where children are affected by the appealed decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
                  children to be with both their parents and if both parents
                  are  being  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the
                  starting point suggests that so should dependent  children
                  who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
                  to the contrary.
             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.
             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social  cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in  the  absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.
             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that  seven years from age 4  is likely  to
                  be more significant to a child than the first seven  years
                  of life.   Very  young  children  are  focussed  on  their
                  parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.
             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the economic  well-being  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

81. In this case the children are very young and would have  no  difficulty
    adapting to life in Nigeria, the country of which they are citizens.  I
    do not find that there would be any language or cultural  difficulties,
    and there are no relevant medical issues.

82. The Appellants have not lived in the United Kingdom for seven years and
    will be focussed  on  their  parents  rather  than  their  peers.   The
    youngest Appellant has not yet started school, and the elder child  has
    only just started her first school.

83. The parents of the children do not have the  right  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and in considering proportionality and Article 8, I have
    to take into account section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  This  confirms  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.   It  is  also  in  the
    public interest that persons seeking to  remain  in  this  country  can
    speak English and are financially independent.  Little weight should be
    given to a private life established when a person's immigration  status
    is precarious.  The family are not financially  independent  and  their
    immigration status has always been precarious.

84. The best interests of the children are to remain with both  parents  if
    possible, and definitely with their mother.  In my  view  it  would  be
    proportionate to remove the Appellants to Nigeria for the reasons  that
    I have outlined above, and their mother would  be  removed  with  them.
    This need not involve a separation of the family as it is open to Z  to
    make an application to accompany his family to Nigeria as the spouse of
    a Nigerian citizen and the father and stepfather of Nigerian  children.
    Removal of the Appellants would  not  breach  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  I substitute a  fresh
decision as follows.


I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

The First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order  in  these  proceedings
because the Appellants are minors.  I continue that order pursuant  to  Rule
14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellants.
Failure to comply with this direction could lead to a contempt of court.

Signed                              Date         28th April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There is no fee award.




Signed                              Date         28th April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

