
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02070/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 March 2014                              |On 17 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                               ABDI  ALI  IYOW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

 Appellant:   Mr Martin Brennan, Solicitor.
 Respondent:            Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born on 1st January 1980.   He
    has been resident in the  United  Kingdom  since  November  2012.   His
    appeal has its origins in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),  dated  12th
    February 2013, whereby his  claims  for  international  protection  and
    under Article 8 ECHR were refused.  His ensuing appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was dismissed in a determination  dated  15th
    June 2013.

 2. The grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal adverted to the
    FtT's finding that the Appellant is a member  of  the  Ashraf  minority
    clan and considered it arguable that the findings that the Appellant  "
    .....  can safely return to Mogadishu airport and relocate to Mogadishu
    or, alternatively, travel safely to his home area of Jowhar is  not  in
    accordance with  the  country  guidance  case  .....    and/or  is  not
    supported by the background evidence of current conditions in Somalia."
    The Secretary of State's Rule 24 Response, supporting the  decision  of
    the FtT, embodies two noteworthy contentions.  The first  is  that  the
    Judge gave adequate reasons for departing  from  the  country  guidance
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in AMM and Others - v  -  Secretary   of
    State for the Home Department [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC).  The  second  is
    that the Judge had ample justification for finding that  the  Appellant
    had been untruthful, having regard to the various  inconsistencies  and
    discrepancies identified in the Appellant's story.

 3. When interviewed in connection with  his  claims  for  protection,  the
    Applicant stated that he was the father of  four  children,  with  ages
    ranging from 3 - 7 years and he had last seen his spouse in Somalia  on
    24th June 2012.  They lived in Jowhar.   The  gist  of  his  claim  for
    asylum is encapsulated in the following answer:

         "I am afraid of Al Shabab (hereinafter "AS").   Afraid  they  would
         kill (me).  They arrested me, when war broke out I escaped."

    He described himself as a Muslim and a member of the Ashraf  clan.   He
    asserted that his uncle had been killed.  He described an  incident  at
    around the same time when two armed men threatened to kill him  and  he
    was, fortuitously, rescued by the Government forces some minutes later.
     He dated this incident  30th  October  2012.   When  asked  about  the
    Government forces, he stated:


         "They are the ones who caused me to leave.  They are the ones  who
    raped my cousin."

    The Appellant also described  an  earlier  incident,  evidently  months
    beforehand, involving his arrest by AS members who had taken control of
    his area since 2009.

 4. Developing his claim and account, the Appellant asserted that he was in
    fear of  AS.   He  claimed  that  AS  had  a  significant  presence  in
    Mogadishu, which was not a safe place in consequences.  He  added  that
    in 2004 members of a militia group linked to a major  can,  Abgal,  had
    visited his home, attacked and injured him and  raped  his  wife.   The
    same clan also killed his father,  in  1993.   He  described  his  clan
    (Ashraf) as part of the Bendiri group. He also appeared to  state  that
    the Ashraf clan has two sub clans
    and that he is a member of one of these, Hassan Sarmen.


 5. The refusal decision of the Secretary of State is  susceptible  to  the
    following analysis:

    (a)  The Appellant's claim to be from Jowhar  was  accepted.   However,
         his claim to be a member of the Ashraf clan  was  disbelieved.   In
         consequence, his claim concerning the attack and rape by Abgal clan
         members in 2004 was rejected.

    (b)  His assertion that he had been detained by AS members on 24th June
         2012 and his description of his escape were considered unworthy  of
         belief.

    (c)  His story was considered  to  be  further  undermined  by  a  twin
         failure to attempt any contact with his family in Jowhar during the
         five month period he claimed to have spent in Mogadishu  from  June
         2012 and his failure to contact his aunt in Mogadishu at  the  same
         time.

    (d)  The issue of risk on return was  then  examined  in  some  detail.
         This involved consideration of various pieces of  information  from
         sundry sources.  This gave rise to an assessment that the Appellant
         has clan and family connections in an area not  controlled  by  AS;
         that  he  could  reasonably  return  to  this  area;  that   living
         conditions  in  central   and   southern   Somalia   had   improved
         sufficiently to overtake the "N situation"  addressed  in  the  AMM
         decision; and that even if he were a member of the Ashraf clan this
         status  alone  would  not  expose  him  to  a  risk  of  proscribed
         treatment.

     This part of the decision contains the following key passage:

         "[57]    In summary, in view of the absence of [AS]  in  Mogadishu,
             at any point of your route of  return  or,  significantly,  in
             your home area of Jowhar, it is not accepted that you are,  in
             fact, at real risk on return where you to return to your  home
             area.   Similarly,  given  the  improvement  of   the   living
             conditions in central and southern Somalia, coupled  with  the
             fact that your claimed status as a minority clan  member  does
             not place you at real  risk  alone  even  if  it  were  to  be
             accepted, it is considered that your return to Jowhar does not
             place you at real risk of a breach  of  Article  3  or  engage
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive."

 6.  The  decision  maker  also  considered  the  alternative  of  internal
    relocation to Mogadishu, stating:

         "[AS] may still have a hidden presence in Mogadishu but they are no
         longer in control.  It is not however considered that you have  any
         political profile that would bring you to their attention.   It  is
         therefore considered that  your  account  does  not  demonstrate  a
         barrier to relocation to Mogadishu if required .....   There  is  a
         significant Ashraf community in Mogadishu .....   the  clan  system
         in Somalia remains a significant means  of  support  for  returnees
         ....  [all combining] .....  to render your relocation to Mogadishu
         viable."


     Drawing on certain pieces  of  information,  the  decision  maker  also
stated:

         "It is concluded that the 'durability' test  outlined  by  AMM  has
         been met  in  respect  of  Mogadishu  .....   The  above  objective
         information, which post  dates  the  promulgation  of  AMM  clearly
         outlines the fact that Mogadishu  is  entirely  controlled  by  the
         Government's troops and that the security  of  Mogadishu  has  been
         consolidated  to  such  an  extent  that  Somalia's  first   formal
         parliament in more than 20 years was sworn in .... Your  return  to
         Mogadishu does not place you at  real  risk  as  a  result  of  the
         current level of fighting."

    The refusal letter was also based on a perceived  "emergence  of  peace
    ...   economic boom ...   [and] ...  new cycle of peace and prosperity"
    in Mogadishu.

 7. Duly analysed, the decision of the FtT was  modelled  substantially  on
    the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  decision.   The  Judge  began  by
    disagreeing with the Secretary of State's finding on the issue of  clan
    membership, holding that the  Appellant  is  a  member  of  the  Ashraf
    minority clan, as claimed by him.  Next, the Judge set himself the task
    of examining the credibility of core of the Appellant's story.   Having
    done so, he stated:

         "I have come to the  view  that  the  general  credibility  of  the
         Appellant has not been established.  I find that the Appellant  has
         been essentially untruthful about the events which he has sought to
         describe in Somalia.  His story is  flawed.   The  inconsistencies,
         the implausibilities and deliberate untruths and the question marks
         all add up in their cumulative effect to  a  position  where  I  am
         unable to accept any part of the evidence of the Appellant as being
         true insofar as it relates to the  events  which  he  described  in
         Somalia which  form  the  basis  of  his  claim  for  international
         protection."

    The Judge then undertook the exercise of elaborating on this relatively
    withering condemnation of the Appellant's credibility.  He proceeded to
    explain at some  length  his  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    assertions in relation to his detention by AS  and  subsequent  escape;
    the Appellant's explanation of why he remained mainly in hiding  during
    the following months, given the absence of any evidence that AS knew of
    his identity; his professed fear of the Government forces  as  well  as
    AS, which the Judge considered incongruous; his story about  the  armed
    threat  to  his  life  some  months  later,  which  the   Judge   found
    intrinsically implausible; and certain perceived discrepancies relating
    to the issue of the Appellant's contact with his  aunt  and  family  in
    Somalia following departure.

 8. Next, the  Judge  assessed  the  updated  situation  in  Somalia.   His
    assessment is ascertainable from the following passages:

         "Somalia is a different place now than  it  was  when  the  country
         guidance case of AMM ....    was decided ....


         The situation in Somalia has now dramatically improved .....


         The preponderance of evidence is that those people  being  targeted
         [by  AS]  at  present  are  the  representatives  of  the   present
         Government ...   in  general  [AS]  does  not  deliberately  target
         civilians and  the  risks  involved  in  living  in  Mogadishu  are
         basically a question of being at the wrong place at the wrong  time
         ...


         [AS] no longer exists  as  an  organised  fighting  force  but  has
         continued  its  warfare  based  upon  guerrilla  attacks  upon  the
         identified groupings  and  persons  [excluding  the  Appellant]  ..
         the Government exercises control ...  in  Mogadishu  and  seeks  to
         enforce the law and protect individuals ....


         The preponderance of evidence does indicate that there is no longer
         a degree of risk, absent the famine and absent  the  open  warfare,
         where it could be said that the citizens of Mogadishu  or  Shabelle
         are entitled to humanitarian protection."

    The Judge then recorded his rejection of the Appellant's claim that  he
    is at risk from AS, on the basis of his adverse  credibility  findings.
    He continued:

         "Even if his account were true .....    Mogadishu and Shabelle  are
         secure in the hands of  Government  forces  and  I  find  that  the
         Appellant is not a particular target ....

         I find that the Appellant will not be at  risk  by  virtue  of  his
         being a member of the Ashraf minority clan."

    Finally, the  Judge  found  specifically  that  access  from  Mogadishu
    Airport to the city remains safe.  He further found that the  Appellant
    could travel safely from Mogadishu to his home town.

 9. I juxtapose the grant of permission  to  appeal  with  the  grounds  of
    appeal seeking such permission.  In short, the Appellant challenges the
    Judge's findings of no real risk on return. This challenge is based  on
    the UNHCR Guidelines, published in 2010 and updated in March 2012.   It
    is contended on behalf of the Appellant that, accordingly, the  Judge's
    finding that the  Appellant  could  safely  relocate  to  Mogadishu  is
    unsustainable.   In  my  view,  this  contention  is  untenable  as  it
    overlooks the simple factual reality  that  this  is  not  an  internal
    relocation  case  in  the   conventional   sense.   Rather,   "internal
    relocation"  for  this  Appellant  will  simply  mean  proceeding  from
    Mogadishu Airport to Mogadishu city. The evidence establishes  that  it
    is safe to do so and there is no  identifiable  error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's premise to this effect.  This aspect of the appeal has no merit
    or substance in consequence.

10. Mr Brennen, in seeking to challenge the Judge's  findings  relating  to
    risk upon return to Somalia, laid emphasis upon the  following  aspects
    of the country evidence:

    (a)  The suggestion in the Home Office Operational  Guidance  Note  for
         Somalia, of October 2012, that members of the Asharaf  and  kindred
         clans "...  may be targeted by [AS] partly because  [AS]  does  not
         recognise their religious status and partly because they oppose the
         Shariff Hassan who was the  driving  force  in  the  2008  Dijbouti
         Agreement with [the President]."  [Paragraph 3.9.6].

    (b)  The claim in the UNCHR Somalia Report (May 2010) that  members  of
         the minority clans in  southern  and  central  Somalia  "...    are
         vulnerable  as  they  lack  the  military  capabilities  to  defend
         themselves and do not generally benefit from the protection of  war
         lords and militias of the large clan [and] are therefore exposed to
         an increased risk of rape, attack, abduction and having their  real
         and personal property confiscated in southern and central Somalia's
         lawless atmosphere."

    (c)  The passage in the same report relating to reports  of  increasing
         forcible recruitment of young Somali males in southern and  central
         Somalia.

     (d) Various passages in the Danish Immigration Service  Report  of  May
2013.

    The Danish Report records that the activities of  AS  include  targeted
    lethal attacks on AS defectors.  There is  decreasing  support  for  AS
    among the clans.  Arrests by Government forces of suspected AS  members
    and   affiliates   are   concentrated   on   younger   people,    occur
    indiscriminately and usually result in detention for less than one day.
     Generally, the UN threat and risk levels relating  to  Mogadishu  have
    reduced, albeit a significant risk in many  areas  endures.   The  main
    task of the Government forces is to keep AS out of the  city,  where  a
    front line and conventional warfare no longer feature.   AS  still  has
    the capacity to undertake specifically targeted  attacks.   The  report
    describes a diminishing graph of "small scale hit and run  attacks  ...
    throwing hand grenades and assassinating people".  AS has  no  military
    capacity to attack Jowhar in Middle  Shabelle.   Large  scale  military
    operations  are  now  beyond  its  capacity.   Mogadishu  Airport   is,
    essentially (though no absolutely), secure.

11. One of the two basic grounds of  appeal  entails  a  challenge  to  the
    Judge's findings adverse to the Appellant's credibility.  It is unclear
    whether this ground is embraced by the grant of permission  to  appeal.
    However, I shall give the Appellant the benefit of the  doubt.  It  was
    not disputed by Mr Brennen that the threshold for intervention in  this
    respect is irrationality. This is a self evidently elevated  threshold.
    I am satisfied that it is not overcome.  The Judge's  several  findings
    relating to the plausibility and consistency of  the  Appellant's  core
    story plainly lay within the range of findings reasonably open to  him,
    having regard to the evidence.  Furthermore, these findings are clearly
    articulated and adequately reasoned.  This ground of appeal  must  fail
    accordingly.

12. Thus the spotlight switches  to  the  issue  of  risk  on  return  and,
    specifically, the Judge's assessment  of  the  evolving  conditions  in
    southern Somalia and Mogadishu.  The context in which this  issue  must
    be considered is shaped by the fact that, having regard to the  Judge's
    findings, the Appellant's only  relevant  characteristics  are,  in  my
    estimation, twofold.  First,  he  is  a  member  of  the  Ashraf  clan.
    Second, he is a member of such clan  who  has  departed  Mogadishu  and
    would be returning approximately two years later.


13.  The decision in AMM must be considered at this  juncture.   The  first
    purpose of this exercise is to  ascertain  whether,  on  paper  and  in
    principle,  the  Appellant  belongs  to  any  of  the  risk  groups  or
    categories identified therein. In AMM, the Upper Tribunal, having  duly
    acknowledged  certain  changes  and  improvements  in   conditions   in
    Mogadishu, held that there is a general Article 15(c) risk to the great
    majority of those returning there from the United  Kingdom:  See  [350]
    and [357] - [358].  Certain  exceptions  were  recognised:  see  [357].
    However it was not suggested - in the decision letter, in  the  hearing
    at first instance or in argument before this Tribunal  -  that  any  of
    these applies to the Appellant.

14. Stated succinctly, the Appellant, without  having  to  demonstrate  any
    special  characteristics,  belongs  to  the   general   risk   category
    identified in AMM.  In making its decision, the FtT was clearly mindful
    of paragraph [363] of AMM, which emphasised that in future cases  where
    the evidence was not the same as or similar to that considered  by  the
    Upper Tribunal, Judges -

         "are not required to regard our findings as authoritative .....


         As time passes, however, it may well be that judicial fact  finders
         are able to conclude that the necessary element of  durability  has
         been satisfied.  How, if at all, that impacts on the assessment  of
         risk on return will, of course, depend on all the other evidence."

    On one view, it is difficult to identify any tangible error of  law  in
    the determination of the FtT in  the  present  case.   However,  it  is
    necessary to adopt a somewhat more panoramic view.  I presided recently
    in the hearing of several specially selected conjoined appeals  to  the
    Upper Tribunal [MOJ and Others v SOS].  This hearing  was  specifically
    convened and designed for the purpose  of  considering  whether  a  new
    Somalia/Mogadishu  County  Guidance  decision  should  be  promulgated.
    Judgment has been reserved.  I am conscious of the large quantities  of
    evidence, both expert and otherwise,  which  were  assembled  in  those
    appeals.  Much of this evidence spans a period  which  encompasses  the
    date when the impugned decision was made  in  the  present  case,  12th
    February 2013.  It is  clear  that  only  some  of  this  evidence  was
    considered by the decision maker.  The proposition  that  there  was  a
    duty to consider, assimilate and  rationalise  all  available  material
    evidence seems to me  incontestable.   The  decision  letter  does  not
    satisfy this standard.  Furthermore, it does not adequately engage with
    the key Article 15(c) element of the decision in AMM.   These  failures
    are inter-related.  Either singly or in combination, they impel to  the
    view that the refusal decision giving rise to the appeal to the FtT was
    not in accordance with the law.  In my judgment, a departure  from  the
    Article 15(c) element of the decision in AMM  would,  in  order  to  be
    sustainable,  require  a  more  detailed  and  sophisticated  exercise,
    addressing and evaluating all relevant available  evidence,  than  that
    carried out by the decision maker.

15. It is not easy to find fault with the decision of the  FtT,  which  was
    crafted with evident thought and care.  However, it was, of  necessity,
    dependent upon  the  depth  and  quality  underlying  decision  of  the
    Respondent, both being based on the same evidence.  I consider that the
    additional evidence on which the Appellant relied at first instance was
    far from  persuasive.  However,  this,  too,  suffered  from  the  same
    frailties which I have identified in the refusal decision.

16. Based on this analysis, I conclude that the FtT  should  properly  have
    decided that the Secretary of State's decision was  not  in  accordance
    with the law.   From this it follows that the decision of  the  FtT  is
    infected by an error of law the materiality whereof is beyond plausible
    dispute.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

17. Giving effect to the above:

    (a)  I set aside the decision of the FtT.

    (b)  I remit the case to a differently constituted FtT for the  purpose
         of remaking the decision.

    (c)  I direct that the remaking hearing should  await  promulgation  of
         the decision of the Upper Tribunal in the conjoined cases to  which
         I have referred above, MOJ and Others - v - Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department (heard in late February 2014).







                                                                     Signed:
                                         [pic]                      THE HON.
                                                        MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date:   14 April 2014
