
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02401/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 27 July 2016                      |On 15 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                    [I S]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Kiai, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order following his conviction for importation of a class A
    controlled drug. The appellant was sentenced to 20  years  imprisonment
    reduced to 17 years on appeal.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller ("the judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated 25 May 2016. The appellant  seeks  to  appeal
    the decision on the following grounds:

       i) In rejecting the probation officer's assessment of  the  risk  of
          reoffending the judge failed to take into account other  material
          evidence, including an expert report from a forensic psychologist
          who  assessed  the  appellant  to  be  at  "very  low   risk   of
          reoffending".  As   such,   the   judge's   assessment   of   his
          rehabilitation was also flawed.

      ii) The judge failed to take into account significant expert evidence
          in the form of an independent  social  work  report.  The  social
          worker strongly recommended that it was in the best interests  of
          the appellant's child for his father to remain in the UK and that
          deportation would "have devastating effects  on  [S's]  welfare".
          The report also made an assessment of  his  wife's  position  and
          concluded that "recurrent bouts of  depression  and  a  sense  of
          hopelessness could lead to self-harming behaviour or suicide"  in
          light of her history of "severe and lengthy depression".

Decision and reasons

3.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

4.    Mr Tufan accepted that the judge did not conduct an in depth  analysis
    of the evidence. I acknowledge that there is some force in  Mr  Tufan's
    submission that the very serious nature of the offence is such that any
    failure to consider the evidence was  unlikely  to  make  any  material
    difference to the final outcome of the appeal. The  significant  weight
    to be placed on the public interest  would  be  difficult  to  displace
    without evidence of very compelling circumstances indeed.

5.    As a general principle it is incumbent on a judge to make findings  in
    relation to evidence that is material to a  proper  assessment  of  the
    appeal. The judge acknowledged that deportation would have an  enormous
    impact on the lives of all of the appellant's family members and  would
    add to their real distress [69].

6.    However, no meaningful assessment was given to the independent  social
    worker report which, on the face of it, raised compelling circumstances
    relating to the effect of deportation on the appellant's  son  and  his
    wife. If the evidence was not phrased in such strong terms it is likely
    that I would have found no material error  of  law,  but  the  evidence
    appears to raise compelling circumstances that should have  been  taken
    into account. Whether those compelling circumstances  are  sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh such  a  serious  conviction  is  a  matter  for
    assessment by a judge. Ultimately, it may be  that  the  conviction  is
    such a serious matter that it still compels his deportation.

7.    The appellant has lived in the UK since 1997 and had lawful  leave  to
    remain at the date of conviction. His family members are  long  settled
    in the UK. The human rights issues raised by the expert  evidence  were
    sufficiently important to require some engagement. Despite the  serious
    nature of the  conviction  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  have  the
    evidence produced in support of the appeal considered  and  weighed  in
    the balance. It was insufficient for the judge to merely state that  he
    had taken into account all the evidence "including that to which I have
    not made specific reference" [75].

8.    The judge's rejection of the probation officer's  assessment  of  risk
    of reoffending without considering material evidence contained  in  the
    forensic psychology report also amounts to an error [74]. If  this  had
    been the only criticism I would have found that it insufficient to  set
    aside the decision because the risk of reoffending is unlikely to be  a
    significant factor in this case given the very serious  nature  of  the
    offence. The public interest may well compel deportation regardless  of
    the risk of reoffending. However, I find that the  judge's  failure  to
    consider two significant pieces  of  expert  evidence  is  sufficiently
    serious to conclude that the decision should be set aside.

9.    I have considered the submissions regarding  the  forum  for  remaking
    the decision. Where possible a decision will normally be remade in  the
    Upper Tribunal. I conclude that it would  be  difficult  to  place  two
    significant pieces of evidence in context without having heard from the
    witnesses. Whether the circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  must
    be assessed holistically. For this reason I find that it is appropriate
    to remit the case for a fresh hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date 14 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








