
[pic]
IAC-AH-RG-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02819/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 October 2014                               |On 27 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     KAG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola of the Special Appeal Team
For the Respondent:    Mr O Oke of Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as the Applicant is a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born in 1984.  He is a Protestant Christian. He has spent very
    little of his life in Pakistan, being the child  of  two  international
    health workers  and  who  has  completed  his  tertiary  education  and
    obtained his professional qualification as an accountant in the  United
    Kingdom.  His sister has indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. In late 2012 the  Applicant  with  his  father  returned  to  Pakistan.
    Difficulties had arisen about a family owned property  which  had  been
    rented out and in respect of which the tenant had prepared a fraudulent
    agreement for  sale.   His  father  had  obtained  a  court  order  for
    possession and the intention was for it to  be  enforced.   The  tenant
    assaulted the Applicant and his father who lodged a complaint with  the
    police.  The tenant filed a counter case in early January 2014 and also
    made a First Information Report was lodged alleging the  Applicant  had
    committed blasphemy.

 3. The Applicant and his father both  left  Pakistan  in  fear  for  their
    safety and the Applicant returned to the United Kingdom  where  he  had
    been studying.  On or shortly after his return on 9  January  2013  the
    Applicant sought international protection because  he  feared  that  on
    return to Pakistan he would be persecuted by reason  of  his  religion.
    On 15 April 2014 the Appellant (the SSHD) refused the Applicant's claim
    and decided to remove him  to  Pakistan  by  way  of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The SSHD's Decision

 4. The SSHD accepted the Applicant's account of  problems  with  a  family
    property in Pakistan which had been rented out and  which  had  led  to
    litigation.  However the SSHD rejected the Applicant's claim to  be  at
    risk for a  Refugee  Convention  reason  because  the  court  documents
    relating to the blasphemy charge were such that they could easily  have
    been fraudulently obtained and the letters from two pastors  lodged  in
    support of his claim were considered to be based on  hearsay  evidence.
    Further, if the Applicant  was  the  subject  of  criminal  charges  as
    claimed he would not have been able freely to leave Pakistan.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 5. By a determination promulgated on 31 July 2014 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Thanki found the Appellant  credible  and  accepted  that  the
    court documentation from Pakistan was genuine.  He went on to allow the
    appeal on asylum grounds.

 6. On 18 August 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal because it was arguable the Judge had  failed
    to provide adequate reasons why the supporting letters from two pastors
    showed  that  there  was  an  outstanding  criminal  case  against  the
    Applicant.  The Applicant  did  not  lodge  any  response  pursuant  to
    Procedure Rule 24 but did prepare  a  fresh  bundle  including  written
    submissions of 23 September 2014.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Applicant attended the hearing.  For the SSHD Mr Kandola  submitted
    that the essence of the SSHD's grounds was that the  Judge  had  failed
    adequately  to  address  the  issue  of  the  validity  of  the   court
    proceedings against the Applicant in the context of  the  jurisprudence
    about documents contained in Tanveer Ahmed*  [2002]  UKIAT  00439.   At
    paragraph 31  of  his  determination  the  Judge  had  noted  that  the
    authenticity of the court documents was an issue but had failed to take
    into account the background evidence that such documents  were  readily
    available in Pakistan.  In addition, the Appellant's account  disclosed
    an inconsistency in that he had said he  was  able  to  leave  Pakistan
    without difficulty  while  at  the  same  time  claimed  there  was  an
    outstanding criminal case against him.

 8. The Judge had  failed  adequately  to  address  the  letters  from  the
    pastors.  They were based on information given to them by the Applicant
    and one of them did not mention the harassment to which  the  Applicant
    said he had been subjected.

 9. The Judge had erred in failing to  make  a  global  assessment  of  the
    evidence before him and had not given adequate reasons to  support  his
    conclusions.

10. For the Applicant, Mr Oke urged me to uphold the determination  because
    it was not irrational and did not contain any error of law.  The  Judge
    had taken into account all of the  evidence  including  the  background
    evidence which was before him and  had  made  a  global  assessment  as
    stated at paragraph 13 of his determination. The Judge was aware of the
    claim recorded at paragraph 21 that the Applicant's uncle continued  to
    be harassed.  The background evidence had been well-referenced  in  the
    course of submissions made to the Judge and I noted this was  confirmed
    in the Judge's Record of  Proceedings.   The  Judge  had  not  made  an
    adverse credibility finding on any point of  the  Applicant's  evidence
    and  the  submissions  recorded  the  SSHD's  challenge  to  the  court
    documents' authenticity on the basis that if they  were  authentic  the
    Applicant would not  have  been  able  to  leave  Pakistan.   The  oral
    submissions included that the background evidence did not mention  that
    a blasphemy charge by itself would amount to a bar on exit.

11. Mr Oke submitted that the Judge's conclusion to accept the letters from
    the pastors should not be considered in isolation but in the  light  of
    what the Judge had found at paragraphs 58-61 of his  determination  and
    his self-direction at paragraph 13 to  consider  the  totality  of  the
    evidence, including objective evidence and submissions.  The Judge  had
    addressed the details of the background evidence at paragraph 63 of his
    determination.    The   accumulation   of   reasons   throughout    the
    determination was more than adequate reasoning to support  the  Judge's
    conclusions and there was no error of law in  the  determination  which
    should be upheld.

12. Mr Kandola for the SSHD then  submitted  that  there  was  no  specific
    positive credibility finding by the Judge in favour of  the  Appellant.
    I referred him to paragraphs 58 and 59  of  the  determination  and  Mr
    Kandola went on to renew the challenge to the court  documents  and  to
    submit that the Applicant was not at real risk on return to Pakistan.

Findings and Consideration

13. I accept that there is no single statement in  the  determination  that
    the Judge found the Applicant to be a credible witness.  However,  this
    is hardly necessary in view of the words and tenor used at paragraph 58
    that the Applicant was a modest witness who gave evidence in a measured
    way and did not exaggerate his claimed difficulties  in  Pakistan.   To
    this must be added the acceptance by the SSHD of the Applicant's claims
    about  the  land  dispute  over  his  father's  property.   The   Judge
    specifically considered the hearsay basis  of  the  evidence  from  the
    pastors, particularly  the  one  who  is  the  Applicant's  uncle:  see
    paragraph 60.  He referred to background evidence about the position of
    the Christian community  in  Pakistan.   He  noted  the  Applicant  had
    brought forward his return to the United Kingdom from 12 January  to  9
    January, being the day immediately after he had been required to attend
    a court and considered that his failure to  attend  court  on  the  day
    before he left  may  not  have  been  noted  in  the  security  systems
    available to the authorities at the airport: see paragraph 65.

14. For these reasons I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    did not contain an error of law and therefore it shall stand.

Anonymity

The Judge made an anonymity direction and there was no  suggestion  that  it
should be removed.  So I now make an anonymity order.

DECISION

     The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
of law and    shall stand.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  24.
x. 2014



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


