
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02533/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 5 July 2013                                |                             |
|Prepared 8 July 2013                          |                             |



                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     D J
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allan, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence, promulgated on 11 April 2013,
    dismissing the appeal against the  respondent's  decision  made  on  14
    March 2013 to refuse him asylum and to refuse him leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant's case is set out in his witness statement.  In  summary,
    he qualified as a teacher and was previously a youth mobiliser for  the
    APRC, the governing party in Gambia. He began to distance himself  from
    the party in 2006 after one of his cousins disappeared and  was  killed
    following an accusation of involvement in an attempted coup d'�tat.  As
    a result, the appellant, another cousin Mr  Faye  (an  APRC  Member  of
    Parliament), and Mr Faye's constituents became disillusioned  with  the
    APRC.  The party then dropped Mr Faye as an  MP.   The  appellant  then
    applied to be allowed to stand  as  an  independent  MP  but  this  was
    blocked he believes by the APRC fearing that he  would  be  successful.
    Although prevented from standing, the appellant assisted  covertly  the
    opposition NRP candidate who lost the election in February  2007  by  a
    narrow margin.  The appellant believes that the APRC were aware of  his
    involvement and that he was  subsequently  monitored  by  the  National
    Intelligence Agency and thus he kept a low profile.

 3. By  coincidence,  the  appellant  had  the  opportunity  to  go  on  an
    educational visit to the United Kingdom as part of his teaching career.
     He applied for, and was granted, a visa to come to the United  Kingdom
    for that purpose, arriving here in June 2007.  The  appellant  remained
    here, after his visa expired, and claimed asylum on 16 February 2013.

 4. In the meantime, the appellant met a  British  citizen,  Ms  W  and  in
    February 2012 they became engaged.  Ms W has two daughters, C  aged  12
    and M aged 19. M has also given birth to a child recently.  It  is  the
    appellant's case that they have formed a family  life  together.  Given
    the ages of C and the granddaughter, I have referred to them  (and  the
    other members of the family) by initials to protect their identity

The Respondent's Case

 5. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter dated  13  March
    2013.   In  summary,  although  accepting  the  appellant's   identity,
    nationality and date of birth [16] the respondent did not accept that:

      i) the appellant had worked for the APRC given his lack  of  knowledge
         of his role and how he would conduct campaigns for them [19];

     ii) that the appellant had  worked  undercover  for  the  NRP  and  had
         masterminded their political strategies in his area [22];

    iii) that the National Intelligence Agency were tracking him [23]  given
         that he had no contact with them from February until June  although
         staying in the family home [24]  and  he  was  able  to  leave  the
         country using his  own  passport  without  difficulties  [25];  the
         appellant's credibility was damaged by his failure to claim  asylum
         on  arrival  or  in  the  subsequent  five  years  [30,  31];   the
         relationship between the appellant and Ms W  was  subsisting  given
         that they lived so far apart [49];

     iv) that the appellant had established a parental relationship with  Ms
         W's children;

      v) that he had therefore failed to fulfil the requirements of  Section
         EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  [54]  and  that  his
         removal was proportionate;

     vi) the appellant did not fulfil the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
         of the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  therefore  his  removal  was
         proportionate [58].

 6. At the hearing on 10 April 2013, within the Fast Track the judge  heard
    evidence from the appellant as well as Ms W and her older daughter,  C.
    He also had before him a bundle produced by the appellant's solicitors,
    containing an expert report from Dr Cessay.  The  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal.

8.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  that  decision  was
    granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Digney  on  17
    April 2013. The appeal then came before me, sitting at Harmondsworth on
    2 May 2013. For the reasons set out in the annex to this determination,
    I concluded that the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law and that it should be set  aside.
    The matter was then adjourned until 5 July 2013 when  I  heard  further
    evidence and submissions.

The hearing on 5 July 2013

 9. The appellant gave  evidence,  adopting  his  witness  statements,  and
    adding that each day his route to work from his village was to walk  to
    the ferry, cross to Banjul and return by the same route.  He said  that
    the day before he left he crossed the river late at night, this time to
    Serrekunda which is closer to the airport in the Gambia than Banjul  or
    his village.  He  said  on  the  morning  he  left  he  travelled  from
    Serrekunda to the airport.

10. In cross-examination the appellant said that he was followed by the NIA
    from about January/February 2007; that he  had  decided  to  go  abroad
    after the elections between February and March; and that  he  kept  the
    fact that he was going abroad to himself.  He said it was  not  he  who
    decided to go abroad but that that had been chosen by his  school,  but
    he had not planned to leave.  He said he had not planned to  leave  and
    although he knew he was in trouble, he had a second  plan  which  meant
    that he would go to Senegal and stay there if  things  got  worse.   He
    said that the NIA had nothing to do with his school and it was just  he
    and his head teacher who were going  on  the  educational  visit.   The
    appellant said that the NIA started following  him  in  February  after
    which he realised that he was in trouble, but until  he  came  here  he
    kept a low profile, knowing that he had to stay  out  of  trouble.   He
    said he had not gone to Senegal as he had not been arrested but that he
    knew they were looking for him and he had to avoid a lot of things.  He
    denied being happy to wait in Gambia, thinking it was only a matter  of
    time before they did something.  He confirmed that he could  have  gone
    to Senegal and had things got worse, he could have left.

11. The appellant confirmed that he had had to apply for his UK visa whilst
    he was being followed; that he had gone to the  Embassy  in  May;  and,
    that he had no idea if he had been followed, although  he  was  usually
    followed from his village to the school and back.  He said he knew some
    of the people who did this personally as some of them lived in the same
    village but that it was not possible  that  they  were  going  to  work
    because he knew where they work and did not  believe  that  they  could
    have been following anyone else as everyone knows  the  NIA  operatives
    and that they cannot keep quiet, which is why information had  come  to
    him that he was being watched.  He confirmed that he had no  choice  as
    evidence had come in February that he was being watched.

12. The appellant said that he had no documentary evidence to show that  he
    was related to Jain Colley Faye or Manlafi Corr and that they were  all
    "cousin brothers".  He said that his maternal grandmother's brother was
    Jain Colley Faye's father  and  Jain  Manlafi  Corr's  mother  was  his
    maternal grandmother's sister.

13. It was put to the appellant that he had said in the first hearing  that
    Sonia with whom he was staying in Reading was not his blood sister  and
    he had referred to her as a "sister" because they were  from  the  same
    town and that she was sympathetic towards him when he was  in  Reading.
    He said that he did know people in Reading who would know him in Gambia
    but that he had not thought about asking them to give evidence  on  his
    behalf.  He said that Sonia had given a statement to his solicitors but
    she was not able to come to court as she might not  be  able  to  spend
    resources on him.  He said that he had a lot of extended family in  the
    United Kingdom but that he had not contacted them to come to court.  It
    was put to him that Dr Ceesay had indicated that he had spoken  to  the
    family member of Manlafi Corr but was not here to give evidence as  the
    firm could not force anyone to come or tell things.  It was put to  him
    that the reason he had given that Sonia might not come as he was not  a
    blood relative but the other people could not come,  his  understanding
    of blood relative being someone who has the same mother and father, and
    he denied saying that he was lying.

14. The appellant said that he had not told Ms W when they met online  that
    he had been married as he was just out of a relationship and  had  lots
    of problems with his wife and children, and had said that  he  had  not
    wanted to get into a relationship.  He said that they had both  met  on
    the website "Tagged" to find friends online; that they  met  there  and
    things went further. The appellant said he had last  had  contact  with
    his daughter in 2011.

15. The appellant said that he had been married in Gambia in 1987 and  that
    he and Ms W were  planning  to  get  married  although  that  had  been
    cancelled.  He was not sure when it had been  booked  but  it  was  his
    partner Ms W who had booked it.  He said it was not her decision as  he
    had instructed her to do that but he could not recall  the  dates.   He
    said he is divorced in Gambia but that he had no evidence of that.   He
    said his ex-wife has  custody  of  her  marriage  certificate  and  has
    married again.  He said he knew that he had been  divorced  as  he  had
    friends and a sister in Gambia who told him that the divorce had  taken
    place in 2008.  He said that he had discussed with Ms W that she  would
    need to get the certificate if she was going to negotiate to have  that
    sent to the United Kingdom.  Asked why he had booked a room if  he  did
    not even have a divorce certificate he said that was not  what  he  was
    saying and that it had been cancelled.  It was put to him that  he  had
    cancelled the wedding booking due to a lack of divorce  certificate  to
    which he replied that he knew he could get it when he was ready.  There
    had not been enough time.  He said it was not the situation  that  they
    had booked a room for the wedding that he knew he could not do  as  all
    the financial problems would have to have been sorted  out  first.   He
    said he had  made  no  effort  since  June  2012  to  get  the  divorce
    certificate as the marriage had been cancelled.

16. I then heard evidence from Dr Ceesay who adopted his initial report and
    his addendum dated 2 July 2013.  He also said that he had brought  with
    him copies of  his  books  and  reviews  of  his  books  from  academic
    journals.

17. In cross-examination Dr Ceesay said that  he  had  left  Gambia  on  28
    November 1996 and had  not  returned  due  to  the  security  situation
    although he had been to Senegal.  He said he was not an opponent of the
    regime but was an academic  and  a  scholar  doing  research  based  on
    qualitative and quantitative methods.  He said in producing his  report
    he had used different methods, speaking to diplomats on the ground  and
    also people who were in the heart of the regime.  He said that  he  had
    also spoken to family, neighbours and people going to  Gambia  and  had
    spoken to people by Skype.  He said that his  knowledge  base  was  not
    anecdotal and had done firsthand quantitative research.  He  said  that
    his expertise was used by FCO,  DFID  and  Amnesty  International.   Dr
    Ceesay said that he had used his contacts on the  ground  to  find  out
    about the appellant whom he had never met prior to  that  day  and  had
    decided to investigate what is happening in Gambia.  He said that  most
    of what the appellant, in fact all,  of  what  he  had  said  had  been
    corroborated.   He  qualified  that  to  say   that   most   had   been
    corroborated.

18. Dr Ceesay was asked what had not been corroborated,  replying  that  he
    wanted to know if the appellant had been APRC and it turned out that he
    was from 1994 to 1996; that he was  the  cousin  of  Jain  Colley  Faye
    although he was not sure whether he was first or second cousin and that
    it was confirmed beyond doubt that Jain Colley Faye was the MP  in  the
    area from 1996 until 2007, so it was also confirmed  to  him  that  the
    appellant was a cousin of Manlafi Corr.

19. Asked whom he had contacted to verified the relationship Dr Ceesay said
    that he had sources, one was a head  teacher,  and  that  he  had  also
    spoken to a former governor of the area who he had asked  if  he  could
    confirm that the appellant was related as claimed to  which  the  reply
    had been yes.

20. Dr Ceesay said that he had also  spoken  to  a  family  member  of  the
    appellant who had confirmed the  relationship,  but  that  this  person
    cannot be named as his status in the United Kingdom was not correct and
    he was uncomfortable for his name to be given.  Dr Ceesay said that  he
    thought that person's presence in the United Kingdom might be illegal.

21. Dr Ceesay said that he could not confirm the name of  the  governor  of
    the region in which the appellant had lived as he was not in a position
    to disclose any name not even by way of factual background.  It was put
    to him that as a result he would submit  that  less  weight  should  be
    given to his evidence and he said he had explained he  could  not  give
    his sources.  Dr Ceesay declined  to  comment  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had named the governor as Lamin Jobarteh.  I asked Dr  Ceesay
    to comment on the fact that it would be a matter of public  record  who
    the governor of a particular area had been in  a  particular  year  but
    said that he had promised that the name would not be  disclosed  as  he
    knew the regime and he could not put people in jeopardy.   He  said  he
    had not named the person in the UK because he might be illegal here; it
    was a person who had come as a visitor to his house and they had talked
    about other matters and it was whilst he was talking to him  about  the
    appellant that he had confirmed the appellant's relationships but  that
    he was not keen to be named in the report.  He said that he did  accept
    this person's evidence, adding that it simply added weight to what  had
    already been confirmed.

22. Dr Ceesay said that he had found out that the allegations that the Home
    Office had made about the appellant were unfounded, that the  appellant
    had in fact been  a  youth  mobiliser  and  had  wanted  to  contest  a
    parliamentary constituency as an independent candidate and that, as  is
    common in Gambia, the Ministry  of  Education  was  used  and  his  tax
    clearance certificate had not been processed on  time  to  prevent  him
    from standing.  He said he was sure this was deliberate although he had
    no evidence to confirm that.  He said that he had relied on people  who
    were in a position to know, having spoken to the director of  education
    and permanent secretary in the Ministry who said that he was  known  to
    them.  They had confirmed that he had been an  untrained  teacher,  had
    then trained and then was teaching until he left Gambia.  He said  they
    had confirmed he had wanted to run  as  an  independent  and  had  been
    blocked.  Dr Ceesay said that in March 2006 an  accusation  of  a  coup
    plot had arisen in the area where he was from and that Jain Colley Faye
    had started to have problems with the regime around  that  time.   This
    arose from the alleged involvement of Manlafi Corr in the coup  attempt
    in 2006, and it was at that  point  that  the  regime  had  started  to
    distance itself from Jain Colley Faye, cousin of Manlafi Corr, who  had
    had problems.  He said the regime was using different  methods  and  in
    the case of Jain Colley Faye they  had  just  not  selected  him  as  a
    candidate and, as he had been popular in the area,  the  community  and
    elders  had  decided  to  prevail  on  the  appellant's  stand  as   an
    independent.  He did not know why Jain had not stood as an  independent
    thinking that he might have been threatened, or, once he had  told  him
    he might be chosen had left it at that.

23. Dr Ceesay said that there was no standard pattern  to  surveillance  by
    the NIA.  He said that he knew  people  who  were  suspected  and  then
    arrested, and charges fabricated against  them.   Sometimes  they  take
    their time until they have ample evidence against people and they could
    even  take  people  to  court  and  try   the   law,   keeping   people
    incommunicado.  Dr Ceesay said that what he  had  established  is  that
    once the appellant had said he would run as an independent there was  a
    problem, but to make matters worse, the regime had discovered  that  he
    was supporting the NRP, the opposition party, and he knew this from the
    former Director of Education.  It was put to him that the appellant had
    left without difficulty, indicating a lack of interest.  Dr Ceesay said
    that it depends on how the appellant's solicitor asked  questions.   He
    said that he had said that they normally have a list of  people  placed
    at border posts and at the airport of those wanted.  He said  that  the
    fact that this was not done would suggest that the team at the  airport
    might not have had his name and that the NIA is not that  efficient  at
    times.

24. It was put to him that it could be that the  appellant  was  not  being
    followed to which Dr Ceesay replied "that is  entirely  your  opinion".
    After further questioning Dr Ceesay said that  he  did  know  that  the
    appellant was being followed as he had spoken to contacts  and  sources
    in different ministries including the Ministry of Defence.  The  person
    who had told him had now absconded to Dhaka and had previously been the
    Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence and prior  to  that  had
    been Director General of the NIA.  He said that  he  knew  this  person
    from his time in Gambia when he  was  a  Deputy  Director  General  and
    confirmed that this person knows the appellant personally.

25. Dr Ceesay said that his source had told  him  that  the  appellant  was
    campaigning, trying to help the NRP candidate to the point of ARPC1 but
    only by a narrow margin which  they  attributed  to  the  role  of  the
    appellant.  He said that they knew he was in the United Kingdom and  he
    was making a general comment about Gambians who came here, discrediting
    the regime and said he would have to be careful.  Dr Ceesay  said  that
    Mr Sambu, former Director General, had confirmed this to him  and  that
    he understood reports said that he was now claiming asylum in Dhaka  as
    people had wanted to kill him.

26. As to why he had described some of his  sources  as  unimpeachable,  Dr
    Ceesay said that the person who he had not named and whose status about
    which he was unsure had come to his house  for  an  entirely  different
    matter and was unimpeachable as he had no reason to tell the  appellant
    lies.

27. It was put to Dr Ceesay that Amnesty International had distanced itself
    from his report.  Dr Ceesay said that one would have to ask Amnesty why
    they had done so and that  they  used  different  methods  in  checking
    facts, but he could call people in the know and speak  to  people  from
    there in the same language.  It was just standard practice for them not
    to adopt his findings.

28. In re-examination Dr Ceesay said that the person who had  come  to  his
    house was a teacher who was separate from the former  head  teacher  to
    whom he had also spoken.

29. I then heard evidence from Ms W who adopted her witness  statement  and
    was then cross-examined.  Ms W said that she had met the  appellant  on
    the website "Tagged" which was just a social  site  and  they  had  not
    lived together until the appellant had been released on bail.  She said
    that he had been living with someone she had  learned  was  his  sister
    whom she had met, and so far as she was aware  the  appellant  did  not
    have any other family in the United Kingdom.   She  said  she  was  not
    surprised by the fact that he had said that he does have  other  family
    here.

30. Ms W said that it was the  decision  of  all  of  them,  including  her
    daughter, to make the provisional booking for marriage and it  had  not
    gone ahead because they needed money which they did not have.  She  was
    asked if she would get married if she had the money and she  said  yes,
    there was nothing else preventing it.  She said they had discussed  the
    need to have divorce papers but that she did not know how to  get  hold
    of them and the appellant would have to do that.   She  said  they  had
    first discussed that a few weeks ago.

31. Ms W confirmed that she has two daughters,  the  younger  of  whom  who
    suffers from a heart murmur and high  blood  pressure  which  is  under
    control as a result of medication.  She explained that the letter dates
    from 2009 as subsequently there have only been appointments  requesting
    them to go to appointments and which had not  set  out  the  condition.
    She said that recently the younger  daughter  needs  to  go  back  into
    hospital as a result of MRI scans  indicating  she  is  at  risk  of  a
    stroke.  She said that she had recently had an operation to remove bone
    from her shoulder due to arthritis, but things had not got  better  and
    she would be seeing the consultant again.  She said that in relation to
    the booking of the marriage in 2012, she had no idea that the appellant
    had been married at that point.

32. In re-examination Ms W said that she did not know whether Sonia  was  a
    blood relative or not.

33. I then heard evidence from C who adopted her  witness  statement.   She
    said that she was aware that the appellant  had  lived  with  Sonia  in
    Reading and that she thought Sonia was a friend.  She  said  they  were
    not related and that he had not referred to her as a sister.  She  said
    she did not know why her mother had thought that they were brother  and
    sister and she said that she did not know  why  the  marriage  had  not
    taken place as it was a matter between  them,  and  she  did  not  know
    anything about the appellant's time in Gambia.

Submissions

34. Mr Allan  submitted  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was  severely
    damaged by his failure to claim asylum on arrival and subsequently, and
    he had  failed  to  provide  an  adequate  explanation  for  this.   He
    submitted that note should be taken of the discrepancies highlighted in
    the previous determination  and  that  further  discrepancies  had  now
    arisen.

35.  Mr  Allan  submitted  that  the  most  credible  explanation  for  the
    appellant's being able to leave, if what he said was true, was that  he
    was not at risk.  He said it was not credible he had kept it to himself
    that he was going abroad given that the head teacher knew  about  this.
    He submitted that  the  appellant's  earlier  activities.  as  a  youth
    motivator neither enhanced nor diminished his  claim  that  he  was  at
    risk, his risk primarily being related to people  who  are  significant
    individuals.  He submitted there was no credible evidence that  he  was
    related to these  people  as  claimed;  that  he  could  have  provided
    evidence from those present in the United Kingdom but did  not  do  so;
    and that the expert had relied on a source who was said to be a  family
    member.  He submitted this was a significant issue  and  omission,  and
    there was a dearth of evidence to confirm the appellant's claims.

36. Mr Allan asked me to note that the appellant was at  best  part  of  an
    extended large family and  there  was  no  indication  that  any  other
    members of the family faced problems.  Even taking the evidence at  its
    highest, Manlafi Corr had fallen under suspicion in 2006 and if he  was
    at risk due  to  that  relationship  the  appellant  would  have  faced
    problems before February 2007.

37. Mr Allan accepted that simply dismissing Dr Ceesay's evidence  was  not
    appropriate  but  that  there  were   problems   with   his   evidence,
    specifically that the sources were not referenced and that there was no
    record of the  conversations  he  had  had  with  his  sources  or  the
    questions asked aside from the fact  that  they  were  not  named.   He
    submitted  that  the  practice  of  not  according  when  or  how   the
    conversations took place was contrary to the principles set out  in  LP
    (paragraph 40) and that he had been wrong to describe  his  sources  as
    unimpeachable as, when probed on them, indicated that one might  be  an
    illegal entrant.  Mr  Allen  submitted  that  accordingly  less  weight
    should be attached to Dr Ceesay's evidence as it was  not  possible  to
    test any of his sources, some of whom may be biased or who  have  given
    evidence from an unbalanced perspective.  He submitted  that  the  risk
    had been exaggerated.  Mr Alan submitted also that it  was  significant
    that Amnesty had declined to comment on  Dr  Ceesay's  comments  as  to
    credibility and  that  there  were  issues  regarding  the  appellant's
    propensity to lie.

38. Mr Allan submitted that  it  was  clear  that  the  appellant  had  not
    disclosed to his "new family" the existence of the previous family, and
    whilst the most recent witness  statement  had  tried  to  rectify  the
    problem that Ms W was unaware  until  the  previous  hearing  that  the
    appellant  had  a  wife  and  children  in  Gambia,  that  there   were
    discrepancies in the reasons given as to why the  marriage  booked  for
    June  2012  was  cancelled.   He  submitted  that  the  appellant   was
    misleading Ms W as to the nature of their relationship and there is  no
    family life between them or between  him  and  her  children.   It  was
    submitted that the appellant was not a necessary  care  giver  for  the
    younger daughter and that cohabitation was only recent.

39. Ms Foot relied on her skeleton argument, submitting that caution should
    be  exercised  in  approaching  what  was  recorded  in  the   previous
    determination given the credibility findings which had been  set  aside
    and that she he had no specific submissions to make to the recording of
    the evidence.  Ms Foot submitted that the appellant had given  adequate
    reasons for not claiming asylum earlier, that his claim was strong, and
    little weight should be attached to the delay in this case.

40. Ms Foot submitted  that  Dr  Ceesay's  evidence  and  that  of  Amnesty
    International  indicated  the  appellant's  claim  was  consistent  and
    congruent with the information, and it was not  a  fair  gloss  on  the
    Amnesty International report to say that it distances  itself  from  Dr
    Ceesay.  She accepted that in some  cases  it  may  be  appropriate  to
    attach less weight to anonymous sources, but that Dr Ceesay  had  given
    good reasons  for  not  naming  sources  and  that  these  sources  are
    reliable.  She submitted it would be unfair to require a transcript  of
    the conversation which would be risky but she accepted that less weight
    could be attached if questions were open or leading.  She said that  it
    was possible to infer that the questions put by Dr Ceesay  were  broad,
    on the basis of his general credentials.  As such she submitted that an
    expert is more able to make findings about  specific  individuals  than
    Amnesty International.

41.  Ms  Foot  submitted  that  there  is  no  requirement  to  corroborate
    information in that the  sources  given  by  the  expert  evidence  the
    appellant was monitored by the NIA  consisted  of  a  former  Permanent
    Secretary and Intelligence Officer to whom significant  weight  can  be
    attached.  She submitted there was clear evidence both from the country
    guidance and the  expert  report  that  the  actions  of  the  NIA  are
    arbitrary and inconsistent; that often the left hand does not know what
    the right is doing and that may explain how the appellant was  able  to
    leave.

42. Ms Foot submitted also that the appellant would be at risk on return as
    a failed asylum and as a result of his online associations,  submitting
    that it was likely that these online associations would  have  come  to
    the attention of the NIA.

43. Ms Foot submitted that the appellant and Ms W had formed a family  life
    together, and that this included the two daughters. She submitted  that
    adequate explanation had been given as to why the previous marriage had
    been explained and that, if I were to accept that family  life  exists,
    that the best interests of the younger daughter should  be  taken  into
    account, and that it would be contrary to her interests to  remove  the
    appellant given the impact on her and on  her  mother.   She  submitted
    also that the requirements of EX1 of Appendix FM were met.

Decision and reasons


44. A person is a refugee and, therefore, entitled to  asylum  pursuant  to
    Directive 2004/83/EC, (the Qualification Directive) if, (in  the  words
    of Article 1A of the  Geneva  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of
    Refugees) owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
    race, religion, nationality or membership of a particular social  group
    or political opinion, he is outside the country of his nationality  and
    is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country. I  have  considered  the  totality  of  the
    evidence before me, applying throughout the  lower  standard  of  proof
    applicable to asylum appeals.


45. A person not entitled to refugee status may  nevertheless  be  eligible
    for 'subsidiary' protection pursuant to Article 2 of the  Qualification
    Directive if at risk of serious harm defined in Article 15.

46. It is accepted that, if what the appellant said was true, he is at risk
    on return to Gambia.  It therefore follows that the credibility of  his
    claims is a core issue in this case.

47. In assessing the appellant's claim,  I  bear  in  mind  the  background
    evidence relating to Gambia. The  country  is,  in  effect,  under  the
    control of the president,  Yahya  Jammeh,  in  a  generally  repressive
    political environment. There is effective  impunity  for  the  security
    forces, in particular  the  National  Intelligence  Agency  (NIA),  and
    corruption is a serious problem. The security forces are implicated  in
    torture of detainees, and  are frequently corrupt;  the  judiciary  are
    not independent, and there is no effective  means  of  challenging  the
    state.

48. The appellant's account of his political activities is, until 2006, one
    of support for the ruling APRC. It is to be noted that it is his cousin
    brothers, Manlafi Corr and Jain Colley Faye were  more  prominent,  the
    latter being a former MP.

49. The coup attempt in 2006 is well-documented. A  substantial  number  of
    people were arrested,  according  to  Amnesty  International,  included
    government officials, military and security forces, including at  least
    five people who had held position in the cabinet, and six were  members
    of parliament from the President's own party. The  killing  of  Manlafi
    Corr is reported in the Freedom Newspaper and appears to be related  to
    the coup.

50. There no documentary evidence to show that Jain Coffey Faye was  an  MP
    for the appellant's area, nor is  there  documentary  evidence  of  the
    appellant's attempt to stand as an independent candidate.  That  aspect
    of the appellant's claim appears to be confirmed by Dr Ceesay  as  does
    his claim that he assisted the opposition; and, more importantly,  that
    that came to the knowledge of the NIA.

51. There are, however, difficulties in the appellant's evidence about  how
    he was able to leave the country without being  stopped  despite  being
    monitored. The appellant said  in  evidence  that  his  problems  began
    around February 2007, and that he was followed to and from school,  and
    he says in his initial witness statement of 25 February 2013 [12]  that
    he knew his movements were monitored.  In his asylum interview [  Q.54]
    that he started to realise he was under surveillance a few months after
    the elections, as people he knew [Q. 55] passed on that information  to
    him. He also mentioned [Q. 60,61] that when  he  had  travelled  within
    Gambia from Barra to Farafenni with Jani Colley Faye, and his  presence
    had been radioed ahead [Q.61]. He was told by a police man  who  was  a
    former colleague [Q.63] that they had a radio message about  him.  Such
    close surveillance would indicate a significant degree of  interest  in
    the appellant.

52. If the appellant's account is truthful, then despite this  surveillance
    and following him to and from work each day, the NIA did not notify the
    airport about him, and, presumably, did not know about the issue to him
    of a visa, despite the fact that the  school  he  was  working  at  had
    arranged an exchange visit, and his visit to the British  Consulate  to
    obtain a visa.

53. I find the appellant's explanation for  remaining  in  Gambia,  despite
    being under surveillance, is wholly unsatisfactory.  If, as he  claims,
    he thought he was at risk of being detained, it makes not sense not  to
    have gone to Senegal which he said was an option, and is a neighbouring
    country, rather than to wait for the chance of a visa to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom, a journey which would necessitate  passing  through  an
    airport checkpoint. It makes little or no sense for him,  if  he  could
    have been arrested at any time,  not  to  have  gone  to  Senegal;  his
    assertion that he would have done so had  things  got  worse  does  not
    adequately explain this, given he says he feared being arrested and ill-
    treated. I find that this undermines significantly his credibility.

54. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2007 yet, despite having
    left Gambia in fear of ill-treatment,  he  made  no  attempt  to  claim
    asylum until 2013, despite being told by  friends  (witness  statement,
    25/02/13 [15]) that he would be killed if he  returned.  The  appellant
    speaks English and I do not accept that not knowing the  procedure  for
    claiming explains this delay. I consider  that  this  delay  undermines
    considerably his claims about his activities in Gambia

55. Dr Ceesay's evidence, it is said, confirms the appellant's  account  of
    his activities in Gambia prior to departure and  his  links  with  both
    Jain Colley Faye and Manlafi Corr.  It  is  also  submitted  that  they
    confirm adverse interest in him by the NIA.

56. Dr Ceesay's evidence in this regard  is  the  provision  of  additional
    evidence not otherwise available to the Tribunal.  In this respect,  it
    is entirely understandable that he has access to  a  greater  range  of
    sources than for example Amnesty International.   There  are,  however,
    difficulties in Dr Ceesay's evidence with regards the sources.   First,
    they are not named although their positions  are  given  which  is  not
    necessarily a problem; and, second, what  questions  were  put  to  the
    individuals is unclear.  As Ms Foot accepts, there is a big  difference
    between asking "can you confirm that [the appellant]  is  a  cousin  of
    Jain Colley Faye and/or Manlafi Corr" and "do you know [the appellant]?
     If so, what can you tell me about him?"  While I can accept that there
    may be, as Dr Ceesay sets out in his addendum [13 to  17]  good  reason
    not to name sources in Gambia,  this  does  not  explain  adequately  a
    failure to explain in sufficient detail how and what questions were put
    to the sources, or the precise responses, not least as it  was  by  the
    time the report was commissioned nearly 7 years since the appellant had
    left Gambia. I do not accept in this regard Ms Foot's  submission  that
    this can be assumed.

57. I consider that Dr Ceesay's use of the word "unimpeachable" to describe
    some of his sources is misplaced, particularly when he  had  suspicions
    about whether one of them, said to be a relative of the  appellant  and
    thus related also to Manlafi Corr and Jain Colley Faye.

58. Further, in his oral evidence Dr Ceesay relies on a source, the  former
    Director General of the NIA  and  former  Permanent  Secretary  of  the
    Ministry of Defence, who says that he knew the appellant and  was  able
    to confirm adverse interest in him  on  the  part  of  the  NIA.   This
    individual is not mentioned either by name or position as a  source  in
    the initial report,  although  one  might  have  thought  that  in  the
    circumstances such an individual was an important source.  This  source
    is not mentioned either in the addendum, the sources being referred  to
    in each being a former Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of Education
    of the Gambia, a retired  director  of  education  and  a  former  head
    teacher at one of the schools where the appellant taught (first  report
    [12]).  Whilst sources at the Ministry of Defence are quoted, these are
    as authority for the confirmation as to what happened to  Manlafi  Corr
    and his blocking as an independent candidate [12].  What Dr Ceesay  has
    done is to introduce only in cross-examination an important source  for
    his evidence not previously identified or mentioned, despite references
    to other NIA operatives in the initial report [14].

59. Taking these factors  together,  I  consider  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case, that I cannot attach weight to Dr  Ceesay's
    evidence as being confirmatory of the appellant's account.

60. Further, in assessing the report from  Amnesty  International,  I  note
    that it is in assessing the risk to the appellant dependant in part  on
    Dr Ceesay's corroboration of aspects of the appellant's  account  [page
    26]. While I note the endorsement of  his  credentials  and  expertise,
    Amnesty International's report does not address the  specific  concerns
    about Dr Ceesay set out above. In the circumstances, while I accept the
    analysis set out in Amnesty International's report  about  the  general
    circumstances in Gambia, I am unable to attach weight to its assessment
    of risks specific to the appellant, given that it is predicated on  the
    assumption that he has given an accurate  account  of  his  activities.
    Similarly, it is difficult to attach much weight  to  the  findings  of
    District Judge Purdy in the extradition case  put  before  me,  as  the
    facts are different and thus of little relevance to the  assessment  of
    the risk to the appellant on return.

61. The appellant claims to have several relatives in  the  United  Kingdom
    yet none of them have appeared  to  give  evidence  on  his  behalf.  I
    consider that it was reasonable for him to have asked them so to do, as
    they may have been able to give  direct  evidence  in  support  of  his
    claims. His explanation - that he did not think of asking them to  come
    - is not satisfactory.

62. Further doubts  arise  as  to  the  appellant's  credibility  from  the
    evidence given by him, Ms W and C as to the nature of his  relationship
    with Sonia with whom he was staying in Reading.

63. It is recorded in  Judge  Lawrence's  determination  [47-48]  that  the
    appellant had that he had lived in Reading, staying with "Sonia" who is
    a sympathiser and  not  a  relative.  Ms  W  said  that  Sonia  is  the
    appellant's blood sister.

64. The appellant now says in his supplementary witness statement [4]  that
    he never told Ms W that Sonia is his blood sister but had  referred  to
    her as a "sister" as a cultural usage as they had grown up in the  same
    town.  In her supplementary witness statement dated 2 July 2013,  Ms  W
    does not retract her evidence about what the appellant told  her  about
    Sonia.

65. I bear in mind Ms Foot's submission that it is dangerous to attach  too
    much weight to a  determination  which  has  been  set  aside,  but  no
    challenge has been made that  this  aspect  of  the  evidence  was  not
    properly recorded. I consider that there is a discrepancy in  what  the
    appellant said about Sonia which casts doubt on his credibility and  on
    the strength of his relationship with Ms W.

66. Taking these factors into account and viewing them as a whole, I am not
    satisfied that the appellant is related to Manlafi Corr or Jain  Colley
    Faye, nor am I satisfied that he has come to the adverse  attention  of
    the authorities in Gambia. I am not  satisfied  that  he  attempted  to
    stand for parliament, nor am I satisfied that he was perceived to  have
    supported  any  person  standing  as  an  independent   candidate   for
    parliament.

67. The appellant claims that he is at risk on return to Gambia on  account
    of his involvement with "Hello Gambia"  and  "Freedom  Newspaper".   He
    claims that this will have become known  to  the  Gambian  authorities.
    While I note the evidence at page 65 of the  appellant's  bundle  shows
    his Skype account, the account is in the name "njuffa joof"  and  there
    is no indication that anything other than that name would be  available
    to the authorities, and I am not satisfied that they would be  able  to
    link it to the appellant.

68. It is submitted that simply as a failed  asylum-seeker,  the  appellant
    would be at risk on return. The evidence for this is the statement from
    President Jammeh (reported in the Freedom Newspaper [AB page  99]  that
    those who return will regret being born. This issue is  dealt  with  at
    length in Dr Ceesay's report, but I note that  the  assessment  of  the
    risks (page 9 of the report) are predicated on the appellant  being  an
    opponent of the regime, or  being  perceived  to  be  such.  I  am  not
    satisfied that that is the case, nor is there  sufficient  evidence  in
    the material before  me  to  show  that  those  who  are  returned  are
    questioned to determine if they claimed asylum,  nor  that  anyone  who
    admitted such a thing would, without previous opposition to the regime,
    be at risk. While Dr Ceesay does refer  to  the  ill-treatment  of  one
    individual at footnote 7, that incident was in 2007, and the individual
    in question was a journalist unlike the appellant. Viewed as a whole, I
    consider that there is insufficient evidence to show that the appellant
    would be at risk on return to Gambia  of  ill-treatment  of  sufficient
    severity to engage either the refugee convention or Articles 2 or 3  of
    the Human Rights Convention.

69. I now turn to the appellant's relationship with Ms W and her daughters.
    As noted above, I was not, in considering whether the determination  of
    Judge Lawrence involved the making of an error of law,  satisfied  that
    his findings in respect of these issues, in error. For the reasons  set
    out  above,  I  consider  that  the  appellant  is  wholly  lacking  in
    credibility, but it is not in dispute that  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant and Ms W have changed, as they are now living together. It is
    therefore,  in  these  circumstances,  necessary  to  reconsider  these
    issues.

70. I consider that there are discrepancies in the explanations  given  for
    cancellation of the proposed marriage ceremony.  Ms W's explanation was
    that the ceremony was cancelled in 2012 as they  did  not  have  enough
    money, and that it was only within the last few  weeks  that  they  had
    discussed the divorce. Given that Ms W was unaware  until  the  hearing
    before the First-tier that the appellant had been married, that  timing
    must be correct, or Ms W did not tell the truth to Judge Lawrence about
    that.

71. The appellant's explanation for the cancellation was evasive as was his
    evidence about why he had agreed to marry and for a room to  be  booked
    when he had no evidence (as would be needed) to show he  was  divorced.
    The fact that he had taken steps to marry Ms W without telling her that
    he had been  married,  and  had  no  evidence  of  his  divorce,  casts
    significant doubt on his intentions and credibility. I  do  not  accept
    his explanation that he knew  he  could  get  the  divorce  certificate
    explains this and I consider that this is another evasion, not least as
    he admitted he has taken no steps to obtain it.

72. It is not disputed that the appellant is now cohabiting with Ms  W,  or
    that her daughters (and recently born grandchild) live  with  her,  but
    that is a recent development. It has to be  set  against  the  previous
    lack of candour on the part of  the  appellant.  The  reasons  for  not
    cohabiting prior to know make little sense. It was initially said  that
    the reason was money, Ms W now saying in  her  supplementary  statement
    [5] she did not previously mean a reduction in her  benefits,  but  one
    more mouth to feed.  That is inconsistent with  her  earlier  statement
    [10] where she said that if the appellant came to live  with  her,  her
    benefits would be affected and already they are not enough  to  support
    him [10]. Yet despite what was put forward as reasons why they did  not
    cohabit, they now do so without any change in finances. Although it  is
    said that  they  have  economised,  I  consider  that  this  is  not  a
    sufficient explanation for what was said to be  an  obstacle  to  their
    claimed intention to marry and cohabit in the past.

73. While I have heard evidence from Ms W and C about the strength of their
    relationship with the appellant, I bear in mind  both  the  appellant's
    lack of credibility, his lack of candour to Ms  W  over  a  significant
    period of time, and the  fact  that  their  cohabitation  is  a  recent
    development.

74. I am not persuaded that the appellant's true intention  is  to  form  a
    family life with the appellant or her children. I am satisfied that the
    appellant is simply using Ms W and her family in an attempt  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  Accordingly, I am not  satisfied  that  he  has
    established a family life with  any  of  them.    I  am  not  satisfied
    accordingly, that he meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of  the
    immigration rules,  or  appendix  FM,  and  in  particular,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the appellant meets the requirements of exception EX1 or
    any of the other provisions of the immigration rules.

75. I therefore turn, in the light of MF (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC), Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2013]
    UKUT 60 (IAC) and Izuazu Article 8  -  new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT  00045
    (IAC), to the learning in respect of article 8. In turning to  that,  I
    bear in mind the questions set out by Lord Bingham at paragraph  17  of
    the opinions in Razgar.   I accept that the appellant has established a
    private life in the United Kingdom but, for the reasons set out  above,
    I do not accept that he has established a family life here either  with
    Ms W or her children or her granddaughter.

76. The best  interests  of  the  children  in  this  case  are  a  primary
    consideration. In this case, I consider that these are best  served  by
    remaining with their mother (in the case of Ms W's daughters) and  with
    her mother in the case of the older daughter's baby.

77. I accept that Ms W's younger daughter has been diagnosed  as  suffering
    from a heart murmur and high blood pressure. That is evident  from  the
    letter dated 2009 to that effect, but there is no more  recent  medical
    evidence that her condition  has  worsened,  or  that  the  appellant's
    removal would have a significant effect on her.

78. While it may well be the case that Ms W and her children have formed an
    attachment to the appellant, and his  removal  may  have  an  emotional
    impact on them, this must be  seen  in  the  context  of  his  actions,
    intentions, and the very short length  of  the  time  they  have  lived
    together. I accept that the appellant has helped out in the  household,
    but that is a recent development, and  I  am  not  satisfied  that  his
    continued presence as a carer is necessary.  Accordingly,  in  all  the
    circumstances, I am not  satisfied  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children require the presence of the appellant in this country.

79. The appellant has, I accept, formed a private life  here,  but  in  the
    knowledge that he could be removed at any time as he had no right to be
    here. He has, I accept, some ties to this country as a  result  of  his
    time here, but he has also sought to remain here on  the  basis  of  an
    unfounded claim for asylum.  Other than his relationship with Ms W  and
    her children, there is little evidence of the contact  of  his  private
    life.

80. There will, inevitably, be an interference with the  appellant's  right
    to respect for his private life as a result of his removal, and that is
    sufficiently  serious  to  engage  article  8.  It  would  also  be  in
    accordance with the law, and with the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining
    immigration control.

81. I consider that, bearing in  mind  the  need  to  maintain  immigration
    control  to  which  a  significant  interest  is  attached,  that   the
    respondent has  satisfied  me  that  the  interference  caused  to  the
    appellant's right to respect for his private life is proportionate.

82. In conclusion, for the reasons set out above, I remake the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making
       of an error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I remake the determination by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

    3. The anonymity order made by the First-tier  Tribunal  is  preserved,
       and will remain in force unless a further order is made.


Signed                                  Date:  3 September 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02533/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Harmondsworth                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 May 2013                                 |                             |
|Prepared 2 May 2013                           |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                   MR D J

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Easty, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr Jagpal, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 7. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence, promulgated on 11 April 2013,
    dismissing the appeal against the  respondent's  decision  made  on  14
    March 2013 to refuse him asylum and to refuse him leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom.

The Appellant's Case

 8. The appellant's case is set out in his witness statement.  In  summary,
    he qualified as a teacher and was previously a youth mobiliser for  the
    APRC, the governing party, but began to distance himself from the party
    in 2006 after one of his cousins disappeared and appears to  have  been
    killed after an accusation of  being  involved  in  an  attempted  coup
    d'�tat.  As a result, the appellant, another cousin  Mr  Faye,  and  Mr
    Faye's constituents became disillusioned  with  the  APRC.   They  then
    dropped Mr Faye as an MP.  The appellant then applied to be allowed  to
    stand as an independent MP but this was blocked he believes by the APRC
    fearing that he would be successful.  Although prevented from standing,
    the appellant assisted covertly the opposition NRP candidate  who  lost
    the election in February  2007  by  a  narrow  margin.   The  appellant
    believes that the APRC were aware of his involvement and  that  he  was
    subsequently monitored by the National Intelligence Agency and thus  he
    kept a low profile.

 9. By  coincidence,  the  appellant  had  the  opportunity  to  go  on  an
    educational visit to the United Kingdom as part of his teaching career.
     He applied for, and was granted, a visa to come to the United  Kingdom
    for that purpose, arriving here in June 2007.  The  appellant  remained
    here, after his visa expired, and claimed asylum on 16 February 2013.

10. In the meantime, the appellant met his partner, Ms W  and  in  February
    2012 they became engaged.  Ms W has two daughters, C aged 12 and M aged
    19.  It is the appellant's case that they have  formed  a  family  life
    together.

The Respondent's Case

11. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter dated  13  March
    2013.   In  summary,  although  accepting  the  appellant's   identity,
    nationality and date of birth [16] the respondent did not accept that:

      i) the appellant had worked for the APRC given his lack  of  knowledge
         of his role and how he would conduct campaigns for them [19];

     ii) that the appellant had  worked  undercover  for  the  NRP  and  had
         masterminded their political strategies in his area [22];

    iii) that the National Intelligence Agency were tracking him [23]  given
         that he had no contact with them from February until June  although
         staying in the family home [24]  and  he  was  able  to  leave  the
         country using his  own  passport  without  difficulties  [25];  the
         appellant's credibility was damaged by his failure to claim  asylum
         on  arrival  or  in  the  subsequent  five  years  [30,  31];   the
         relationship between the appellant and Ms W  was  subsisting  given
         that they lived so far apart [49];

     iv) that the appellant had established a parental relationship with  Ms
         W's children;

      v) that he had therefore failed to fulfil the requirements of  Section
         EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  [54]  and  that  his
         removal was proportionate;

     vi) the appellant did not fulfil the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
         of the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  therefore  his  removal  was
         proportionate [58].

12. At the hearing on 10 April 2013, the  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant as well as Ms W and her older daughter.  He also  had  before
    him a bundle produced by  the  appellant's  solicitors,  containing  an
    expert report from Dr Cessay.

13. The judge dismissed the appeal finding that:

      i) The government in Gambia does not tolerate opposition to it [18];

     ii) The appellant's suspicions that he had been  followed  by  the  NIA
         were without foundation [19];  that it was not  plausible  that  he
         would have been tracked and followed on a daily basis  for  two  to
         three weeks but not arrested [33] and that the explanation for  not
         being arrested was not plausible;

    iii) Had the appellant been tracked it was not plausible that no attempt
         would have been made to stop him from leaving the country [32];

     iv) It was not plausible that the NIA would not have  known  about  his
         planned departure given that he needed to get  government  approval
         for his trip to the United Kingdom [23];

      v) No weight can be attached to the opinion of Dr Cessay [30] and that
         the expert's opinion was in part matters which are exclusively  the
         provenance of a finder of fact [30];

     vi) It was not likely that the appellant's name was on the list held at
         the border of those who were wanted [32, 34];

    vii) Dr Cessay's belief that all failed asylum seekers are likely to  be
         viewed as dissidents on return to Gambia is not tenable [35];

   viii) Even if questioned  the  appellant  is  not  likely  to  face  ill-
         treatment [36] or otherwise faces adverse attention on return [37];

     ix) The appellant was not involved with any  opposition  party  in  the
         past [37];

      x) There was no evidence of the appellant's alleged activities in  the
         United Kingdom unknown to the Gambian authorities [38];

     xi) The appellant had been deceptive towards Ms W and her  children  in
         an attempt to secure his status in the United Kingdom [46] and that
         the appellant had not formed a family life with Ms W  and  her  two
         daughters [49, 50];

    xii)  The  appellant's  involvement  with  Ms  W's  daughters  are   not
         sufficiently close that their best interests are invoked [52]; that
         the appellant's removal to the Gambia is proportionate to Article 8
         [60].

8.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  that  decision  was
    granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Digney  on  17
    April 2013.

Does the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?

Ground 1 Errors in Approach to Expert Evidence

9.   Miss Easty submitted, relying on the grounds of appeal that  the  judge
    had erred in making adverse findings of credibility before going on  to
    consider the expert evidence, his approach  being  an  expert's  factor
    justification  of  the  earlier  adverse  credibility  findings.    She
    submitted also that the judge had failed to provide proper reasons  for
    concluding that the expert's credentials  are  such  he  could  not  be
    treated as an expert, had erred in failing to  put  to  Dr  Cessay,  if
    necessary  at  a  further  hearing,  the  concerns  raised  about   his
    credentials; and, that the judge had improperly dismissed  Dr  Cessay's
    evidence  on  the  basis  that  his  sources  were   not   sufficiently
    identified.

10.  Whilst I note Mr Jagpal's submission that this is just a  disagreement,
    and there are difficulties arising  from  the  expert  being  asked  to
    comment on the credibility and plausibility of the appellant's account,
    I am not satisfied, viewing Dr Cessay's report as a whole, that he  is,
    as Mr Jagpal  submitted,  acting  as  an  advocate  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  The nature of an expert in immigration hearings is somewhat
    different from that in other hearings.  An expert is frequently, as  Dr
    Cessay appears in this case, to be providing  additional  evidence  not
    otherwise available to the Tribunal.  In this case, that  evidence  was
    capable of corroborating some aspects of the  appellant's  claim  which
    the judge had projected.  I note Mr Jagpal's submission that the  judge
    did raise with Counsel the defects in  the  expert  report  as  to  the
    expert's  credentials  and  that  the  Counsel  did  not  ask  for   an
    adjournment.  That said, that does not absolve the judge from taking  a
    balanced objective view of the expert.

11.  Nonetheless, at paragraph 30 the judge states "I am unable, in law,  to
    attach any weight to the views expressed by Dr Cessay, having concluded
    that he was seeking to usurp the role of a fact finder.

12.  I consider that what Dr Cessay was seeking to do,  as  is  permissible,
    is to provide evidence in the form of  information  supplied  from  his
    contacts in Gambia which were capable  of  supporting  the  appellant's
    claim.  Whilst it may have been open to the judge  to  attach  more  or
    less weight  to  those  aspects  of  the  expert  report,  it  was  not
    permissible to reject it out of hand without any attempt at analysis of
    why it is he thought that the expert had attached too  much  weight  to
    the sources consulted.

13.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that there is a material error  of  law  in
    respect of the judge's approach to the expert's evidence arising from a
    misdirection that he could not accept his evidence.





Ground 2 Unlawful Approach to the Appellant's Credibility

14.  Ms Easty submitted that the judge had erred in considering not  whether
    the appellant's account was  credible  but  it  was  implausible.   She
    submitted further that the judge had erred in his analysis  in  failing
    to take into account the background evidence and more particularly  the
    evidence of Dr Cessay.

15.  Whilst I note Mr Jagpal's submissions that  viewed  as  a  whole  these
    findings are unexceptional and sustainable, I consider that  the  judge
    has, partially affected by  his  approach  to  ruling  out  the  expert
    evidence, failed adequately to explain why he considered certain events
    implausible.  As Ms Easty conceded, it would have been open to  him  to
    say that they were not credible but the test for saying that  they  are
    not plausible is somewhat different.  Accordingly, I am satisfied  that
    this ground also identifies an error of law in the determination.

Ground 3 Failure to Make Adequate Findings on Material Matters

16.  I find  less  merit  in  the  submission  given  that  the  appellant's
    evidence of his sur place  activities  are  limited  to  follow  online
    publications, that there is, as Miss Easty accepted, a  lacuna  in  the
    chain of evidence is damaging first that the appellant  had  subscribed
    either to "Hello Gambia" or "Freedom  Newspaper";  that  this  evidence
    held by them would be  sufficient  to  identify  the  appellant  as  an
    individual; or, that that evidence would have come to the attention  of
    the Gambian authorities.  That said, I accept that was not the analysis
    given by the judge and whilst the error made the error  of  law,  there
    were other bases on which he could have come to the same finding.  That
    said, given my findings above, I do not consider  that  these  findings
    are sustainable

Ground 4 Failure to Identify Standard of Proof

17.  I find no merit in this ground.  The judge refers at several places  in
    his determination to the lower standard of proof and it can be expected
    that the judge was  aware  that  this  was  the  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood.

Ground 5 Failure to Conduct Lawful  Assessment  of  Best  Interests  of  the
    Children

Ground 6 Errors in Assessment of Family Life

19.  These grounds fall to be taken together.  Aside  from  the  concerns  I
    have with relation to credibility as set out above, once those findings
    had been made, I consider that it was open to the judge  to  find  that
    the appellant had not established a family life with Ms W or  with  her
    daughters.  Similarly, it is difficult to impugn the  judge's  findings
    or rather failure to make findings in respect of the best interests  of
    Ms W's daughters given that he found there was no family  life  between
    the appellant and them.

20.  That said, in light  of  the  observations  regarding  the  credibility
    findings above, it may be necessary to revisit the findings in  respect
    of family and private life and also the best interests of the children.

21.  For these reasons, I find that  the  determination  of  the  judge  did
    involve the making of a material error of law.  The errors are material
    in that it was open to the judge on the material found to come to other
    conclusions regarding the risk to the appellant on return to Gambia and
    in respect of his family life  with  Ms  W.   Accordingly,  I  set  the
    decision aside.

Re-making the Decision

22.  I do not consider that, in all the circumstances, it  is  necessary  to
    order that this matter be heard de novo.  As Miss Easty accepts,  there
    is a limited amount of further evidence that can be given  although  it
    will be necessary to hear evidence, in all the circumstances,  from  Dr
    Cessay.

23.  As the matter has now been taken out of the  Fast  Track,  I  make  the
    following directions.

    (1)  The matter is to be listed before UTJ Rintoul at Field House on  a
         date to be fixed.

    (2)  That the  appellant  serve  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on  the
         respondent, ten working days before the hearing, a further  witness
         statement capable of standing as examination-in-chief  setting  out
         any further information he wishes  to  give  with  respect  to  his
         activities in the United Kingdom and  in  relation  to  his  family
         life.

    (3)  That the  appellant  serve  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on  the
         respondent a witness statement from Ms W, setting out  any  further
         information with respect to her family  life  with  the  appellant.
         That statement capable of standing as examination-in-chief.

    (4)  Any further  material  to  be  submitted  must  comply  with  Rule
         15(2)(a).


Signed                                  Date:  16 May 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


