
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02181/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 29 September 2016                         |On 05 October 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President,

                                   Between

                                     MM
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sellwood, of Counsel, instructed by Migrant  Legal
                    Project (Cardiff)

For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                               DECISION

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary  of  State")
    dated 26 August 2014, whereby  the  application  of  the  Appellant,  a
    national of Iran aged 32 years, for asylum was  refused.   The  ensuing
    appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").


 2. The application for permission to appeal  to  this  Tribunal  canvassed
    four grounds.  Permission was granted in  respect  of  each.   For  the
    reasons given ex tempore at the  conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I  have
    decided that the decision of the FtT is vitiated by material  error  of
    law and must be set aside in consequence.  I summarise these reasons in
    the following way.


First Ground of Appeal

 3. This ground was presented as the leading basis of the challenge to  the
    first instance  decision.   In  essence,  it  complains  that  the  FtT
    misdirected itself in law on the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  asserted
    conversion  from  Islam  to  the  Evangelical  Christian   faith.   The
    Appellant's case on this ground was supported by two witnesses, one  of
    them a Baptist Church Minister.  With reference to this  evidence,  the
    Judge stated in her decision:


       . There was no  significant  challenge  to  the  credibility  of  the
         witness and "I  can  place  significant  weight  on  his  evidence"
         relating  to   the   Appellant's   frequent   church   attendances,
         participation in baptismal classes  and  prayer  meetings  and  his
         proselytising activities.


       . The Minister's evidence "...    is  capable  of  corroborating  the
         Appellant's account. I give his evidence significant weight".


         Next, referring to the evidence of both supporting witnesses:


       . ...  "I take account of the  positive  evidence  of  the  Christian
         community in the United Kingdom, who have in  good  faith  assessed
         [the  Appellant's]  involvement  and  commitment  as  arising  from
         genuine belief".


         Referring to the second supporting witness only:


       . ....  "I find that [his] evidence is capable of  corroborating  the
         Appellant's account confirming his introduction to [the  church  in
         question]".


         Referring to the written evidence of a pastor:


       . ...  "I count this as positive evidence  showing  that  from  first
         exposure to the date of hearing the Appellant has consistently been
         involved with the Evangelical Church movement".




 4. The FtT found that the Appellant had  given  a  false  account  of  his
    circumstances in Iran.  This finding was juxtaposed with the  issue  of
    his  religious  conversion  in  the  pre-penultimate  and   penultimate
    paragraphs of the decision:


         "Whilst I do not discount the possibility that even in the  context
         of an unmeritorious and  false  claim  for  asylum  conversion  may
         nonetheless  be  genuine  and  real,  I  find  the  position   here
         undermined by the Appellant's continuing to maintain  what  I  have
         found to be a false account of his circumstances in Iran ....


         In  short  I  find  his  involvement,  including  his  baptism  and
         attendance at church and involvement in  community  activities,  is
         entirely expedient, designed to bolster his claim for asylum."



    These conclusions were prefaced by a diligent consideration of all  the
evidence.




 5. In Daoud v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    755, Sedley LJ stated, at [11]:


         "To claim falsely that you have been persecuted in the past because
         of your ethnicity does not mean that you  may  not  face  risks  in
         future because of it."


    To like effect is the statement of Pill LJ  in  Yusuf  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1554, at [29]:


         "The fact that a claim is inconsistent with the  first  claim  made
         does not of itself deprive an applicant of the  protection  of  the
         Refugee Convention or the [ECHR]."




    Giving effect to these principles, the substance of the  error  of  law
    exposed by the first ground of appeal  is  a  failure  to  examine  and
    determine the question of whether  the  Appellant's  undisputed  active
    involvement in the church and religious faith  concerned,  irrespective
    of motivation, gave  rise  to  a  risk  of  persecution.   The  Judge's
    assessment of expediency was not enough.


Second Ground of Appeal


 6. The essence of this ground is an asserted failure on the  part  of  the
    FtT to engage with  all  of  the  evidence  bearing  on  the  screening
    interview of the Appellant, including the undisputed evidence that,  on
    any showing, he was seriously physically and  mentally  debilitated  at
    the time.  The duty to engage with all of the evidence bearing on  this
    issue was not, in my estimation, discharged.  Coupled  with  this,  the
    Judge's description of the Appellant as merely "tired" at the  material
    time is unsustainable.


Third Ground of Appeal

 7. One discrete aspect of the Appellant's case concerned his account of an
    episode involving alleged threats, a report to the  police,  a  serious
    assault and resulting injuries and the destruction of his car by  fire.
    In its decision the FtT criticised the Appellant for failing to provide
    corroborating evidence of any of these matters, including  evidence  of
    the police involvement and investigation.  The simple point made in the
    ground of appeal is that these matters were not put forward in  support
    of the Secretary of State's refusal of the asylum  claim.  Furthermore,
    they were not canvassed with the Appellant at the hearing. None of this
    is contested.  This, in my judgment, gives rise to a clear  finding  of
    procedural unfairness.



Fourth Ground of Appeal

 8.  This  overlaps  to  some  extent  with  the  third  ground.   In   its
    consideration of the aforementioned dimension of the Appellant's  case,
    the FtT, referring specifically to a single question and answer  during
    the asylum interview, finds an inconsistency in the  Appellant's  case.
    However, as rehearsed in the grounds  of  appeal,  the  FtT  failed  to
    engage with the evidence (the interview translation) that  whereas  the
    interviewer posed a single question, the interpreter converted this  to
    seven questions and, furthermore, did not consider that,  in  response,
    the Appellant may reasonably and legitimately  be  considered  to  have
    been simply correcting what was put to him by the interpreter.  I  find
    that this ground too is made out.


Decision

 9. The appeal succeeds to the extent that the decision of the FtT  is  set
    aside. I remit the appeal to a differently constituted  FtT  for  fresh
    consideration and decision.






                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 29 September 2016

