
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02846/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26th January 2015                          |On 2nd June 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              MR MUBASHAR AHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Geraint Jones QC, promulgated on 5th November 2014,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 27th October 2014.   In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed  the  appeal  of  Mubashar  Ahmad.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who  was  born  on  1st
    January 1969.  He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 23rd January 2004,  refusing  his  application
    for asylum status in the UK,  and  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is a member of a  persecuted  minority
    faith in Pakistan, namely, the Ahmadi faith.  Since his arrival in  the
    UK over a decade ago now, he has been involved with the local Ahmadiyya
    Muslim Association, going to public prayers, and performing service  in
    the Langar Khanna Kitchen, such that he is now a refugee sur place, who
    will be persecuted in Pakistan under  the  Pakistani  Penal  Code,  for
    wishing to practise his faith in the way that he wants to.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that he was bound by the current country guidance in  MN
    [2012] UKUT 389 and that the test was whether the Appellant would  face
    a real risk of persecution if returned to  Pakistan.   The  judge  held
    that, as far as the Appellant was concerned, "whilst he would  consider
    himself to be an Ahmadi, he would not manifest his faith, or  religious
    identity openly in defiance of the restrictions of the Pakistani  Penal
    Code ..." (paragraph 39).

 5. The judge went on to say that,

         "I am entirely satisfied that the Appellant might have attended the
         occasional stall and assisted in distributing leaflets on a  number
         of occasions ...  However, I am equally  satisfied  that  any  such
         minimal activity was deliberately designed to permit the  Appellant
         to put forward this instant case on a wholly exaggerated basis.  In
         other words, the Appellant has attempted to manufacture a sur place
         argument ..." (paragraph 39).

 6. The judge went on to further state that,




         "I also find that the  Appellant  is  not  somebody  for  whom  his
         religious identity is of special  or  particular  importance.   The
         Appellant has attempted to portray himself as such, especially when
         giving his seemingly rehearsed answers  instead  of  answering  the
         fairly simple questions put to him during  cross-examination.   The
         Appellant must have an intention to practise his  faith  openly  in
         circumstances that would or might bring him into conflict with  the
         authorities.  I do not consider the Appellant to be  a  witness  of
         sufficient credence, even bearing in mind the  modest  standard  of
         proof, to allow me to so find" (paragraph 40).

    The judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the Appellant's regular attendance at prayer and  his  work  in
    the Langar Khanna Kitchen.   Accordingly,  he  did  not  give  adequate
    reasons for his conclusion that the Appellant was not someone for  whom
    his religious  identity  was  of  special  importance.   Secondly,  the
    grounds argue that the judge appeared to  treat  the  test  as  if  the
    Appellant would in fact  openly  manifest  his  faith  in  defiance  of
    restrictions as opposed to whether he would wish to do so  (bearing  in
    mind what the Supreme Court determined in HJ (Iran)).

 8. On 21st November 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 9. On 5th December 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that
    it was open to the judge to conclude  that  having  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was an Ahmadi, that his  activities  on  return  to  Pakistan
    would not bring him into a situation of real risk.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented by Mr Lemer  of
    Counsel and the Respondent was represented by Mr Wilding, a Senior Home
    Office Presenting Officer.  Mr Lemer submitted that, whereas the  judge
    refers to MN [2012] UKUT 389, it was plain that he does not follow  its
    implications right the way through in the way that  he  ought  to  have
    done.  The question was what the Appellant would himself  want  to  do.
    The question is not whether he would actually not do that which the law
    prohibited under the Pakistani Penal Code.

11. Second, the judge's failure to take  into  account  relevant  evidence,
    such as the Appellant's activities in the Langar  Khanna  Kitchen,  and
    his daily prayer.  Instead, it is plain from the determination that the
    focus of the judge was on the Appellant's leafleting and preaching.  It
    is in this respect, that the importance of MN [2012] UKUT 389 could not
    have been fully appreciated by the judge.

12. For his part, Mr Wilding submitted that it was  not  true,  considering
    the determination as  a  whole  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take
    everything into account.  For example,  the  judge  did  refer  to  the
    Appellant's activities with the Ahmadiyya Muslim  Association  UK  (see
    paragraph 6).  The judge did refer to the  letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya
    Muslim Association dated 1st May 2014  (see  paragraph  26).   He  then
    concluded  that,  "I  find  that  the  Appellant's  involvement  and/or
    activities with the AMA in this country have  been  modest,  infrequent
    and low-key" (paragraph 40).

13. It is clear from this that the judge did  not  regard  the  Appellant's
    activities, taken as a whole, to be in any way significant to him.  The
    head note of MN [2012] UKUT 389 makes it  quite  clear  that  it  would
    exclude someone in the Appellant's position.  Moreover, the actions  of
    working in the Langar Kitchen, or  of  attending  prayers,  was  not  a
    public practice at all.  However, even if it was a public practice,  it
    was not an error to say that these activities were not material.

14. In  reply,  Mr  Lemer  submitted  that  the  judge  was  focusing  upon
    credibility.  There  was  no  assessment  by  the  judge  of  what  the
    Appellant actually wanted to do himself on return.  Going to a "mosque"
    (which one chooses to describe as a "mosque") is not a private,  but  a
    public activity.  No regard was given to these matters.

Error of Law

15. Whilst I find that the judge has erred in failing  to  apply  the  full
    import of HJ (Iran), I do not conclude that  this  is  a  determination
    that should, properly speaking, be set  aside.   The  judge  has  erred
    because what HJ (Iran) determined  was,  not  whether  a  person  would
    manifest his faith "or religious identity openly and in defiance of the
    restrictions of the Pakistani Penal Code" (paragraph 39), but whether a
    person was prevented from doing so because of the Pakistani Penal Code.



16. Similarly, it is not correct to say that the Appellant's  claim,  taken
    as a whole, rests upon whether

         "Those photographs might just happen to be noticed by  somebody  in
         Pakistan who might just happen to think that they should be brought
         to the attention of the authorities who might then just  happen  to
         take an adverse interest in the Appellant ..." (paragraph 40).

17. The issue is again, what the Appellant  would  himself  choose  to  do.
    However, the error here is not capable of affecting the outcome of  the
    appeal and I consequently do not set it aside, because  the  judge  has
    made a finding that the Appellant's activities with the AMA "have  been
    modest, infrequent, and low-key" (paragraph 40) and are not such as  to
    attract persecution, even if they are replicated as activities again in
    the Appellant's home country of Pakistan.

18. Under Section 12(2)(a) the Upper Tribunal may, but need not, set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Applying  that  provision,  I
    have decided that this is not a proper case for the  setting  aside  of
    this determination.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is in error but I do  not
find that the error is capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal.   I
do not consequently set it aside.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th May 2015



