
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA022772015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 May 2015                           |On 23 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     zi
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Law Firm Limited
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oakley promulgated on 22  September  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "I grant permission principally on ground one.  The  Judge  deals  very
    briefly with the psychiatric report at [41] to [44]  of  the  Decision.
    It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  relation   to   his
    consideration of  the  expertise  and  experience  of  the  doctor  (by
    particular reference to [6] of the report).  It is also  arguable  that
    the Judge has erred  in  his  criticism  of  the  doctor's  failure  to
    consider  alternative  reasons  for  the  Appellant's   mental   health
    condition taking into account what is said at [42] of the  report.   It
    is also arguable that the Judge has provided inadequate reasons for his
    departure from the findings in that report."


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I announced that I found  the  decision
    involved the making of an error of law and that my full  reasons  would
    follow.


 4. I have made an anonymity direction.


Submissions


 5. Ms Iqbal relied on the grounds of appeal, except that in  paragraph  11
    there was an error.  The evidence of the Appellant's membership of  the
    Radical Party  had  been  provided  to  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The documents provided were identical to the  ones  provided
    with the grounds.  However she was unable to identify  which  documents
    these were, as there did not appear to be any documents attached to the
    grounds, and she did not  have  copies  of  documents  which  had  been
    submitted with the grounds.  It was not clear from the  bundles  before
    me to which documents she was referring.


 6. Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on the Rule  24  response.   She  submitted
    that the judge had applied the correct approach.  At paragraph [30]  he
    indicated that he was aware of the psychiatric  report.   At  paragraph
    [32]  he  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  credible,  taking  the
    psychiatric report  into  account.   She  submitted  that  he  had  not
    artificially separated the evidence.  He had considered the credibility
    issues, for example the lack  of  evidence  regarding  the  Appellant's
    physical injuries.  At paragraph [41]  he  turned  to  the  psychiatric
    report.  His criticism of the psychiatrist was that he had only been on
    the Specialist Register for two years.  Further, he had not  considered
    other explanations  for  the  Appellant's  PTSD.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs [43] to [45] of the psychiatrist's report.  He had  gone  no
    further than saying that the Appellant had not  exaggerated  his  claim
    and therefore was telling the truth.  She submitted that  the  Tribunal
    was the primary fact finder, and on an holistic analysis the  Appellant
    had not been found credible.


 7. In relation to ground 2, the Respondent had  accepted  the  Appellant's
    membership of the Radical Party.  There was limited evidence to  enable
    the judge to find anything else beyond mere membership.  The  materials
    presented were similar to those as were before the  judge.   The  judge
    did not need to refer to every piece of evidence.


 8. In response Ms Iqbal submitted that the psychiatric report had not been
    properly considered.  I was referred to paragraph [42]  of  the  report
    where  the  psychiatrist  had  considered  alternative  causes  of  the
    Appellant's PTSD, and had found that these alternative causes could not
    account for it.  She submitted that paragraph [42] of the decision  was
    contrary to paragraph [42] of the psychiatric report, and  insufficient
    reasons had been given.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  appeared  to
    reject the psychiatric report wholesale because  the  psychiatrist  did
    not have the necessary qualifications, but the expert had set  out  his
    qualifications at paragraphs [3] to [6] of the report.  The approach of
    the judge in rejecting the psychiatric report or  of  attaching  little
    weight to it because of the psychiatrist's lack of  experience  was  an
    error of law.


Error of Law


 9. At paragraph [30] the judge  refers  to  the  psychiatric  report.   In
    paragraph [32] he concludes, after  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    account and also the  evidence  in  the  Respondent's  and  Appellant's
    bundles, coupled with the psychiatric report, that the Appellant is not
    credible.  I find  that  his  approach  to  the  credibility  does  not
    indicate that he has properly considered the psychiatric report.


10. The psychiatric report is the last piece of  evidence  that  the  judge
    turns to after seven earlier paragraphs of findings.  He deals with  it
    from paragraphs [41] to [44].  Paragraph [41] states:


    "I turn then to the medical report  which  is  in  fact  a  psychiatric
    report from Dr Chiedu Obuaya dated 14 August 2015.  I  note  that  this
    particular doctor has only  been  on  the  Specialist  Register  for  a
    relatively short period of time  namely  from  30  September  2014  and
    therefore he cannot  be  considered  a  seasoned  expert  on  providing
    reports  for  the  Asylum  cases  notwithstanding   he   has   provided
    psychiatric reports for mental health  review  tribunals  and  managers
    hearings which are  of  course  very  different  from  assessments  for
    psychiatric purposes in asylum cases.  The amount of  weight  therefore
    that I give to this report must to an extent be limited by the lack  of
    this particular consultant psychiatrist's experience."


11. I have considered the report, in particular paragraphs [3] to [6],  and
    the CV.  In paragraph [4] of the report Dr. Obuaya states that he is  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist in the NHS, and a visiting psychiatrist at  the
    Helen Bamber Foundation.  In paragraph [5] he states that he  regularly
    compiles psychiatric reports for Mental  Health  Review  Tribunals  and
    Managers' Hearings for patients detained under the Mental  Health  Act.
    He then states that he has provided psychiatric reports for immigration
    cases.  "Within this remit I have a  special  interest  in  the  mental
    health of asylum seekers and refugees including victims of torture  and
    human trafficking. "


12. In paragraph [6] he states:


    "I regularly undertake  assessments  in  detention  centre  and  prison
    settings.  I have compiled over 85 reports for  Courts,  Mental  Health
    Review Tribunals and Hospital Managers' Hearings, as well as  over  170
    psychiatric reports for immigration  cases  relating  to  refugees  and
    asylum seekers."


13. In paragraph [41] of the decision,  when  discounting  the  psychiatric
    report, the judge makes no reference to the  psychiatrist's  experience
    of providing reports for immigration cases  relating  to  refugees  and
    asylum seekers.  He completely ignores what is said in paragraph [6] of
    the report.  He refers only to the fact that  Dr  Obuaya  has  provided
    reports for Mental Health  Review  Tribunals  and  Managers'  Hearings,
    which he states are "very different" from assessments for asylum cases.
     He then attaches less weight to this report because of this  perceived
    lack of experience.


14. Further, when considering the report the judge states, [42]:


    "I have noted that he does not think that the Appellant was feigning or
    not describing his experiences accurately but he has not considered the
    possibility of these experiences being caused by other factors over and
    above the separation that has occurred from his county  [sic]  and  his
    family as well as continuing immigration uncertainty."


15. Paragraph [42] of the report states:


    "I  have  considered  the  possibility  that  other  factors,  such  as
    separation from his country and  family,  as  well  as  his  continuing
    immigration uncertainty, could have caused ZI's psychological symptoms.
     These factors  cannot  account  for  the  onset  of  his  symptoms  as
    described  above.   However,  all  three  factors  may   presently   be
    exacerbating these symptoms, particularly separation from his family."


16. I find that paragraph [42] of the decision runs  counter  to  paragraph
    [42] of the report, where the psychiatrist specifically states that the
    other factors cannot account for the onset of the Appellant's symptoms.
      The  judge  states  that  the  psychiatrist  does  not  consider  the
    possibility of these experiences being caused by other factors over and
    above the  separation  that  has  occurred,  but  the  "other  factors"
    considered by the psychiatrist are not limited  to  those  listed.   He
    concludes that the factors listed may be exacerbating his symptoms, but
    he finds that other  factors  cannot  account  for  the  onset  of  his
    symptoms.


17. I find that the psychiatrist clearly  considered  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's symptoms could have  been  caused  by  other  factors,  but
    considered that they did not.  The judge's findings in  paragraph  [42]
    do not reflect this, and the judge  has  failed  to  give  reasons  for
    departing from the findings of the expert.


18. Further, I find that the psychiatric report has not been considered  in
    the round with the other evidence.  It is considered at the end, and it
    is considered very briefly.  No weight is attached to  it  because  the
    judge erroneously states that the psychiatrist is  not  experienced  in
    providing reports for asylum cases, and because he has only been on the
    Specialist Register for a relatively short period of time.   The  judge
    makes findings which are contrary to the findings of the expert without
    giving reasons, and therefore fails to take the psychiatrist's findings
    into account when considering the evidence as a  whole.   I  find  that
    this failure to consider the psychiatric report in the round  with  the
    other evidence affects the credibility findings.  I find that this is a
    material error of law.


19. In relation to the second ground, it is unfortunate that Ms  Iqbal  was
    unable to identify the documents to which she was  referring  when  she
    stated that the documents had been before the judge.  In any  event,  I
    have  found  that  the  decision  involves  an  error  of  law  in  the
    consideration of the psychiatric report, and I have therefore  set  the
    decision aside.


20. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


21. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    it aside.


22. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 20 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

