
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02137/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Sent         |
|On 4 August 2014                           |8 August 2014              |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MOHAMMED HEYDARI
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr T Melvin a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Ms S Akinbolu counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Iran who was born
      on 1 November 1991 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of State  has  been
      given permission to appeal the determination  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Adio ("the  FTTJ")  who  allowed,  on  Article  8  human  rights
      grounds, the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision of 12 January 2014 to remove him  from  the  UK  pursuant  to
      section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


   2. The claimant arrived in the UK clandestinely  on  7  August  2006.  He
      claimed asylum the next day. The claim was  refused  on  27  September
      2009 but as he was a minor he was granted  discretionary  leave  which
      expired on 27 September 2009. He submitted a further  application  for
      leave on 24 September 2009. This was refused on 7 April 2011.  He  did
      not appeal in time. However, he made an appeal on 20 July  2011  which
      was dismissed on 28 July 2011. His appeal rights were exhausted on  16
      August 2011. The Secretary of State received a pre-action protocol  on
      13 February 2012 and responded on 21  February  2012  maintaining  the
      decision. At some stage the Secretary of State was  having  difficulty
      in obtaining a travel document in order to remove the  appellant  from
      the UK. He was put on temporary release. The claimant was arrested  on
      12 January 2014 and put on reporting conditions with which  he  failed
      to comply.


   3. The claimant appealed against the removal decision and the FTTJ  heard
      his appeal on 7 May 2014. Both parties were  represented  by  counsel.
      The claimant gave evidence as did the friend with whom he was  living.
      There was a witness statement from the friend's mother with whom  they
      both lived.


   4. The FTTJ recorded that the claimant was not  pursuing  the  appeal  on
      Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection or Articles 2 or  3  human
      rights grounds. In this respect he also followed the findings  of  the
      Immigration Judge who had heard the earlier appeal by the claimant. In
      deciding the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds  the  FTTJ  said
      that he was guided  by   JS  (Former  unaccompanied  child  -  durable
      solution) (Afghanistan) [2013] UKUT 568 (IAC) and Gulshan (Article 8 -
      new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). He found
      that the claimant  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules
      because he did not have family in  this  country  and  had  not  spent
      sufficient time here. He went on to consider  the  Article  8  grounds
      outside  the  Rules  and  whether  there  were  any  other  compelling
      features.


   5. The FTTJ found that the claimant had attempted to commit  suicide.  He
      had established a private life in this country and had been here since
      2006. Applying the guidance in JS and Razgar, R  (on  the  Application
      of) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  27
      principles he found that the appeal turned on the final question,  the
      proportionality of  the  proposed  interference  with  the  claimant's
      private life human rights. He found, not only that  the  claimant  had
      attempted suicide, but that he was on medication and obtaining regular
      medical support for his depression and awaiting  a  further  operation
      for treatment of haemorrhoids. There had been unsuccessful attempts to
      trace his family in Iran through the Red Cross.  Social  services  had
      continued to support the appellant after his 18th  birthday  and  this
      support had only recently come to an end. He had been  living  with  a
      friend and his mother for the last five years and the friend had saved
      him from taking his own life. The FTTJ found  that  the  claimant  was
      still in a vulnerable position and there would be no adult support for
      him in his own country. He had come here  at  the  age  of  15  as  an
      unaccompanied minor and had been here for eight  years.  He  concluded
      that it would be a disproportionate interference with  the  claimant's
      right to respect for his private life to remove him  from  the  UK  at
      this time. He allowed the appeal on Article  8  human  rights  grounds
      only.


   6. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal submitting that the FTTJ  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  give
      reasons or adequate reasons for findings on material matters. The FTTJ
      had failed to identify compelling circumstances not recognised by  the
      Rules or exceptional circumstances. The facts  of  the  case  did  not
      bring the claimant within JS. The grounds go on to  refer  to  country
      information about Iran from a number of sources which, it  is  argued,
      show that  the  claimant  would  be  able  to  obtain  proper  medical
      treatment and support.


   7. There is a Rule 24 response from the claimant's representatives.


   8. Mr Melvin said that he wished to add a further ground of appeal namely
      "irrationality". Prior to the hearing the Secretary of State had  made
      no application to amend the grounds of appeal  and  when  I  asked  Mr
      Melvin exactly what the amended grounds would say he indicated that he
      had not put them in writing. I offered him the opportunity  to  do  so
      before I considered the application  but  on  reflection  he  withdrew
      this.


   9.  Mr  Melvin  submitted  the  judgement  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA
      Civ 558 and drew my attention to paragraphs 40  to  44.  He  submitted
      that there were no compelling circumstances in this case. There was  a
      lack of medical evidence showing a  future  risk  of  suicide  and  no
      evidence that the  claimant  had  attended  the  medical  appointments
      referred to in the notices of appointment  sent  to  him.  There  were
      sufficient health services in Iran to assist him and give him the care
      he might need. I asked Mr Melvin whether the evidence referred  to  in
      paragraphs 6 to 10 of the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal were before the FTTJ. Eventually  and  reluctantly,
      Mr Melvin accepted that there was no indication that  this  or  indeed
      any other country material submitted by the  Secretary  of  State  was
      before the FTTJ. I can find no indication that any  of  this  evidence
      was before the FTTJ. Mr Melvin then submitted that the  FTTJ  had  not
      considered  the  question  of  the  availability  of  adequate  health
      facilities in Iran.


  10. Mr Melvin argued that the FTTJ had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for
      allowing the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds. I was asked  to
      find that the FTTJ had erred in law, to set aside the decision and  to
      remake it  myself  without  the  need  for  any  further  evidence  or
      submissions.


  11. Ms Akinbolu argued that the Secretary of State's submissions  amounted
      to no more than an attempt to reargue the case without  revealing  any
      error of law. It could not be an error of law for the FTTJ not to take
      into account evidence which was not before him. He had found as a fact
      that the claimant had attempted suicide and on all the  evidence  this
      was a conclusion open to him. It did  not  have  to  be  confirmed  by
      independent  medical  evidence.  The  Secretary  of  State   had   not
      challenged the findings of fact. The claimant had lived with a  friend
      and his mother for several years. The Red Cross  had  been  unable  to
      find any member of his family in Iran. It was clear that the FTTJ  had
      applied the appropriate JS factors and that he had in mind and applied
      the tests in Gulshan.


  12. Ms Akinbolu submitted that it was open to the FTTJ to  find  that  the
      claimant was a young and vulnerable person whose private  life  rights
      outweighed the public interest in removing him from the UK. She  asked
      me to find  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  and  to  uphold  the
      determination. If I was against her  and  decided  that  the  decision
      needed to be remade she submitted that it was difficult to see  how  I
      could come to any different conclusion. I reserved my determination.


  13. I find that  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
      challenge the FTTJ's findings of credibility or fact. Whilst there  is
      no independent medical report which states in terms that the  claimant
      has attempted suicide there is some indirect evidence  in  the  letter
      from a NHS Trust Mental  Health  Services  Department  giving  him  an
      appointment and letters from Richmond Wellbeing Service. Even if there
      had been a challenge to this finding I would have  concluded  that  on
      the evidence before  him,  including  the  documentary  evidence,  the
      claimant's evidence and the evidence of his friend, it was open to the
      FTTJ to reach this and related conclusions.


  14. I find that FTTJ followed the correct approach  of  first  considering
      whether the claimant could succeed on Article 8 human  rights  grounds
      under the Immigration Rules. The conclusion that he could not, for the
      reasons given in paragraph 26, is correct and unchallenged.  The  FTTJ
      directed himself by reference to  Gulshan  and,  whilst  there  is  no
      specific reference to the question of  whether  "there  were  arguably
      good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules",  I  find
      that there were ample reasons for  the  FTTJ  to  go  on  to  consider
      whether the claimant could  succeed  outside  the  Rules.  The  FTTJ's
      reference  to  "compelling  factors"  in  paragraph  26  is,  I  find,
      sufficient  indication  that  he  was  considering   the   "compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules" referred to
      in Gulshan.


  15. I can find nothing  in  Haleemudeen  to  indicate  the  need  for  any
      different approach to that set out in Gulshan. The  decision  in  this
      case is not one taken under a part of the Immigration Rules which  are
      contain a complete code ruling out consideration outside the Rules.


  16. The summary in JS, prepared by the author of that determination, Blake
      J, states;


              "(1) A  local authority's obligations to an appellant  as  an
              unaccompanied child and asylum seeker  and  his  status  as  a
              former relevant child after he becomes 18 do not of themselves
              determine the  outcome  of  a  decision   on   an  appellant's
              immigration status but may provide evidence relevant to  those
              issues.


         (2)   The failure of the Home Office to endeavour to trace  family
            members of a  child  asylum  seeker  is  only  relevant  to  an
            immigration appeal after the appellant ceases to  be  a  child,
            where he is able to show a causal link between that failure and
            issues relevant to the outcome of the appeal.


        (3)    For an unaccompanied asylum seeking child, the  best  durable
            solution is to be reunited with his own family unless there are
            good reasons to  the  contrary.   Where  reunification  is  not
            possible and there are no adequate reception facilities in  the
            home country, an appropriate durable solution may be  to  grant
            discretionary leave during the remaining years of minority  and
            then arrange a return to the country of origin. Where the child
            is of a young age on  arrival,  cannot  be  reunited  with  his
            family and will spend many years in the host state  during  his
            minority a durable solution may need to be found  in  the  host
            state.


        (4)    Where the appellant is no longer a minor,  the  duty  on  the
            Secretary of State under s.55 of the Borders,  Immigration  and
            Citizenship Act 1999 no  longer  arises  but  when  making  the
            assessment of whether  removal   would  lead  to  a  breach  of
            article 8 all relevant  factors  must  be  taken  into  account
            including age, background,  length  of  residence  in  the  UK,
            family  and  general  circumstances  including  any  particular
            vulnerability and whether an  appellant  will  have  family  or
            other adult support on return  to his home country  appropriate
            to his particular needs.


        (5)     In the context of Afghanistan it is also necessary to  take
            into  account  the  guidance  in AA (Unattended   children)
            Afghanistan  CG [2012]  UKUT  16  (IAC) about  the  risks  to
            unattached  children  in  the  light  of  the  reminder  in KA
            (Afghanistan)   v   Secretary   of   State   for    the    Home
            Department[2012] EWCA Civ 1014 in the judgment of Maurice  Kay
            LJ at [18] that there is no bright line across which the  risks
            to and the needs of a child suddenly disappear.

  17. I find that what the FTTJ properly considered fell  foursquare  within
      the requirements of subparagraph (4). The FTTJ could only consider the
      appeal on the basis of the evidence before him. My attention  has  not
      been drawn to and I cannot find any indication that the  Secretary  of
      State submitted  evidence  which  could  have  led  the  FTTJ  to  the
      conclusion that there were adequate psychiatric and  support  services
      for the claimant's needs in Iran.


  18. I find that on all the evidence before him and his clear  findings  of
      fact it was open  to  the  FTTJ  to  find  that  the  claimant  was  a
      vulnerable young adult and that there  were  compelling  circumstances
      (or factors) which would make his removal from the UK "at  this  point
      in time" a disproportionate interference with his  Article  8  private
      life rights.


  19. I the FTTJ did not make an anonymity direction and  I  have  not  been
      asked to do so.


  20.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
      determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 5
      August 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

