
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02354/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd December 2015                |On 20 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     G Y
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jones of Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1    This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 12 June 2015 (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morgan) dismissing
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 27  January
    2015 to remove him administratively under s.10 Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999. The Appellant is a national of Kosovo, and first entered  the
    United Kingdom in 1999, claiming asylum 1 November 1999. The details of
    that claim are not before me, but related to the then ongoing  conflict
    in Kosovo. The appeal was dismissed in October  2001.  Thereafter,  the
    Appellant evaded immigration control, remaining in the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully. There is a suggestion in the Respondent's decision that the
    Appellant made contact with the Respondent in 2010, but as far as I  am
    able to determine, no application for leave to remain was made  by  the
    Appellant until 2012, after the Appellant had become aware he  was  HIV
    positive and had fallen ill with cancer.

2    That application was refused in February 2014 with no right of  appeal.
    Further representations of November 2014 were treated as a fresh asylum
    and human rights claim, resulting in the present decision of 27 January
    2015. The Appellant had claimed that he was at  real  risk  of  serious
    harm in Kosovo as a result of his homosexuality, and also  argued  that
    his removal to Kosovo would be in breach  of  Article  3  ECHR  on  the
    grounds that he would not be able to obtain  in  Kosovo  the  level  of
    medical care that he is receiving in the United Kingdom, and  that  his
    removal would bring about a significant deterioration in his health.

3    When the appeal came before the First tier Tribunal on  11  June  2015,
    those acting for the Appellant  indicated that  the  Appellant  was  no
    longer pursuing the appeal on asylum or Article  3  ECHR  grounds,  but
    only on Article 8 ECHR, on the grounds that his removal would amount to
    a disproportionate interference with the Appellant's private and family
    life that he enjoyed in the UK.

4    At paragraph 12  onwards  in  the  decision,  the  judge  set  out  the
    Appellant's evidence as to his private life in the United  Kingdom.  At
    paragraph 15 it was recorded that the Appellant had been in a  same-sex
    relationship with his British partner since 2011; the  couple  did  not
    live together but they had plans to live together in  the  future;  the
    Appellant however had been distancing himself from his partner  because
    he does not know how to tell his partner about his HIV status  and  his
    immigration history; the partner did  not  know  about  or  attend  the
    appeal hearing; the Appellant had lost some friends since  they  became
    aware of his HIV status and he feared the stigma that accompanied this;
    he feared that if he were to tell his partner that this might  end  the
    relationship. At  paragraph  16  the  judge  recorded  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he feared having to hide his  sexuality  if  returned  to
    Kosovo due to discrimination in that country. At paragraph 17 the judge
    recorded the submissions behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the  various
    factors affecting the Appellant cumulatively would amount to  a  breach
    of his and his partner's rights under Article 8 ECHR.

5    At paragraph 17 the  judge  expressed  considerable  sympathy  for  the
    Appellant, having left Kosovo at a time of  significant  upheaval.  The
    Appellant had in the last few years been diagnosed with HIV and  cancer
    which now appeared to be in remission. The judge held at  paragraph  17
    that even considering those factors cumulatively they did not enable  a
    finding   that   the   Appellant's   return   to   Kosovo   would    be
    disproportionate; it was harsh in all the  circumstances  but  did  not
    amount to a disproportionate breach of either the  Appellant's  or  his
    partner's private or family life. At paragraph 18 the judge  considered
    the application of part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, (although referring to this as Part 5A of section 19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014).  The judge stated as follows:

         "I have given considerable weight to the public interest  question.
         Section 19 does not assist the Appellant in demonstrating that  his
         removal would be disproportionate. On the contrary it  necessitates
         a finding that his removal is in the public interest. I  find  that
         the weight to be given to the requirements of  immigration  control
         outweighs the interference with the Appellant's private and  family
         life. The Appellant is an unlawful entrant to  the  United  Kingdom
         who  has  submitted  an   unsuccessful   asylum   application   and
         subsequently absconded  and  remained  in  United  Kingdom,  worked
         unlawfully and sought  access  to  the  NHS.  In  summary,  on  the
         particular facts, I am unable to find that it  is  disproportionate
         to expect the Appellant to return to Kosovo."

6     At  paragraph  19,  the  judge  expressed  remarks   which   are   not
    determinative of the appeal, but invited the Respondent to  consider  a
    pragmatic grant of discretionary leave or temporary  admission  to  the
    Appellant. I find that this paragraph does not form any  relevant  part
    of the reasoning of the judge.

7    An application for permission to appeal  was  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but permission was refused on 23 July  2015.  The  application
    was renewed on the same  grounds  which  in  summary  argued  that  the
    judge's finding  that 'Part 5A  necessitates a finding that his removal
    is in the public interest' was demonstrably wrong;  if  that  were  the
    case then no Appellant could succeed unless  satisfying  all  parts  of
    s.117B. In granting permission to appeal on 21  September  2015,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker expressed the view that it was arguable  that  the
    First tier Tribunal judge incorrectly interpreted s.117  A  to  D,  and
    failed to take proper account of the  relevant  immigration  rules,  in
    stating that the public interest required the Appellant's  removal.  It
    was arguable that the public interest was one  of  the  factors  to  be
    considered in assessing whether  removal  is  disproportionate  rather,
    than imposing a requirement.

8    Before me Ms Jones appeared on behalf the  Appellant.  I  turned  first
    however to Mr Tarlow appearing for the Respondent and invited his views
    as to whether or not the First-tier judge had erred in law.  He  relied
    upon the Rule 24 notice dated 12 October 2015  which  argued  that  the
    judge had correctly directed himself in law, and had  at  paragraph  18
    made a decision on the  basis  of  proportionality,  in  balancing  the
    weight to be given to immigration control as against  the  interference
    with the Appellant's private and family life. It was submitted that the
    grounds were no more than a disagreement with the findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal. Mr Tarlow added to that what the judge had done  was  to
    merely give considerable weight to the public interest question. I  did
    not need to hear from Ms Jones on the error of law issue.

    Discussion

9    Part 5A of the nationality, immigration and Asylum  act  2002  provides
    as follows, in so far as is relevant:

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  Tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         Tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

10   The meaning an application of part 5A NIAA 2002 has been considered  in
    a number of cases. Relevant amongst those are the following:

    (i)  Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC): Headnote:

             "... (e) sections 117A-117D  do  not  represent  any  kind  of
             radical departure from or "override" of previous case  law  on
             Article 8 so  far  as  concerns  the  need  for  a  structured
             approach. In particular, they do  not  disturb  the  need  for
             judges to ask themselves the five questions set out in  Razgar
             [2004] UKHL 27.  Sections 117A-117D are essentially a  further
             elaboration of Razgar's question 5 which is essentially  about
             proportionality and justifiability.

         And at para 25:

             25.  Fifth, we do not regard ss. 117A-117D as being  any  kind
             of radical departure from or "override" of previous  case  law
             on Article 8 so far as concerns  the  need  for  a  structured
             approach. In particular, it does  not  disturb  the  need  for
             judges to ask themselves the five questions set out in  Razgar
             [2004] UKHL 27. Indeed it seems to us that in effect  ss.117A-
             117D  are  essentially  a  further  elaboration  of   Razgar's
             question 5 which  is  essentially  about  proportionality  and
             justifiability [1](Lord Bingham's question  5  asks,  assuming
             that in reply to previous questions it  has  been  established
             that there had been an interference with the right to  respect
             for private and family life, " [i]f so, is  such  interference
             proportionate to  the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be
             achieved?"). We derive  this  from  the  definition  given  in
             s.117A(3):

                  "In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
                  the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                  under Article 8(2)." (Emphasis added)

             26.  Sixth, bearing in mind that ss.117A-117D  focus  only  on
             certain of the  steps  judges  must  take  when  dealing  with
             Article 8 grounds (and they do not,  for  example,  deal  with
             whether private or family life exists  or  whether  there  has
             been an interference with it), it  cannot  be  said  that  its
             provisions are intended to modify existing learning as to when
             it is or is not an error of law for a judge  to  have  express
             regard to specific elements of a structured approach.

    (ii) Further, in Forman (ss  117A-C  considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  412
         (IAC):

             "17. We consider the correct analysis  of  sections  117A  and
             117B to be as follows:

                  (i)  These provisions apply in every case where a court or
                  Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision  made
                  under the Immigration Acts breaches a  person's  right  to
                  respect for private and family life under Article  8  ECHR
                  and, as a result, would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                  Human Rights Act 1998. Where a Court or  Tribunal  is  not
                  required to make this determination, these  provisions  do
                  not apply.

                  (ii) The so-called  "public  interest  question"  is  "the
                  question of whether an interference with a person's  right
                  to respect for private and family life is justified  under
                  Article 8(2).", which appears to embrace the  entirety  of
                  the proportionality exercise.

                  (iii)    In considering the public interest question,  the
                  court or Tribunal must have regard to  the  considerations
                  listed in section 117B in all cases: per  section  117A(1)
                  and (2).

                  (iv) In considering the public interest question in  cases
                  concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, the court
                  or  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to  the   section   117B
                  considerations and the considerations  listed  in  section
                  117C.

                  (v)  The list of considerations in sections 117B and  177C
                  is not  exhaustive:  this  is  clear  from  the  words  in
                  parenthesis "(in particular)".

                  (vi) The court or Tribunal concerned  has  no  choice:  it
                  must have regard to the listed considerations.

             To this we  would  add  the  following.  While  the  court  or
             Tribunal  is   clearly   entitled   to   take   into   account
             considerations other than those listed in section  117B  (and,
             where  appropriate,  section  117C),  any  additional  factors
             considered must be relevant, in the sense that  they  properly
             bear on the " public  interest  question".  In  this  discrete
             respect, some assistance is  provided  by  reflecting  on  the
             public law  obligation  to  take  into  account  all  material
             considerations which, by definition, prohibits  the  intrusion
             of immaterial factors. We are not required to  decide  in  the
             present case whether there is any tension between section 117A
             (2), which obliges the court or  Tribunal  concerned  to  have
             regard to the list of considerations listed  in  section  117B
             and, where appropriate,  section  117C)  and  the  contrasting
             terms of section 117B (5) and  (6)  which  are  framed  as  an
             instruction to the  court  or  Tribunal  to  attribute  little
             weight to the two considerations specified."

    (iii)    And further, in Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015]
         UKUT 674 (IAC): headnote:

             "(i) Section 117B (6) is a reflection of the distinction which
             Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are, and who
             are  not,  liable  to  deportation.  In  any  case  where  the
             conditions enshrined in section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are  satisfied,  the  section
             117B(6) public interest prevails  over  the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B (1)-(3).

             (ii)  Section  117B  (4)  and  (5)   are   not   parliamentary
             prescriptions of the public interest. Rather, they operate  as
             instructions to courts and Tribunals to be  applied  in  cases
             where the balancing exercise is being conducted  in  order  to
             determine proportionality under Article 8 ECHR, in cases where
             either of the factors which they identify arises".

         And

             "20. In  section  117B(6),  Parliament  has  prescribed  three
             conditions, namely:

                  (a)  the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

                  (b)  such person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, namely a person  who
                  is under the age of 18 and is a  British  citizen  or  has
                  lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
                  seven years or more; and

                  (c)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  qualifying
                  child to leave the United Kingdom.

             Within   this   discrete   regime,   the   statute   proclaims
             unequivocally that where these three conditions are  satisfied
             the public interest does not require the removal of the parent
             from the United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none.

             21.  Giving effect to the analysis above, in our judgment  the
             underlying Parliamentary intention is  that  where  the  three
             aforementioned conditions are satisfied the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply."

11   My analysis of these authorities is that the considerations set out  in
    s.117B are matters to which regard  must  be  had  in  determining  the
    public interest question. Save perhaps for the positive satisfaction of
    the criteria set out in s.117B(6),  which  following  the  analysis  in
    Treebowan, would appear to indicate that the public interest  does  not
    require removal, the satisfaction  or  non-satisfaction  of  the  other
    considerations in s.117B do not dictate a specific answer  one  way  or
    the other in the determination of whether it is in the public  interest
    to remove an individual; they are merely matters to which  regard  must
    be had.

12   I find that although the judge  otherwise  appears  to  have  correctly
    directed himself in law as to the assessment of the proportionality  of
    the Appellant's proposed removal, his comment at paragraph 18 that part
    5A 'necessitates a finding that his removal is in the public  interest'
    represents a misdirection in law. I find that such  a  misdirection  is
    sufficiently concerning  that  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  had  the
    misdirection  not  taken  place,  that  the  same  outcome  would  have
    resulted. The error is therefore material.

13   The judge's decision as  to  the  proportionality  of  the  Appellant's
    proposed removal being unsound, therefore,  I  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision. I announced that that was my conclusion during the hearing.

14   I discussed with the parties how the matter might  then  proceed.  Both
    were content for  me  to  re-hear  any  oral  evidence  that  would  be
    required, and to hear submissions as to the remaking of the decision.

15   I therefore proceeded to hear evidence from the Appellant. Without  the
    use of interpreter, the Appellant adopted his witness  statement  of  2
    June 2015. He was asked additional questions by Ms Jones to the  effect
    that he had no family in the UK or in Kosovo. His father  had  died  in
    1999 during the war, and he had not had contact with his  mother  since
    he left Kosovo. He had no brothers or  sisters.  He  had  no  remaining
    friends in Kosovo either.

16   Cross-examined by Mr Tarlow, the Appellant confirmed that he was  in  a
    relationship in the United Kingdom with a man called Richard.

17   I asked the Appellant some questions. I asked  if  he  had  friends  in
    United Kingdom to which he stated that he used to but  that  since  his
    diagnosis with HIV and cancer he had lost many. I asked whether he  was
    out as a gay man in the United Kingdom. He said not really; he would go
    out at night to parks. He used to go to clubs but stopped years ago. He
    stated that it was hard to be  openly  gay  because  homophobic  people
    attack gay people every day. He was aware of two attacks  taking  place
    in Finsbury Park. He used to have both  straight  and  gay  friends.  I
    noted that he relied on three letters from charitable organisations (to
    which I make further reference below) but  asked  him  if  he  had  any
    friends outside of these organisations. The Appellant  stated  that  he
    had a friend from Germany who was a gay man.

18   He had not tried to contact his mother, having no telephone number  for
    her. He had not asked for any assistance  from  eg  the  Red  Cross  in
    trying to locate his mother. He was  financially  dependent  on  asylum
    support. He had not worked in the UK for the last three years;  he  had
    previously worked as a chef in a kitchen.

19   In re-examination, Ms Jones asked the Appellant why  he  had  not  told
    his partner about his HIV status or immigration status;  the  Appellant
    stated that he had tried to tell him but that that  was  not  easy  for
    him.

20   I heard submissions from Mr Tarlow. He submitted that  it  was  in  the
    public interest that  the  Appellant  be  removed,  but  this  was  not
    determinative of the outcome of the  appeal.  The  Appellant  had  been
    present in the United Kingdom illegally for the whole of the time  that
    he had been here. He had only made contact with the Home Office in 2012
    because he needed further medical treatment which could not  have  been
    paid for without being on asylum support. Any relationship that he  had
    with his partner could not be that strong as the Appellant had not told
    the partner about his immigration status or HIV status. If  the  nature
    of  the  relationship  changed  then  the  Appellant  could   make   an
    application to enter the United Kingdom from Kosovo.

21   On  behalf  of  the  Appellant  Ms  Jones  argued  that  the  Appellant
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  on  the  grounds
    that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    integration into Kosovo if he were required to leave the United Kingdom
    and she also relied upon article 8 outside the rules. The Appellant had
    lived in the United Kingdom for 16 years having arrived at the  age  of
    23 and was now 40 years old. He is homosexual. Ms Jones argued that  it
    was difficult to be homosexual in Kosovo due to  discrimination  there.
    Although it was not illegal under Kosovan law, there was discrimination
    and dislike towards gay men in that country. Ms Jones  referred  me  to
    passages in the Appellant's objective bundle between pages 20 to 45  as
    to levels of discrimination against gay men. The Appellant  would  have
    difficulty in reintegrating into life in  that  country  such  that  he
    should be granted leave to remain under the immigration rules.

22   Outside of the immigration rules, Ms Jones addressed the issues  in  s.
    117B NIAA 2002. The Appellant  spoke  English  fluently.  He  had  also
    previously worked as a chef, and demonstrated that he  was  capable  of
    being financially independent, although he had  experienced  ill-health
    more recently. She argued that overall, the  Appellant's  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would amount to a disproportionate interference with
    his right to private and family life in the UK.

    Remaking

23   I first consider the Appellant's  potential  entitlement  to  leave  to
    remain under the immigration rules. It was  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant  that  he  at  satisfied  the   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) on the grounds  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into life in Kosovo upon return.

24   I accept that the Appellant is a gay man.  There  is  no  real  dispute
    about that. I have regard to the following evidence as to the  position
    of the LG BT  community  in  Kosovo;  not  only  matters  to  which  my
    attention  was  drawn,  but  other  matters  also  contained   in   the
    Appellant's objective bundle.

25   At page 20, an article in  'Forced  Migration  Review'  seemingly  from
    April 2013 suggests that despite Kosovo being one of only  10  European
    states to have constitutionally banned discrimination on the ground  of
    sexual orientation, society remains deeply traditional and even hostile
    towards sexual minorities. It was stated that walking around  the  busy
    streets of Pristina, there were no visible signs of an  LGBT  community
    and no gay bars or clubs. Social conventions dictated that  most  young
    people in Kosovo live with their families until they marry;  those  who
    come out as LGBT risk being kicked out of the family home.

26   However, it was stated that despite this, the LGBT community in  Kosovo
    is very much alive and recently a small number of LGBT individuals have
    dared to break the silence and speak out. A report  from  ILGA   Europe
    entitled 'Annual Review of the Human Rights Situation  of  Lesbian  Gay
    Bisexual Trans and Intersex people in Europe 2015 -  Kosovo'  dated  18
    May 2015, provides that while a general atmosphere of hostility towards
    LGBTI people remained, the government and police in  2014  demonstrated
    professionalism in dealing with members  of  the  LGBTI  community  and
    issues linked  to  sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity.  Despite
    promises from government, laws against discrimination  and  for  gender
    equality stalled after the general election in June.

27   The US State Department  report  has  a  section  on  societal  abuses,
    discrimination, and acts of violence based on  sexual  orientation  and
    gender  identity.  It  was  recorded  that  there   was   no   official
    discrimination in employment,  housing,  statelessness,  or  access  to
    education or health care, but societal pressure persuaded the  majority
    of LGBT persons to conceal their sexual orientation or gender identity.
    A youth initiative for human  rights  report  held  that  40%  of  LGBT
    individuals were afraid to acknowledge their identity and 10% had  been
    physically assaulted at least once as a result of  being  perceived  as
    LGBT. LGBT activists affected by a December  2012  assault  on  an  NGO
    office reported officials  treated  them  professionally  and  actively
    pursued  the  assailants.  Another  local  NGO   observed   that   LGBT
    individuals  generally  felt  insecure  and  frequently  complained  of
    threats to their personal  safety  but  rarely  reported  incidents  to
    authorities due to the stigma attached to homosexuality.  It  was  said
    stated that the government took steps to signal its  support  for  LGBT
    rights and problems. A later passage of the  report  provides  that  an
    LGBT organisation in Kosovo  claimed  that  the  LGBT  community  faced
    physical attacks and threats during the year, particularly  via  social
    and online media and on radio. In August, three men assaulted a gay man
    in Prizren. In June, a transsexual 17-year-old in Pristina was verbally
    abused and threatened by three other boys his age, and in April, an 18-
    year-old gay man was verbally abused by his schoolteacher.

28   Assessing that evidence, my view is that it  was  appropriate  for  the
    Appellant to have indicated before the First tier Tribunal that he  was
    no longer pursuing an argument that he faced a  real  risk  of  serious
    harm Kosovo on the grounds of his  sexuality.  I  have  summarised  the
    evidence above in order to assess the distinct, but  associated  issue,
    whether  the  Appellant  would  have  very  significant  obstacles   in
    integrating into Kosovo on return. I accept that on the  face  of  that
    evidence there is discrimination  against  homosexual  men  in  Kosovo.
    However, the extent of the discrimination is not, from the  evidence  I
    have seen, very significant. The evidence as to  presence  of  an  LGBT
    community is somewhat  contradictory  ('no  visible  signs'/'very  much
    alive'). The attitude of the authorities in  Kosovo  towards  the  LGBT
    community appears to  be  positive.  Specific  and  recent  reports  of
    physical assaults are few in  number.  Whilst  it  is  said  that  some
    members of the LGBT community may face ostracism from  their  families,
    the Appellant has no family that he is contact with in any event. I  do
    not find that the Appellant would have very  significant  obstacles  in
    integrating into Kosovo arising out of his homosexuality.

30   I acknowledge  that  the  Appellant  has  been  out  of  Kosovo  for  a
    prolonged period. He left there at the age of 23, and is now  40  years
    old. He is not in good health.  However, it has been  conceded  (again,
    appropriately, I find) that his removal would not infringe  his  rights
    under Article 3 ECHR on medical grounds. However, the Appellant has not
    asserted that he no longer speaks Albanian, and his formative years, up
    to the age of 23, were spent in that country. He will be familiar  with
    the societal norms in that country. Further, the humanitarian situation
    and state of the economy has improved in Kosovo since the time that  he
    left the country in 1999, in a state of war. I do not find  that  there
    are very significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration  into
    Kosovo arising from his prolonged absence from the country. He does not
    meet the requirements for leave to remain on grounds of private life as
    set out in the immigration rules.

31   Considering, outside of the  rules,  whether  the  Appellant's  removal
    from the United Kingdom would amount to a disproportionate interference
    with his private and family life, I find that  the  Appellant  has  not
    established that he has a family life his partner Richard that  he  has
    mentioned. The Appellant may well be in a relationship with  this  man,
    but there is absolutely no evidence from Richard  himself.  The  reason
    for this lies entirely at Appellant's door; he has not told Richard  of
    any difficulties with his immigration status or that the  Appellant  is
    HIV-positive. This is a conscious decision on the part of the Appellant
    not tell his partner of these matters. The Appellant says that he fears
    the consequences of telling Richard of these matters. I find  that  the
    fact that he has not done so tends to indicate that their  relationship
    is not particularly strong. In the absence of evidence from Richard  as
    to the strength of the  claimed  relationship,  and  in  light  of  the
    admitted fact that the Appellant has never lived with Richard,  I  find
    that it has not been established that the Appellant and Richard have  a
    family life between them.

32   Considering the Appellant's private life in  United  Kingdom;  I  find,
    applying s.117B (2) and  (3)  NIAA  2002  that  it  is  in  the  public
    interest, and in particular in the interests of the economic well-being
    of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in  the
    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English  and   are   financially
    independent. The Appellant is not  currently  financially  independent.
    Further, the fact that he speaks English fluently does not give him any
    positive right to reside in United Kingdom (AM (s117B) [2015] UKUT  260
    (IAC) , headnote 2).

33   The Appellant relies on evidence  of  his  contact  with  a  number  of
    voluntary organisations.  A  letter  from  the  Earnest  Foundation  in
    London dated 7 October 2015 explains that it is  a  registered  charity
    promoting a safe and healthy living community, helping to  improve  the
    quality of life for people living with and affected by HIV and AIDS. It
    confirms that the Appellant joined the organisation (although  it  does
    not state when) and has developed  a  family  bond  with  the  members,
    especially those of the same sexual preference. The Appellant's act  of
    volunteering to the services of the  organisation  had  been  of  great
    benefit to the Appellant in terms of  overcoming  depression,  anxiety,
    loneliness  and  he  has  gained  confidence   and   self-esteem.   The
    organisation had referred the Appellant to the Food Chain for provision
    of  food  items.   The  Appellant  had  also   been   active   in   the
    organisation's advocacy programme at encouraging  people  to  come  for
    early HIV testing.

34   A letter from 'Body and Soul',  another charity in London for  children
    and teenagers and adults living with or closely affected by HIV,  dated
    26 October 2015, states that the Appellant first came into contact with
    that organisation in March 2015, and has attended each of their  weekly
    service  evenings  since  that  time.  He  had  received  a  number  of
    complimentary  therapies  for  managing  stress  and  anxiety.  He  had
    attended  a  number  of  workshops  such   as   medication   adherence,
    immigration, nutrition, sexuality and physical and  mental  health.  He
    had built strong relationships with both the  group  members  and  with
    staff which had been an important source of support to him and  without
    them his mental and physical health could be easily compromised.

35   A letter from the 'Cara' organisation dated 4 September 2015  confirmed
    that the Appellant had been a client of theirs  from  March  2015.  The
    organisation had been providing support  for  the  Appellant  including
    peer and emotional support,  with  the  Appellant  regularly  attending
    their weekly peer support group meetings.  There  are  letters  in  the
    Appellant's  main  bundle  confirming  that  the  Appellant   had   had
    assistance from the British Red Cross in terms  of  food  support,  and
    also from Food Chain.

36   It is to be noted that there were no live witnesses in support  of  the
    appeal aside from the Appellant himself. Although the letters from  the
    various charitable organisations I have mentioned state that he has had
    involvement  with  their  services,  and  has  developed  a  number  of
    friendships with staff members and other service users,  there  are  no
    witness statements from any specific individual explaining  the  nature
    of any friendship the Appellant has with them personally. I  find  that
    the nature of the Appellant's private life that he has  in  the  United
    Kingdom is a fairly  limited.  He  struggles  financially,  as  clearly
    demonstrated by his reliance on food aid; he is not working, and has no
    workplace friendships. He has no family in the United Kingdom.

37   That private life, such as it is, is,  in  accordance  with  s.117B(4),
    NIAA 2002, to be given little weight, on the grounds that it  has  been
    developed during a period when the Appellant has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully. I do attach  some  weight  to  that  private  life,
    however.

38   The Appellant has therefore demonstrated that he has  some  connections
    with the United Kingdom. I accept that the  removal  of  the  Appellant
    would amount to an interference with  the  private  life  that  he  has
    developed in the United Kingdom. I find  that  that  interference  will
    have consequences of sufficient gravity as potentially  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8 ECHR.  I  find  that  that  interference  is  in
    accordance with the law, on  the  basis  that  it  is  sought  for  the
    purposes of maintaining immigration control, and  I  find  that  it  is
    necessary in a democratic society in the interests of the economic well-
    being of the country, or for the prevention of disorder  or  crime,  it
    being generally accepted that the maintenance  of  immigration  control
    represents a justification for such interference.

39   The final  question  to  be  asked  is  whether  that  interference  is
    proportionate to the stated goal. The Appellant's lengthy  presence  in
    the United Kingdom has been brought about by his prolonged  evasion  of
    immigration control to between  2001,  when  he  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted, and 2012, when he made his next  application  for  leave  to
    remain. The Appellant also asserts that he  worked  on  off  unlawfully
    during this period of time. Having found above that the Appellant  does
    not meet the immigration rules, I have regard to the consideration (set
    out  in  s.117B(1)  NIAA  2002)  that  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.

40   I too have some sympathy with the Appellant, who has been at  afflicted
    with illness. However, those acting for him have rightly accepted  that
    his removal to Kosovo would not be unlawful on  protection  or  medical
    grounds. The importance of maintaining immigration  control  is  to  be
    acknowledged and given due weight. I find that the  Appellant  has  not
    advanced sufficient grounds arising from his private life in the United
    Kingdom to demonstrate that it would be disproportionate to remove  him
    from the United Kingdom, for the purposes  of  maintaining  immigration
    control.

41   I find the proposed removal  of  the  Appellant  to  Kosovo  would  not
    amount to a disproportionate breach of his rights to private and family
    life under article 8 ECHR.

42   I therefore dismiss the appeal.




    Decision:

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  by  dismissing  it  under  the
    immigration rules and on asylum and human rights grounds.




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so because  the  decision  contains
    sensitive information about the Appellant's health and sexuality.


Signed:  Date: 20.10.16
     [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

