
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02897/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 January 2016                    |On 4th May 2016                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    D- L-
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Knorr, Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant, that  is  the  present  respondent.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
    direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I make  this
    order because the First-tier Tribunal  has  made  a  similar  order  and
    because I  am  satisfied  that  publicity  concerning  the  respondent's
    identity could increase the risks he might face  in  the  event  of  his
    return.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  two
    judge panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent, hereinafter "the claimant",  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 6 February 2015 to refuse him asylum and make  him
    the subject of a deportation order. My primary task is not decide if  he
    his a refugee or if he should be deported but if the Secretary of  State
    has shown that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  reaching  the
    decision that it did.

 3. The claimant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo.   He  was
    born on [ ] 1993 and so is now 22 years old.  He has lived in the United
    Kingdom since January 2006.  He arrived with his sister and they claimed
    asylum the day after they arrived.  His claim for asylum was refused but
    he was given discretionary leave to  remain  as  a  minor.   That  leave
    lapsed on 1 February 2009.  On 30 January 2009 he  applied  for  further
    leave to remain.

 4. His situation is complicated because in September 2009 he was  convicted
    before the Crown Court of attempted rape, aiding and abetting  rape  and
    false imprisonment of a female under  the  age  of  16  years.   He  was
    sentenced to five years in custody but this was reduced to four years on
    appeal.

 5. He was released from custody at the end  of  October  2010.   About  six
    months later the Secretary of State refused him further leave to  remain
    and decided to deport him.  That decision and a subsequent decision were
    withdrawn but, as set out above, on 6 February  2015  the  Secretary  of
    State decided that  the  claimant  was  not  a  refugee  and  should  be
    deported. It was an appeal against that  subsequent  decision  that  was
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The appeal was allowed on asylum grounds and  on  human  rights  grounds
    with reference to Article 3 and Article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human  Rights.   The  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  was
    dismissed.  The Tribunal did not uphold the decision of the Secretary of
    State under Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 that the claimant was a danger to the  community  and  consequently
    not entitled to protection as a refugee.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy.  The respondent's grounds are apt  and
    helpful and I have considered them with Mr Tufan's  submissions  and  Ms
    Knorr's response.

 8. I begin by deciding if the First-tier Tribunal's decision that there  is
    a real risk to the applicant's safety in the event of his return to  the
    DRC is sound in law.  My findings on this point  materially  affect  the
    approach to the rest of the case.

 9. The asylum claim is summarised in the Decision  beginning  at  paragraph
    50.  It is a feature of the case that the  claimant's  sister  has  been
    recognised as a refugee.  In some  ways  her  case  is  similar  to  the
    claimant's case but,  as  the  grounds  rightly  point  out,  there  are
    additional and compelling features in her case which do not apply to the
    claimant.

10. Nevertheless the First-tier Tribunal directed itself, I find  correctly,
    that the findings of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    claimant's sister's case are a necessary starting point when they relate
    to the case of this claimant.

11. The First-tier Tribunal deciding the claimant's sister's case found  her
    evidence "compelling" and the Tribunal accepted her account of what  had
    happened to her in the DRC.  The claimant's experiences in the DRC  were
    shared with his sister.  The First-tier Tribunal therefore accepted that
    the claimant's mother is now dead and that while he was child in the DRC
    soldiers came to their home, assaulted him and raped his sister.

12. The Tribunal recognised that the incident  was  some  ten  years  or  so
    before it made its decision.  It was Ms Knorr's case that  the  claimant
    was still at risk.  His mother had been arrested and detained on account
    of her political activities.  It was  reasonable  to  believe  that  her
    subsequent death was a result of those activities.  The claimant and his
    sister, although still children, had been targeted  by  the  authorities
    after their mother's disappearance.   The  claimant  would  probably  be
    identified as his mother's son on arrival.  He would be returning to the
    DRC at a time of increasing tensions in anticipation of an  election  in
    2016.

13. Although mentioning that the claimant was a failed asylum seeker  and  a
    person with criminal convictions Ms Knorr made it clear  that  that  was
    not the "crux" of her case that he was  at  risk  on  return  for  those
    reasons. They were incidental to her main argument.

14. The First-tier Tribunal followed the decision of  the  Tribunal  in  the
    sister's case and  accepted  that  this  claimant  had  been  persecuted
    because of her association with his mother.

15. The Tribunal noted background evidence and an expert report  that  there
    had recently been "crackdowns" in the DRC and accepted evidence that the
    claimant would be interrogated on return.   The  Tribunal  was  entirely
    satisfied that people returned to the DRC are interviewed so that  their
    identity can be  established.   Establishing  this  claimant's  identity
    could reasonably  be  expected  to  identify  him  as  the  son  of  his
    persecuted mother and thus lead to the claimant himself being at risk.

16. The Tribunal was expressly aware that the  decision  in  BM  and  Others
    (returnees - criminal  and  non-criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]  00293  (IAC)
    discounted there being a risk  of  persecution  or  other  serious  ill-
    treatment simply by reason of being a returned offender or failed asylum
    seeker.

17.  The  Tribunal's  concern  was  clearly  that  the  claimant  would   be
    identified as  someone  whose  mother  was  worthy  of  persecuting  and
    therefore at risk himself.

18. The finding that the claimant is a refugee was clearly challenged.

19. The grounds point out  that  the  Tribunal  began  by  saying  that  the
    respondent did not appear to be disputing  the  claimant's  credibility.
    The grounds say that this is wrong.

20. In particular paragraph 66 of the notice  of  decision  letter  disputed
    the claimant's evidence that he had seen the photograph of his  mother's
    funeral.  The photograph appeared to be  of  a  funeral  but  there  was
    nothing in the photograph that identified  it  as  the  funeral  of  the
    claimant's mother.  The decision that it was the  mother's  funeral  was
    described as "pure speculation".  Further the  claimant  had  identified
    himself to the authorities of the DRC in the United Kingdom  because  he
    had applied for a passport and that was considered to be not credible if
    he  feared  persecution  from  the  authorities  in   his   country   of
    nationality.

21. The grounds also assert that the claimant's sister's appeal was  allowed
    for reasons that do not apply to the claimant including her being a lone
    female stigmatised by rape and being a member  of  a  particular  social
    group.  The First-tier Tribunal clearly  acknowledged  this  distinction
    but, according to the grounds, had not appreciated its significance.

22. Mr Tufan submitted that the UDPS is a legitimate political party in  the
    DRC and is the main opposition party.  There was, he said,  insufficient
    background evidence to support the conclusion that the claimant would be
    at risk now.  Mr Tufan recognised that at paragraph 23 of  its  Decision
    the Tribunal had relied heavily on paragraph 6.7 of  the  report  of  Dr
    Seddon (page 432 in bundle) which is set out and refers  to  the  "ample
    objective  evidence  to  suggest  that  those  suspected  of   political
    associations ... will be at risk in the DRC today."

23. Mr Tufan submitted that the Tribunal could not conclude from  that  that
    this  claimant  was  someone  who  would  be  suspected   of   political
    associations or affiliations.

24. Ms Knorr objected to  this  line  of  argument  pointing  out  that  the
    grounds of appeal did not challenge  the  Tribunal's  acceptance  of  Dr
    Seddon's evidence.

25. It is appropriate to look at the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the appeal of  the  claimant's  sister.   Having  accepted  the
    claimant's sister's evidence as credible and referring to her witnessing
    attacks on her family the  First-tier  Tribunal  said  unequivocally  at
    paragraph 34 that he found the claimant's sister to be a refugee "on the
    grounds of a political opinion imputed to her by reason  of  her  family
    connections".

26. At paragraph 35 he then began an alternative  analysis  with  the  words
    "in the alternative" and here the First-tier Tribunal Judge claimed that
    he accepted that the claimant's sister was a refugee by  reason  of  her
    membership of a particular social  group  and  by  being  a  lone  woman
    stigmatised by rape.

27. It really is quite plain that the First-tier  Tribunal  considering  the
    case of the claimant's sister accepted that she was at risk because  she
    was her mother's daughter.   There  were  other  important  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal but the decision to allow the appeal did not  depend
    on them.

28. In her reply dated 15  October  2015  Ms  Knorr  pointed  out  that  the
    contention that  the  evidence  does  not  substantiate  the  claimant's
    mother's death and that the claimant had obtained a passport should  not
    be understood as challenges to his credibility as a whole.

29. The point about the evidence about the mother's death is that  documents
    were provided from the Red Cross to Lewisham Social Services.  It was  a
    permissible inference that they did indeed show the  claimant's  mother.
    His  sister  accepted  the  evidence  was  imperfect  but  thought   she
    recognised someone in the photograph. The  point  is  that  neither  the
    claimant nor his sister was relying deceitfully on  evidence  which,  on
    scrutiny, was shown to be dishonest. Rather the evidence was  recognised
    to be of limited value but produced from an independent  source  because
    it was the best that could be done.

30. It was not challenged that  the  passports  had  been  obtained  at  the
    assistance of Social  Services  for  the  purposes  of  getting  a  bank
    account.  The fact that  a  person  has  sufficient  confidence  in  his
    government to seek a passport from the embassy in the United Kingdom  on
    the advice of Social Services is  hardly  compelling  evidence  that  he
    feels safe in the event of his return.

31. Whilst it is right to say that the refusal letter  made  it  plain  that
    the claimant's account was not accepted in its entirety it is going  too
    far to say that credibility was so much in issue that the Tribunal erred
    in the approach that it  took.   Basically  the  lead  points  had  been
    resolved in the  claimant's  favour  in  his  sister's  appeal  and  the
    Tribunal believed the thrust of the claimant's evidence.   There  is  no
    error of law there.

32. Neither was it suggested that the Tribunal was not entitled to  rely  on
    Dr George's evidence.

33. The evidence that this claimant would be at risk now  might  be  thought
    less compelling than the evidence that he been ill-treated in  the  past
    but Dr George was clearly of  the  opinion  that  the  past  history  of
    persecution taken with the present circumstances and the  likelihood  of
    discovery when interrogated on return was sufficient to create a risk.

34. This is clearly the evidence that the  Tribunal  has  accepted  and  the
    grounds fail to show any error  of  law  in  accepting  those  findings.
    Although it was some time ago it is at least reasonably likely that this
    claimant's mother has been killed because of her  political  activities.
    It may well be, as claimed, that this is a  family  that  has  seen  the
    sharp end of persecution and the conclusion that the claimant  would  be
    at risk now was permissible.

35. Once this is established then the Secretary of State's  case  starts  to
    fall away.  Clearly the need for "Article 3 protection" is made out.

36. Further  the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  is  entitled  to  refugee
    protection remains.  There is  no  argument  that  he  has  committed  a
    serious crime but that was some time ago.  He was a young  man  when  he
    went  into  custody.   There  was  abundant  evidence  to  support   the
    conclusion that he had addressed his offending behaviour and was  not  a
    risk to anyone.  Some might find it  repugnant  to  offer  international
    protection to a person who has behaved so badly.  People are entitled to
    such views but that does not alter the terms of the  Refugee  Convention
    or the European Convention on Human Rights.   To  be  disqualified  from
    refugee protection there needs  to  be  both  a  serious  crime  and  an
    existing danger and the finding  that  there  was  no  present  existing
    danger was wholly justified by the evidence.

37. The finding that removal would be  contrary  to  the  claimant's  rights
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  might  be  a
    little under explained.  There is a clear statutory obligation on judges
    not to allow an appeal on Article  8  grounds  when  certain  conditions
    exist unless there are further circumstances.  Section 117C(6) refers to
    "very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2."

38. There are manifestly such circumstances here.  They are  the  fact  that
    the claimant needs international protection because there is a real risk
    of his being seriously ill-treated in the event of  his  return.   Maybe
    that  these  are  the  paradigm  examples  of   the   "very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2"
    needed to prevent deportation.  It  may  well  be  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not get this point quite  right.   If  it  is  necessary  I
    remake the decision on this point only and I make it  in  the  claimant'
    favour.

39. Although I have considered carefully the arguments raised  by  Mr  Tufan
    which he did clearly and  economically,  for  the  reasons  given  I  am
    satisfied the  decision  that  the  claimant  is  still  a  refugee  was
    permissible and with that the rest of the case follows.

Notice of Decision

40. I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.  I  uphold  the  finding
    that the claimant is in need of international protection under Article 3
    and is still a refugee.  If necessary I remake the finding that  removal
    would be contrary to his rights under Article 8.  The reasons given  are
    not impressive.  The proper reason is that it is contrary to a  person's
    Article 8 rights to risk Article 3 ill-treatment.

41. In all the circumstances I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 April 2016                  |








