
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02889/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 February 2016                          |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     wI
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Sarah Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 17 February  2014  refusing  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain and to remove him to Sri Lanka.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 30 June 1970.

 4. The appellant claims that he opened a pharmacy business in Puttalam  in
    2006 but some medicine from the pharmacy was bought on  behalf  of  the
    LTTE in January 2009. The appellant was  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    army, beaten and handed over to police. He was kept in custody  for  11
    months. He was eventually released on 20 November 2009 by a  judge  who
    accepted that he had not deliberately supplied medicine to the LTTE. He
    was not required to sign at Puttalam police station after 30 May  2010.
    However, in March 2012  he  received  a  letter  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities asking him to sign on at the police  station.  He  believed
    that he would be kidnapped in a white van and killed. He fled Sri Lanka
    and arrived in the UK on 1 October 2012. His wife and children  are  in
    the UK but they left him on 25 November 2012.

 5. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account to  be  credible.
    He had taken over two  years  to  claim  asylum  and  his  account  was
    internally inconsistent.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 25 June 2015. The judge found that the  long
    delay in claiming asylum damaged his credibility but accepted  that  he
    was a pharmacist in Sri Lanka with his own  business.  His  explanation
    for sending his wife to the UK as a domestic worker for her own  safety
    was not credible given that his children  remained  in  Sri  Lanka.  He
    remained in Sri Lanka for six months after  receiving  the  March  2012
    letter from police.  The  purported  arrest  warrant  produced  by  the
    appellant was dated 16 October 2012; the delay  was  inconsistent  with
    the alleged breach of bond conditions and the issue of the warrant  was
    inconsistent with the claimed previous acceptance of innocence  by  the
    courts. The judge made other adverse credibility findings at paragraphs
    51-62 of the decision. The appeal was dismissed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal  on  2  September  2015.  The
    grounds assert that the judge erred in the  assessment  of  the  arrest
    warrant, failed to make distinct or identifiable findings in respect of
    the court and police  documents  produced  by  the  appellant  and  the
    adverse credibility findings were unreasonable.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on  5
    January 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge erred  in
    law by failing to take into account and/or give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the documentary  evidence  relied  upon,  in  particular  the
    evidence from the appellant's attorney in Sri Lanka. The judge did  not
    appear to have considered  that  evidence  at  all.  All  grounds  were
    arguable.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated  2015, the respondent sought to uphold  the
    judge's decision on the basis that the judge was not obliged to  accept
    the purported arrest warrant as genuine nor to place  weight  upon  the
    letter apparently emanating from a Sri Lankan  lawyer.  The  judge  had
    given clear reasons for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  and  had
    considered all of the evidence in the round.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

11. Miss Anzani focused her submissions on ground 2.  The  court  documents
    appear at page 14 of the appellant's bundle and the  attorney's  letter
    at page 56. The appellant's account is that he  was  processed  through
    the court system and that appears from pages 14-61. A 90 day  detention
    order was requested in January 2009. There is a bond  certificate  with
    attached conditions of bail. Each subsequent court hearing  is  covered
    in the papers. The most recent attendance was March 2012. There was a 6
    month adjournment on each occasion and the last adjournment appears  at
    page 58. Page 60 shows the failure to attend and then an arrest warrant
    was issued. At page 66,  there  is  a  letter  from  the  attorney  who
    attended the magistrates'  court  and  that  confirms  the  appellant's
    release on bail. The reliability of the court documents is enhanced  by
    the evidence from the attorney who is a genuine attorney in  Sri  Lanka
    as attested by his identity card.

12. Miss Anzani further  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not  assess  the
    documents. The judge took adverse  credibility  points  but  failed  to
    consider the arrest warrant and the  risk  of  further  detention  upon
    return. There is an absence of clear reasons for accepting or rejecting
    the documents. The court file  shows  a  detailed  chronology  that  is
    consistent with the appellant's account. The judge failed to assess the
    evidence of the attorney. The documents were rejected  wholesale  after
    the adverse credibility points were taken. There are no  reasons  given
    for  rejection  of  individual  documents.  The   respondent   had   an
    opportunity to verify but chose not to do so. Under PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011, where the respondent chooses not to  verify,
    it is inappropriate to advance a case that relies  upon  documents  not
    being genuine. The judge failed to engage with that argument despite it
    being made in the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge was clearly aware of  the
    documents which are referred to in paragraph 39 of  the  decision.  The
    original documents were referred to for the first time  in  examination
    in chief. This was not a case where  the  respondent  has  sat  on  the
    originals. The judge did have in mind the  summary  of  the  documents,
    referred to from paragraph 47 of the  decision  onwards.  Paragraph  50
    refers to the arrest warrant and at paragraph 54 there are no documents
    to  support  the  claimed  referral   to   the   International   Health
    Organisation. The credibility of the account had to be assessed in  the
    round. The judge's reasons for finding the appellant not to be credible
    were similarly applied to the documents that were submitted. The  judge
    took direct quotes from the asylum interview record. There were  proper
    reasons for finding against the appellant on the issue of delay and the
    judge was entitled to take that into account.

14. I find that paragraphs 61-62 of the decision are  critical.  The  judge
    stated at paragraph 61 that it was  difficult  to  assess  whether  the
    court documents were genuine. The judge then stated that past detention
    could lead to future risk of detention and ill treatment. At  paragraph
    62, following an "orbital assessment", the judge did  not  accept  that
    there was an outstanding warrant. The judge did not explicitly consider
    the evidence from the attorney.  I  am  satisfied  that  constitutes  a
    material error of law because the evidence from the attorney was highly
    material to the central issue of whether the court documents, including
    the arrest warrant were genuine. The judge failed to consider  material
    evidence and make findings.

15. The documentary evidence was  extensive,  running  to  over  40  pages.
    Fabrication of that evidence would have been a significant task.  I  am
    satisfied that the judge has not given adequate reasons  for  rejecting
    the court evidence and the existence  of  the  warrant.  There  was  no
    attempt to consider the documents individually or  the  weight  of  the
    documents when considered as a whole. I find that is a  breach  of  the
    duty to give reasons, as set out in MK (duty to give reasons)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC). There is a  duty  to  explain  the  tribunal's
    assessment of the most important pieces  of  evidence  and  to  provide
    reasons for choosing to give (as the case may be) no, little,  moderate
    or substantial weight thereto. I find that no such explanation  can  be
    gleaned from the decision of  the  First-tier  tribunal.  The  "orbital
    assessment" was not sufficient. That is a  further  material  error  of
    law.

16. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand. I have not found it necessary to consider the remaining  grounds
    of appeal. In light of the fact that the  original  documents  appeared
    for the first time at the oral hearing, the respondent should be  given
    a reasonable opportunity to verify the original documents. Ms Willcocks-
    Briscoe indicated that 90 days would be a  reasonable  period  for  the
    verification process.



Decision

17. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if  we  set  aside  the  judge's  decision.  Bearing  in  mind
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider
    that an appropriate course of action. I find that  the  errors  of  law
    infect the decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be  de
    novo with all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

18. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.
    I further order that the rehearing should not be listed less  than  120
    days from the date of this decision.




Signed   [pic]                      Date 24 March 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


