


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02107/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 February 2015                  |On 18 February 2015                  |
|Prepared on 13 February 2015         |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    J. B.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  the  DRC  who  entered  the  United
         Kingdom as a child on 19 December 2005, in the company  of  two  of
         her siblings. Her elder brother immediately claimed asylum,  naming
         his sisters as his dependents. The names which  the  Appellant  and
         her siblings used in that asylum application, were  not  consistent
         with the names that had been used in September  2005  in  the  visa
         applications (supported by apparently genuine DRC  passports)  that
         they had made, or the name in which an  ETD  was  obtained  by  the
         Respondent for the removal of her elder brother to the  DRC  on  26
         May 2009.

      2. The asylum claim made by her elder brother was  rejected,  and  his
         appeal to the Tribunal was dismissed by Immigration Judge Timson in
         a Determination promulgated on 26 April 2006. Her  elder  brother's
         account of events was rejected as untrue,  and  that  decision  was
         made before the  Tribunal  was  made  aware  of  the  inconsistency
         between the names in which he had made his  visa  application,  and
         the name in which he had  made  his  asylum  application,  and  the
         inconsistency  between  the  family  details  given  in  that  visa
         application,  and  those  given  in  his  asylum  application.  The
         Appellant and her sister do not appear to have  given  evidence  at
         that appeal. Further submissions were made on her  elder  brother's
         behalf, and they were rejected  as  advancing  no  fresh  claim  to
         asylum. An application for judicial review  of  that  decision  was
         rejected as without merit on 18 May 2009. Her elder brother was  in
         consequence removed to the DRC on 26 May 2009 using an ETD that had
         been obtained by the Respondent for him from the  DRC  authorities.
         That ETD was issued to him in the same identity as  that  which  he
         had used in the September 2005 visa application.

      3. The Appellant made her own claim to asylum on  10  May  2009.  That
         application was refused on  25  February  2014,  but  discretionary
         leave to remain was granted  to  her  until  25  August  2016.  The
         Appellant pursued an "upgrade" appeal to the Tribunal against  that
         decision, which was dismissed  by  Determination  of  Judge  Fisher
         promulgated on 3 July 2014.

      4.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, as drafted, raised three complaints; that the
         Judge had made  findings  that  were  perverse;  that  he  had  not
         adequately considered the "sur place" claim; that he had failed  to
         follow current country guidance in his assessment of the risk  upon
         return. That application was refused by Judge Gibb on 23 July  2014
         on the basis that the complaints, as drafted, were not arguable and
         amounted in reality merely to an attempt to reargue the appeal.

      5. Undaunted the Appellant renewed her application for  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal, which was granted on 2  October  2014
         by Upper Tribunal Judge King in the following terms;

             The Judge  has  dealt  adequately  with  a  number  of  issues
             affecting return as a woman and as a failed asylum seeker.

             It was accepted that the applicant had a minor role in APARECO
             although that role was not defined. The quote from BK did  not
             reflect paragraphs 192, 193, and 197. In  the  light  of  such
             matters it is arguable the Judge  should  have  given  clearer
             reasons why there was no risk to the Appellant on return.

             The burden is upon the Appellant to produce  to  the  Tribunal
             all relevant material on this issue well  in  advance  of  the
             hearing.

      6. The reference to BK is to  the  country  guidance  decision  of  BK
         (Failed asylum seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 98, quoted by the Judge
         in the course of his Determination - a  country  guidance  decision
         that was upheld by the Court of Appeal in BK (DRC) [2008] EWCA  Civ
         1322.

      7. The Respondent filed a Rule 24  Notice  on  13  October  2014.  She
         argued that the Judge had directed himself appropriately,  and  had
         given adequate reasons for the decision that  the  Appellant  would
         not be at risk upon return to the DRC.

      8. Neither party has formally applied  for  permission  to  rely  upon
         further evidence pursuant to Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         Procedure Rules 2008.

      9. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Adjournment

     10. By letter type dated Monday 9 February 2015, but only faxed to  the
         Upper Tribunal at 0935 hours  on  Tuesday  10  February  2015,  the
         Appellant's representatives  applied  for  an  adjournment  of  the
         hearing of the appeal. The  basis  for  the  application  was  that
         Counsel who had accepted instructions pro bono  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant "has informed that she is no longer available  to  attend
         the forthcoming hearing" [sic]. That application was refused by the
         Duty Judge the same day,  and  in  consequence  a  notice  of  that
         decision was sent by fax to the Appellant's representative at  1152
         hours on 10 February 2015. The Tribunal file shows that attempts by
         Upper Tribunal staff to phone the  Appellant's  representatives  in
         relation to the matter were unsuccessful.

     11. When the hearing was called on before me,  the  Appellant  and  her
         foster mother Ms Lovell confirmed that they  wished  to  renew  the
         application for an adjournment. In the course  of  doing  so,  they
         accepted that a Notice of the Hearing had been sent  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal by first class post to the parties, and to the Appellant's
         representative, on 19 January 2015. The Appellant  and  her  foster
         mother accepted that they had duly received a copy,  although  they
         could not now recall precisely when that was.

     12. I was told that they had decided that they could not afford to  pay
         privately for representation at the appeal hearing, and so they had
         sought to find professional representation for  the  Appellant  pro
         bono. They accepted  that  they  were  aware  that  an  adjournment
         application had been made by the Appellant's  representatives,  but
         they denied knowledge of any decision made upon that application.

     13. Contrary to the clear inference in  the  letter  dated  9  February
         2015, they agreed that Counsel had never accepted instructions  for
         the hearing, because she had never been in a  position  to  do  so.
         Counsel was never available to conduct a hearing  on  12  February,
         because when she was first contacted  in  relation  to  the  matter
         "last week", she had explained to them that she  had  a  pre-booked
         holiday, and thus could not accept their instructions. Attempts  to
         find another member of the Bar willing to act  on  the  Appellant's
         behalf without charge had come to nothing.

     14. The application was renewed therefore on  the  basis  that  it  was
         unfair and unrealistic to  expect  the  Appellant,  even  with  the
         assistance of her foster mother, to argue the appeal without  legal
         assistance. Thus, it was argued, the  appeal  should  be  adjourned
         until the only representative identified as being able and  willing
         to accept instructions on  a  pro  bono  basis,  was  available  to
         attend.

     15. I refused the renewed application. It was plain that  the  original
         application for an adjournment was advanced  on  a  false  premise;
         Counsel had never accepted instructions to appear on behalf of  the
         Appellant at the hearing. Thus the Appellant  had  not  been  left,
         unexpectedly and at the last moment, without representation at  the
         hearing.  The  Appellant  was  professionally  represented  at  the
         hearing before the First Tier Tribunal, and  her  applications  for
         permission  to  appeal  had  been  prepared  with  the  benefit  of
         professional assistance. She continued to  be  represented  by  MLP
         even now, although no member of that firm had attended the hearing.
         The Appellant was not taken by surprise by that; it was plain  that
         this was something that had been discussed  and  agreed  some  time
         earlier.

     16. The Appellant and her foster mother had known since  early  October
         2014 that she had secured  permission  to  appeal,  and  there  had
         therefore been ample time for both her, her foster mother, and MLP,
         to explore the Appellant's ability to secure  legal  assistance  at
         any forthcoming hearing, even if the date upon which  that  hearing
         would actually be held was unknown until the Notice of Hearing  was
         received in mid January 2015.

     17. Finally, and as I sought to explain to both the Appellant  and  her
         foster mother, it was quite common  for  claimants  to  be  without
         representation in the First Tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal.
         The issue raised by the grant of permission in this  appeal  was  a
         narrow one, and not one  that  could  only  be  advanced  with  the
         benefit of legal assistance. The Appellant had  the  assistance  of
         her foster mother, to make any points she wished  to  make,  and  I
         would assist where I could properly do  so.  The  current  economic
         reality,  in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  must  operate,  is  that
         adjournment in  such  circumstances  is  not  consistent  with  the
         overriding objective, or  the  public  interest  in  the  efficient
         timeous and fair disposal of such an appeal.

    The scope of the appeal

     18. The Appellant and her foster mother confirmed that  they  had  been
         advised, and understood, that there was no general right of  review
         of Judge Fisher's decision and that the scope of the appeal was set
         out by Judge King as follows;

             It was accepted that the applicant had a minor role in APARECO
             although that role was not defined. The quote from BK did  not
             reflect paragraphs 192, 193, and 197. In  the  light  of  such
             matters it is arguable the Judge  should  have  given  clearer
             reasons why there was no risk to the Appellant on return.

     19. The starting point for any analysis of Judge Fisher's Determination
         must be the adverse findings of fact he made  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant, which went to the core of her claim, and which it is not
         open to her to challenge on the limited ground of appeal for  which
         permission was granted.

     20. First. The Appellant is not who she has claimed  to  be  since  she
         arrived in the UK in December 2005. In consequence,  and  since  an
         ETD had been issued in relation to her brother's return  under  the
         original Congolese identity in relation to  which  a  passport  had
         been issued to him, and in which a visa application had  been  made
         by him, there was no evidential basis upon which the  Judge  could,
         or should, have assumed that an ETD would not be issued in relation
         to the Appellant under the original Congolese identity in  relation
         to which a passport had been issued to her, and  in  which  a  visa
         application had been made by her.

     21. Second. The Appellant did not tell the truth to the  Respondent  or
         the Tribunal about the presence of members of  her  family  in  the
         DRC. In consequence she would not be  returned  to  the  DRC  as  a
         single woman without family support and protection.

     22. Third. The Appellant's brother advanced an asylum claim, which  was
         rejected as untrue by the Tribunal even before  it  became  obvious
         that he had made that claim under a false identity. He was returned
         to the DRC in May  2009  using  an  ETD  issued  by  the  Congolese
         authorities to him in the name  upon  which  he  had  made  a  visa
         application in September 2005, and in which  a  passport  had  been
         issued to him in March 2005, and not the name under  which  he  had
         claimed asylum.

     23. The grant of permission does not permit the Appellant to  challenge
         those findings.

     24. Nor does the grant of permission permit the Appellant to argue that
         she faced any risk upon return to the DRC on account of any  family
         connection to anyone considered by the authorities in the DRC to be
         of interest to them. The Appellant had claimed that her brother was
         detained at the airport upon return to the DRC,  and  then  injured
         and ill treated in detention, and this claim was supported by  both
         her foster mother and Ms Catherine Ramos. The  Appellant's  brother
         was said to be one of the individuals referred to anonymously in Ms
         Ramos' "Unsafe Return I",  and  "Unsafe  Return  II"  reports.  The
         content and conclusions of those reports were  discussed,  and  the
         subject of serious criticism, in P (DRC) [2013] EWHC 3879,  and  in
         PBN (DR Congo) [2013] IEHC 435. Both of those  decisions  concluded
         in the light of the UKBA's Fact Finding Mission report of  November
         2012, and contrary to  Ms  Ramos'  opinion  evidence,  that  failed
         asylum seekers were not per se at risk of ill treatment upon return
         to DRC. The Judge noted that the Appellant's brother  had  in  June
         2009 been able both to  write  to,  and  to  conduct  a  number  of
         telephone conversations with Ms Ramos since his return to the  DRC.
         In my judgement, when the Determination is read as a whole,  it  is
         plain (despite the language used in paragraph 55)  that  the  Judge
         did not accept as true the assertion that the  Appellant's  brother
         had been detained at the airport upon return to the DRC. The  Judge
         approached the matter however on the basis that even if that  claim
         were true, he did not accept that the Appellant faced any  risk  of
         harm upon return to the DRC, in the event of being perceived in the
         DRC as her brother's sibling. No challenge is open to the Appellant
         to that finding.

     25. The grant of permission is limited to the Judge's approach  to  the
         Appellant's "sur  place"  claim  which  rested  in  turn  upon  the
         evidence that she  had  become  involved  with  the  activities  of
         APARECO, and had joined that organisation, and might  thereby  have
         acquired a profile  with  the  DRC  authorities  as  an  opposition
         activist. The Appellant made a number of individual claims in  this
         respect in the course of her evidence, which are  set  out  in  the
         Determination, as follows;

             She claimed to have attended a march organised by  APARECO  in
             2011, but she accepted that there was no record of her name as
             one who had done so, and that there were no  photographs  that
             recorded her as having done so.

             She claimed to have attended some APARECO activities in  2013,
             but  under  cross-examination  she  clarified  that  she   was
             referring to meetings she attended by telephone and Skype. She
             claimed that her role at this time was  an  advisor  to  young
             people,  nationally,  speaking  at  meetings,   and   building
             awareness of the  actions  of  the  regime  in  the  DRC.  The
             independent evidence of what that role had  been  in  practice
             was scant. She did not assert that there were any  photographs
             of her having done any of these things, or that she was  named
             as having done so, published upon the internet.

             APARECO has not had a branch  office  in  the  north  east  of
             England at any material time. Its  presence  in  the  area  in
             which the Appellant has lived since at least 2008 was  limited
             to one representative, who was not the Appellant.

             She accepted that the representations made on  her  behalf  to
             the Respondent in late 2013 made  no  mention  of  her  having
             attended any march or  demonstration,  or,  to  having  become
             involved in any of the  activities  of  APARECO.  She  had  no
             explanation for that - but asserted  that  she  had  told  her
             representatives of these  matters  at  the  time.  Her  foster
             mother claimed to have been  fully  aware  throughout  of  the
             Appellant's involvement in the activities of APARECO.

             She claimed to have formally joined APARECO as a  full  member
             only on 22 February 2014, using the name that she has  adopted
             by deed poll in the UK.

             She claimed to have given a speech at a meeting in London on 5
             June 2014, which had been written for her by Mr Likiyo.  Again
             she did not assert that there  were  any  photographs  of  her
             having done so, or that she was named as having done so,  upon
             the internet.

             What were produced in evidence were some photographs from 2014
             showing the Appellant holding a placard, and at some meetings.
             It was not suggested that these had been  published  upon  the
             internet.

     26. The Judge's findings were that the Appellant had not done  anything
         in the UK that would give rise to a reasonable likelihood that  the
         DRC authorities would perceive her as an "opposition activist". His
         finding was that what she claimed to have done, was not  sufficient
         to be reasonably likely to lead the DRC authorities to perceive her
         as an "activist", as opposed to someone  with  a  "lower  profile",
         even if they knew of it, and even if they could link those  actions
         to her.

     27. In any event, in my judgement, the Judge was perfectly entitled  to
         draw  the  distinction  between  the  two  categories  of   persons
         ("activist" as opposed to someone with a "lower  profile")  in  the
         context that he did. That context was his reference to the  way  in
         which those terms were used in the decision in P (DRC) [54].

     28. The evidence before the Tribunal about APARECO which the Judge  did
         accept, was that APARECO had no presence in the DRC,  no  activists
         in the DRC, and conducted no activities  in  the  DRC.  It  was  an
         entirely UK based  organisation  conducting  its  internal  affairs
         largely by telephone and Skype video calls. The Appellant would not
         therefore be able to do anything in support of that organisation in
         the event of her return to the DRC. There is no challenge to  these
         findings, and the Judge was perfectly entitled to make them on  the
         evidence that was before him, for the reasons that he gave.

     29. Part of the evidence relied upon  in  relation  to  APARECO  was  a
         report said to have been prepared by an organisation known as  AHRO
         - which the Judge declined to attach any real weight to.  Again  he
         was entitled to do so for the reasons that he gave.

     30. Although the Judge did not perhaps spell this out in the course  of
         the Determination in the way that he might have done, it  is  quite
         clear to me, that it is a necessary consequence of his findings  in
         relation to the Appellant's true identity, that the  identity  used
         when taking membership of APARECO or whilst undertaking any of  the
         sur place activities relied upon, is neither the identity by  which
         the Appellant is known to the DRC authorities,  nor,  the  identity
         under which she would be returned to the DRC. It was not  the  name
         under which either the original visa application, or, the  original
         asylum claim, was made.

     31. There is no obvious reason  therefore  why  the  identity  used  in
         taking membership of APARECO should be linked to her true  identity
         by the DRC authorities. Moreover, there was no reliable evidence to
         suggest that APARECO had been infiltrated, and that its  membership
         details were known to the DRC authorities, and the  Judge  made  no
         finding to that effect. Thus the evidence was that such  membership
         details were confidential to the organisation  and  the  individual
         members.

     32. As to the  Appellant's  account  of  her  own  involvement  in  the
         activities of APARECO, whether before or after she formally  became
         a member of that organisation; she did not assert  that  either  of
         the identities she has used in the  UK  could  be  found  upon  the
         internet associating her with that organisation.

     33. Accordingly there was nothing in the evidence to give rise  to  the
         inference that there was a reasonable likelihood that the  identity
         under which the Respondent would return her to  the  DRC  would  be
         linked by the DRC authorities either to APARECO itself, or  to  any
         activities undertaken by the Appellant in the UK upon which she now
         relies as founding a sur place claim.

     34. In those circumstances there was in my judgement no error of law in
         the Judge's finding that the Appellant was not reasonably likely to
         be perceived as an opposition activist by the DRC authorities  upon
         return. She had not used at any stage within the UK the identity in
         which she had been issued with a passport by the DRC, and thus  the
         identity under which she would be returned to the DRC. There was no
         basis in the evidence upon which the Judge could, or  should,  have
         inferred that she would upon return be perceived as the  individual
         who had undertaken the activities that she relied upon as  creating
         a risk of harm - even if he were to have accepted  her  account  of
         them in full.

    DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 3
    July 2014 contains no error of law in the dismissal of the  Appellant's
    appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and remade, and  it
    is accordingly confirmed.






    Signed



    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

    Dated 13 February 2015







    Direction regarding anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is
         granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
         proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
         direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
         Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
         being brought for contempt of court.






    Signed





    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

    Dated 13 February 2015


