
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/02120/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On  7 August 2015                    |On 3 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     FN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kathryn Cronin, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga and
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms Emma Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not currently subject to an anonymity order by the First-
    tier Tribunal pursuant to rule 13 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698). However,
    an anonymity order was previously made by the Upper Tribunal on 7 March
    2014 and that order is still in force.

 2. Therefore, pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698) I renew the order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public to identify the appellant. Breach of this order can be  punished
    as a contempt of court.

 3. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Grant) dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 22 February 2013 to refuse the appellant's  claim  for  asylum
    made on 13 July 2012 and to remove the appellant from the UK.

Introduction

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia born on 29 September 1992. She  is
    the sole child of a single mother (AF), does not know  her  father  and
    was brought to the UK by her mother in August/September 2004.  She  was
    then aged 11. Her mother returned  to  Gambia  after  a  week  and  the
    appellant was left with MN, a British/Gambian  national  and  was  told
    that her mother had arranged for her to work for MN.  She  did  so  for
    seven years, undertaking domestic duties and child-  care  for  the  MN
    children, one of whom was severely disabled.  She typically  worked  12
    hours a day and was not paid. She  was  given  a  false  Gambian  birth
    certificate to  pass  her  off  as  MN's  daughter  and  was  routinely
    assaulted and abused.

 5. The appellant was encountered by UKBA on 16 August 2011 when attempting
    to apply for support allowance at a  jobcentre.  On  31  May  2012  the
    appellant claimed that she had been  a  victim  of  trafficking  and  a
    national mechanism referral was made. On 11 June  2012  the  respondent
    (as a competent authority) made a positive reasonable grounds  decision
    that the appellant was a victim of trafficking. The  appellant  claimed
    asylum on 13 July 2012 and then on  19  February  2013  the  respondent
    concluded that she was not a victim of  trafficking  and  rejected  her
    asylum claim.

 6. On 4 November 2013, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Courtney  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on grounds of asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    protection under the  European  Convention.  However,  the  appeal  was
    allowed to the extent that removal would breach the appellant's  rights
    under Article 4 of the European Convention to the extent  that  removal
    would engage the respondent's duties under Article 14 of the Convention
    on action against trafficking in human beings. The judge  directed  the
    respondent to consider whether a further  period  of  leave  should  be
    granted.

 7. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal and her appeal  was  heard
    on 10 February 2014 before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington.  The
    Upper Tribunal found that the First-tier judge made errors of  law  and
    remitted the appeal to the  First-tier  for  a  de  novo  hearing.  The
    following finding of the First-tier judge was preserved;

         "65. Having given careful consideration to  all  of  the  available
         evidence both written and oral, I am satisfied that the core of the
         appellant's account is true and that  she  has  been  a  victim  of
         trafficking at the hands of MN".



The Appeal

 8. The appellant then attended an oral  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  on  20
    January 2015. She represented by Ms Cronin. The  hearing  proceeded  by
    way of submissions only.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant was  never  trafficked
    from Gambia as alleged or at all. Her date  of  birth  was  27  October
    1990. It was not credible that she did not know who her mother was  and
    wrongly thought that MN was her mother. The judge  rejected  her  claim
    that she was a confused younger child. Her mother brought her to the UK
    to give her a better life and has always acted in her  best  interests.
    She was not chained in the house and kept in domestic servitude all  of
    the time. She went to school. She was not  at  risk  of  re-trafficking
    upon return to Gambia. She comes from a  family  who  can  provide  for
    themselves and has the means to  establish  herself  successfully  upon
    return. No period of respite was required. The preserved  finding  that
    MN trafficked her was limited solely to what has happened  in  the  UK.
    The judge rejected the expert evidence that the appellant was  at  risk
    of re-trafficking on return. The appellant's mother will  be  overjoyed
    to see her again.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law.  The  judge  had
    contravened the explicit preserved credibility finding in finding  that
    the appellant had given false evidence regarding her  confusion  as  to
    her family identity. The judge failed to consider the concrete evidence
    that the mother had arranged for the appellant  to  be  issued  with  a
    false  birth  certificate  showing  MN  as  her   mother.   The   judge
    demonstrated a stereotyped view of trafficking (sex trafficking is  the
    usual form of trafficking, it is unusual for family members  to  escort
    victims to the  UK,  attendance  at  school  means  that  she  was  not
    trafficked by her mother and the  appellant  was  not  chained  in  the
    house). The judge's benign assessment of the mother's actions is belied
    by the evidence and findings. The mother did not say goodbye or mention
    the requirement to undertake domestic work and has made  no  effort  to
    contact the appellant. The judge failed  to  consider  the  possibility
    that the funds for the UK visits had  come  from  MN  rather  than  the
    mother's affluent circumstances.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First- tier Tribunal Judge  Pirotta
    on 14 April 2015. No evidence was called at the remitted  hearing.  The
    respondent had not challenged the schedule  of  agreed  and  unresolved
    facts ("the schedule") submitted by counsel for  the  appellant  before
    the hearing. There would  have  to  be  substance  in  new  factors  to
    displace preserved findings. It was not clear how the judge had reached
    conclusions diametrically opposed to  the  preserved  findings  on  the
    evidence considered given that there was no  fresh  live  evidence  but
    there were substantial expert reports and objective country evidence in
    the appellant's favour, some of which had not been considered before.

12. In a Rule 24 response dated 22 April  2015,  the  respondent  submitted
    that the preserved finding was that the appellant had  been  trafficked
    by MN and having made a finding that the appellant was  not  trafficked
    by  her  mother  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  consider  that  the
    circumstances in which she had been trafficked do not place her at risk
    of re-trafficking, Explanation is given for the findings regarding  the
    intention of the mother when she brought the appellant to the UK.

13. The appellant  replied  to  the  Rule  24  response  on  11  May  2015,
    submitting that the respondent  had  failed  to  give  any  reasons  or
    authority for the proposition that the judge was entitled to  make  her
    finding that the appellant was not trafficked by her  mother  and  thus
    not at risk of re-trafficking. Credibility was  not  in  issue  in  the
    hearing. The schedule was  not  disputed  by  the  respondent  and  the
    schedule and the determination of the Upper Tribunal  made  clear  that
    the preserved  findings  were  that  the  appellant  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking at the hands of her mother.

14. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

15. Ms Cronin submitted that the judge went behind the positive credibility
    finding when there was no new evidence before her. All core facts  were
    accepted. The positive case  for  the  mother  is  unsustainable.   The
    mother told untruths to the entry clearance officer in  2003-2004.  The
    birth certificate was not given sufficient weight; it  shows  that  the
    premise of the mother's application to bring the appellant  to  the  UK
    was false. It was perverse to accept the mother's evidence as credible;
    the respondent's bundle clearly shows that she lied. The appellant  has
    gone through school on the basis of  her  1992  birth  certificate  and
    there was no challenge on age grounds. The appellant did not  know  who
    her mother was because she was confused about the behaviour of her  own
    mother. The entry clearance officer in 2005  found  the  mother  to  be
    untruthful  and  deliberately  lied  about  the  whereabouts   of   the
    appellant. The mother was not a successful  businesswoman  because  she
    could not afford to send the appellant to school.  The  mother  clearly
    trafficked the appellant to  the  UK.  Yet  the  judge  says  that  the
    appellant was never trafficked from Gambia as alleged or at all.

16. Ms Cronin went on to make detailed submissions about risk on return  on
    the  basis  that  the  appellant  is  a  sitting  target  for   further
    exploitation in Gambia and the judge erred in ;law by dealing with  the
    expert evidence  in  one  paragraph.  No  consideration  was  given  to
    relevant country guidance on FGM. There  was  no  proper  reasoning  in
    relation to particular social group. The appellant  would  now  qualify
    for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(v) as well as 276ADE(vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules. There is no evidence that  the  mother  is  even
    currently in Gambia. The appeal should  be  allowed  and  the  decision
    remade without a further hearing.

17. Ms Savage submitted that the preserved findings were only a small  part
    of the facts. The judge was fully aware of the preserved  findings  and
    the role of  the  appellant's  mother  in  the  trafficking  was  fully
    evaluated by the judge. The findings  are  not  inconsistent  with  the
    preserved findings, the judge detailed the submissions and  dealt  with
    them appropriately. It was then open to the judge to consider  risk  in
    light of the findings of fact and the judge did so at paragraphs 79-93.
    If there is a material error of law then  there  are  still  unresolved
    areas of fact and there should be a rehearing.

18. Ms Cronin responded by submitting that the  judge  re-interpreted  core
    facts and developed a new background for the mother. She is someone who
    is a proven liar. Simply  quoting  evidence  does  not  mean  that  the
    evidence has been  properly  considered  and  entirely  dismissing  the
    expert evidence was not appropriate.

19. I find that core issue in  this  appeal  is  straightforward.  The  key
    preserved finding of fact is that the appellant was trafficked  by  MN.
    She was clearly trafficked from Gambia;  the  trafficking  cannot  have
    begun and ended in the UK. The judge had no basis for  the  finding  at
    paragraph 88 of the decision that the appellant was  "never  trafficked
    from Gambia or at all". The preserved finding is that the appellant was
    trafficked. The judge did not hear any new  evidence  that  might  have
    justified a departure from the preserved finding and Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00782 principles apply. The finding that the appellant was  never
    trafficked from Gambia or at all is a material error of law.

20. I also find that it was not open to the  judge  to  make  a  series  of
    adverse credibility findings in relation to the appellant and  positive
    findings in relation to the mother. Those findings are  not  consistent
    with the preserved finding that the core of the appellant's account  is
    true. It is evident that MN  did  not  act  alone  in  trafficking  the
    appellant from Gambia to the UK.  On  the  basis  of  the  unchallenged
    agreed facts set out in the schedule, the only possible  conclusion  is
    that the appellant's mother facilitated her trafficking to  the  UK.  I
    also find that the appellant's date of birth is part of the core of her
    account.

21. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

22. Judge Rimington ordered a de novo hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with preserved findings of fact. Bearing in mind paragraph 7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice  Statements  I  consider  that  remains  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

23. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by  a  judge  other  than  the  previous  First-tier
    judges. I once again preserve the  finding  made  by  First-Tier  Judge
    Courtney at paragraph 65 of her decision. That means that the appellant
    is a victim of trafficking and that the core of her account is true. To
    avoid any  further  misunderstanding,  I  summarise  the  core  of  the
    appellant's account as follows;

          1. The appellant was born on 27 September 1992 and is  a  citizen
             of Gambia. She was the only child of a single mother, AF,  and
             the only other known relative is a maternal aunt.

          2. AF arranged the appellant's visitor visa, brought her  to  the
             UK and left after one week. The appellant has had  no  contact
             with AF or her family since 2004.

          3. AF did not explain that the appellant was to stay in  the  UK,
             did not say goodbye to her and made no attempt to contact  her
             notwithstanding   that   she   appeared   to   know   MN,    a
             British/Gambian national.

          4. The appellant was trafficked by MN from Gambia to the  UK  and
             the trafficking was facilitated by AF  who  provided  a  false
             birth certificate to MN. The purpose of  the  trafficking  was
             unpaid domestic servitude.

          5. AF applied for entry clearance to the UK on  26  January  2005
             and 13 June 2005 but was refused entry. In interview  in  June
             2005 AF falsely stated that she had taken the appellant to the
             Principal Hospital in Senegal following an accident  in  March
             2005. In fact, the appellant was in the UK.

          6. On 14 July  2005  an  entry  clearance  officer  wrote  to  AF
             requesting that she bring the appellant with her  passport  to
             the British High Commission before 21 July 2005. There  is  no
             response or follow up investigation  shown  in  the  disclosed
             records.

          7. The appellant was almost 12 when  she  entered  the  UK  as  a
             visitor on  17  August  2004.  She  was  passed  off  as  MN's
             daughter. MN exploited, abused and mistreated the appellant as
             a child domestic servant. The domestic duties  included  child
             care of a baby (J, born in 2006), a young boy, P, born in 1998
             and intensive personal care of MN's disabled daughter, S, born
             in 1992.

          8. MN threw the appellant out of the home when in August 2011 she
             protested about the work that she was required  to  undertake.
             MN denounced the appellant as an overstayer when questioned by
             police.

          9. The appellant had valid leave only until 9 February  2005  but
             she was unaware that her immigration status was  irregular  as
             she attended school and college with her peers.

         10. The appellant did not wish for MN to be prosecuted because  of
             MN's standing in the Gambian community, the  likely  community
             response to such action and  because  of  her  attachment  and
             sense of responsibility to S and J.


Signed   [pic]    Date 31 August 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
