
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/02634/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On 25th February 2016                                               On  31st
March 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                                  Ms [E D]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Stuart-King (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Ms Willocks-Briscoe (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Henderson dated the 10th September 2015,  in  which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Albania who was born on  the  30th  May
      1992. It is the Appellant's case that she married a  Mr  [ED]  without
      her family's consent and lived with him in Tirana, but had no  further
      contact with her family after the marriage. Her husband  worked  as  a
      waiter, but also carried out building work in  Greece  to  earn  extra
      money. She says that in August 2012 when her husband was working  away
      in Greece she began a clandestine relationship with Mr  [ET],  and  on
      the 13th January 2013, [ET] invited the Appellant to go to a party  at
      a house in Durres city. When she arrived at the  house,  she  entered,
      and it is her case that she was prevented from leaving and  forced  to
      have sex with men who were brought to the house on a daily basis, such
      that she was forced into prostitution.


   3. She says on the 24th March 2013, she was able to open the door to  her
      room to go to the toilet, and found that the  house  key  was  in  the
      front door and was not locked such that she was able  to  escape  from
      the house. She says that she managed to catch a bus to Tirana and went
      to her husband's family home and that her husband was there  and  that
      she told her husband and his family that she had  been  kidnapped  and
      she was afraid that they would not help  her  if  she  told  them  the
      truth. She says that her husband  suggested  they  leave  for  Albania
      together and they travelled to Italy, then through France to  the  UK.
      She said that she then discovered that she was pregnant and  that  she
      conceived during the time she had been detained in the house in Durres
      and that when she told her husband he was angry, as he  realised  that
      the child could not  be  his  and  he  wanted  her  to  terminate  the
      pregnancy, but when she refused he left  her  on  the  21st  September
      2013.


   4. The  Appellant's  original  claim  for  asylum  was  rejected  by  the
      Respondent in a Refusal  Letter  dated  the  20th  January  2015.  The
      Appellant appealed against that decision, and that appeal was heard by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson  on  the  2nd  September  2015  at
      Taylor House, and he rejected the Appellant's appeal for  the  reasons
      set out in his decision which was promulgated on  the  22nd  September
      2015. The Appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision  to  the
      Upper Tribunal, and  although  permission  to  appeal  was  originally
      refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on the  27th  October  2015
      permission to appeal has been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
      on the 13th December 2015 who found that "It is properly arguable that
      the findings may not be properly reasoned."



   5. I have fully taken account of the contents of the  Grounds  of  Appeal
      and also the Respondent's Rule 24 reply. These are a matter of  record
      and  are  therefore  not  repeated  in  full  here,  but   the   legal
      representatives elaborated upon  the  reasons  set  out  within  these
      documents at the oral appeal hearing and I have fully taken account of
      those submissions also.



   6. In her submissions to the Tribunal  Ms  Stuart-King  argued  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge had  not  given  adequate  reasons  and  the
      relevant evidence had not been taken into account and that he may have
      departed from the Country Guidance cases  and  had  had  made  unclear
      findings in respect thereof. She argued that at  [41]  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had said  that  "the  Appellant  did  not  explain  the
      inconsistencies set out in the home office's decision (as  above)  and
      did not give any further evidence to suggest  that  the  decision  was
      incorrect". She argued that it was unclear what the Judge had meant by
      this and that the Appellant had produced a witness  statement  between
      pages 96 and 100 of the Appellant's Bundle dated the 7th August  2015,
      in which she gave explanations as to the points of credibility  raised
      within the Refusal Notice.



   7. She argued that it was unclear from the Judge's reasoning within  [41]
      which paragraphs of the refusal letter remained unanswered and that an
      explanation for the inconsistencies had been given between  paragraphs
      10 and 14 of her statement. She argued that if  the  Judge  considered
      that these explanations were insufficient, then he was under a duty to
      say so and give reasons therefore. She argued that the Judge does  not
      appear to have taken  account  of  the  contents  of  the  Appellant's
      witness statement.


   8. Ms Stuart-King further argued that the Judge's finding at  [43],  that
      the Appellant had not explained why  her  husband  had  not  tried  to
      contact her for the 2 months when she was in the house in Durres, that
      this was not a point that was ever put to the Appellant at the  appeal
      hearing and that she should have been given the  opportunity  to  give
      evidence as to whether or not her husband had  tried  to  contact  and
      that her own evidence was that her phone had been taken away from  her
      by her kidnappers. She argued there was no evidence that  he  had  not
      tried to contact her and that this point was  not  dealt  with  either
      within the original refusal letter or at the appeal.



   9. Ms Stuart-King further argued that the Judge at [44] stated that  "the
      Appellant says that when she managed to run away she went to  her  in-
      laws home and her husband happened to be there. She told them that she
      had been kidnapped and her husband then decided that they would  leave
      Albania together" and then found that this account lacked credibility,
      was inadequately reasoned. She said that the Judge had not  given  any
      reasons as to why it was said that account lacked credibility and that
      the Judge's reasoning within that paragraph that "the  Appellant  also
      said that  she  told  her  husband  that  she  had  been  forced  into
      prostitution during her kidnapping, but that he felt sorry for her and
      had not abandoned her. This demonstrates that she had not left Albania
      because she feared persecution, but because she had been encouraged to
      do so by her husband and that she left Albania under his  protection."
      was a non-sequitur, and that even if she left  with  her  husband  and
      under his protection,  that  did  not  mean  that  she  did  not  fear
      persecution. She further argued that any adverse  credibility  finding
      in this regard further failed to reflect the fact that  the  Appellant
      was now separated from her husband and would be returning  to  Albania
      as a single woman with a child, rather than with her husband.


  10. Ms Stuart-King further argued that the Judge's finding  at  [47]  that
      "It is possible that although she entered into the  relationship  with
      [ET] voluntarily, that she was forced to have sex with his friends and
      associates and this is why she ran away from the house in Durres (even
      if she was not abducted as such).", is possibly inconsistent with  the
      Judge's previous findings.



  11. Ms Stuart-King further argued that between [48 and 52] of the judgment
      the Judge had failed to  properly  make  findings  in  respect  as  to
      whether or not the Appellant met the criteria in the case of AM and BM
      (Trafficked Women) Albania CG [2010]  UKUT  80  (IAC)  and  the  Judge
      stated why his findings in respect of the 6 criteria  set  out  within
      that case meant that either the Appellant did or did not  fall  within
      one of the categories of people at risk, and whether or not she  would
      be able to integrate back into society in  Albania,  and  whether  she
      will be able to access the arrangements  of  facilities  available  to
      trafficked women in Albania. She argued that if  the  Judge's  finding
      was that she had not been trafficked, then he had not  properly  dealt
      with her ability to integrate as a single woman with a child born  out
      of wedlock.



  12. She further argued that the Judge had failed to take  account  of  the
      evidence of Dr Cornelius Katona, in the form of his psychiatric report
      dated the 25th June 2015, and his  findings  that  the  Appellant  was
      suffering from PTSD, in assessing her evidence.



  13. Ms Willocks-Briscoe on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  relied  upon  the
      Secretary of State's Rule 24 Reply in which it  was  argued  that  the
      Judge had directed himself appropriately and that the Judge had  found
      the Appellant was not credible in respect of her asylum claim and  had
      given adequate reasons for those findings at paragraphs [41 to 46]. It
      was argued that the findings were neither perverse nor irrational.



  14. Ms Willocks-Briscoe further elaborated and argued that in  respect  of
      [41] that in her statement the Appellant had  simply  reiterated  what
      she had said in interview and had not changed her case in that regard,
      even if she had not been provided with an interpreter. She argued that
      what is stated within the witness statement simply mirrored  what  was
      said within the interview. She further argued that the  Appellant  had
      numerous opportunities  to  present  evidence  regarding  her  husband
      trying to contact her, but had  not  taken  those  opportunities.  She
      agreed that that issue had not been raised within the  Refusal  Notice
      and that she was not aware of any evidence of it  having  been  raised
      within  the  appeal,  but  argued  that  the  Judge  was   making   an
      observation, rather than a finding and  that  it  was  an  observation
      only, rather than a credibility finding against her.



  15. Ms Willocks-Briscoe further argued that in respect of [44] given  that
      the finding was that the Appellant had gone to her  in-laws  home  and
      that her husband  was  there,  she  could  not  argue  that  that  was
      implausible, but argued that the Judge's finding in  that  regard  was
      not material. She argued that the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge at [44] had to be read in conjunction with the findings at  [45]
      and should not simply be read in isolation. She  further  argued  that
      the Judge had not accepted the Appellant's account that she  had  been
      trafficked and/or forced into prostitution, and had simply set out his
      consideration of the AM and BM case, as an alternative basis  for  his
      findings.



  16. I reserve my decision on error of law and the question of materiality.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  17.  First-tier Tribunal Judges  when  conducting  a  First-tier  Tribunal
      appeal hearing against the decision of the Secretary of State, are not
      simply reviewing the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  they  are
      conducting a rehearing. It is therefore vital that First-tier Tribunal
      Judges' do give adequate and sufficient reasons  for  their  findings,
      and that their findings are sufficient and  clear  to  mean  that  the
      losing party, in particular, knows why they have lost.


  18. In dealing with the inconsistencies which were said to been  found  by
      the Home Office in the reasons for refusal letter at [20],  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Henderson stated:



      "The Respondent relied upon the Home Office's conclusive findings that
      the Appellant was not the victim of trafficking and in  particular  on
      the inconsistencies mentioned in  those  findings.  These  essentially
      relate to the Appellant's account of her detention  in  the  house  in
      Durres and her description of her escape from that house. Further  the
      Appellant went to her husband's family home, yet she  said  that  [ET]
      knew where her husband and family lived and had threatened  them.  The
      Appellant had been safe there for at  least  a  month  before  leaving
      Albania. Also the Appellant had returned to Durres  (where  the  house
      was situated) to leave  for  Italy.  This  was  regarded  as  unlikely
      bearing in mind her statement about [ET] and his ability to  find  her
      and harm her and her family".


  19. First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson  went  on  at  the  start  of  his
      conclusions to find at [41] "on the basis of the  evidence  before  me
      and bearing in mind the Home Office Conclusive Grounds Decision on the
      12th June  2014  I  find  that  the  Appellant  is  not  a  victim  of
      trafficking. The Appellant did not explain the inconsistency  set  out
      in the Home Office's decision (as above) and did not give any  further
      evidence to suggest that the decision was incorrect".


  20. Although bearing in mind as I do that the decision has to be read as a
      whole, I find that the Judge's reasoning in  respect  of  the  alleged
      inconsistencies is inadequate. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  not
      set out what  actual  inconsistencies  he  finds  in  the  Appellant's
      account, and simply relies upon a  very  scant  description  of  those
      inconsistencies which he set out at [20]. Further, although he  states
      that he has taken account of the Appellant's witness  statement  dated
      the 7th August 2015 at [25], there is  no  reference  to  the  further
      explanation that the Appellant gave at paragraph 10 of  her  statement
      dated the 7th August 2015, as to why she disagreed with  the  decision
      of the Secretary of State and the Conclusive Grounds Decision. Nor  is
      there reference to her explanation as to how from the 13th January she
      was locked in a room and would be accompanied to the toilet by a  man,
      but that after one month they became more relaxed as  she  was  seeing
      clients and earning money and that they would then let her go  to  the
      toilet herself, but there was still someone outside  the  room,  apart
      from the day when she escaped and she did not know why  there  was  no
      one there that day and that the day she escaped was the only time that
      she was left unguarded, but that there were always men in  the  house.
      It is unclear from the Judge's findings that this further  explanation
      has in fact been taken into account by him in reaching  his  decision.
      Whether or not he accepted  that  account,  the  Appellant  had  given
      further evidence in an attempt to suggest that the  original  decision
      was incorrect, but it is unclear from the Judgement as to  whether  or
      not  the  Judge  has  in  fact  actually   considered   that   further
      explanation, and he has not given clear reasons within [41] as to  why
      that further explanation was rejected. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      simply stating the Appellant had not explained the inconsistencies set
      out in the Home Office's decision and had not given  further  evidence
      to suggest that decision was incorrect failed to take account  of  the
      fact that the judge was not considering what not conducting  a  review
      of the reasons for refusal letter, but was conducting a rehearing, and
      was  duty-bound  to  set  out   his   own   findings   regarding   any
      inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence and the  reasons  for  his
      findings in that regard. His failed to do so.


  21. Further, the Judge's finding at [44] that  "the  Appellant  says  that
      when she managed to run away she went to  her  in-laws  home  and  her
      husband happened to be there. She told them she had been kidnapped and
      her husband then decided that they would leave for  Albania  together.
      Again this account lacks  credibility",  I  find  to  be  inadequately
      reasoned. There is no reason, as was properly conceded by Ms Willocks-
      Briscoe, as to why the  Appellant's  husband  should  not  be  at  his
      parents' home, and the Judge has not explained why  if  the  Appellant
      then told her husband that she had been kidnapped, that they would not
      decide to leave Albania together. The  simple  description  that  this
      account lacks credibility, does not tell the Appellant why her account
      was not accepted in this regard.



  22. Further, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding that  "the  Appellant
      also said that she told her husband that  she  had  been  forced  into
      prostitution during her kidnapping, but that he felt sorry for her and
      had not abandoned her. This demonstrates that she had not left Albania
      because she feared persecution, but because she had been encouraged to
      do so by her husband and that she left Albania under  his  protection"
      at [44], is as was argued by Ms Stuart-King, I find is a non sequitur,
      in that even if she was encouraged to leave by her  husband  and  left
      with him "under his protection", that does not necessarily  mean  that
      she had not left because she feared persecution.  Although  the  Judge
      goes on to at [45] to consider the Appellant's evidence that  she  was
      afraid that [ET] would find her  if  she  returned  to  Albania,  this
      paragraph does not, as was sought to  be  contended  by  Ms  Willocks-
      Briscoe, justify the lack of reasoning at [44] for  the  Judge's  find
      that she had not left Albania  because  she  feared  persecution.  The
      Judge has not sought to link the reasoning at [45] as to  his  finding
      that she had not left Albania because of persecution,  but  is  simply
      dealing at [45], with her risk upon return.


  23. Further, I find that the Judge's finding at [47] that "It is possible,
      although she entered into a relationship with [ET]  voluntarily,  that
      she was forced to have sex with his friends and associates and this is
      why she ran away from the  house  in  Durres  (even  if  she  was  not
      abducted as such)" is inconsistent with the Judge's previous  findings
      that she had not been "kidnapped" and detained against  her  will  and
      that she was not a victim of trafficking. Even  if  she  went  to  the
      house voluntarily, if she is then detained there and  forced  to  have
      sex with [ET]'s friends and associates, such that she had to run  away
      from the house in Durres, she would still be a victim of  trafficking.
      The Judge has not properly explained his reasons or  his  findings  in
      this regard. This was not, as was argued  by  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  on
      behalf of the Respondent, simply a  finding  in  the  alternative,  as
      nowhere does the Judge state that if  he  is  wrong  in  the  original
      findings, he would have found as an alternative  basis  that  "it  was
      possible that she had  been  forced  to  have  sex  with  friends  and
      associates".



  24. Nor do I consider that the Judge was simply commenting or observing at
      [43] that the Appellant had not explained  why  her  husband  had  not
      tried to contact her for two months when she was detained in the house
      in Durres. These were  part  of  the  Judge's  findings  in  terms  of
      credibility. It was not simply an observation on  his  part,  but  was
      part of his conclusions. Given that this was  not  raised  within  the
      Refusal Notice and on the evidence before me and was not raised at the
      appeal hearing with the Appellant, I find  that  it  was  procedurally
      unfair for the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  have  sought  to  make
      adverse credibility findings against the  Appellant  in  this  regard,
      without giving her the opportunity to explain this point further.



  25. I further find that in respect of the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
      sufficiency of protection upon  return  between  [47]  and  [53]  that
      although the First-tier Tribunal Judge did make findings in respect of
      the factors (a) to (f) of the criteria set out within AM  and  BM,  in
      terms of the Appellant's family being of a  modest  economic  standing
      and that she and her family had a basic education and  the  fact  that
      she was suffering from PTSD, but was being treated by  medication  and
      that she was not suicidal, and that she had a young daughter  who  may
      not be technically illegitimate but who had not been accepted  by  the
      Appellant's  husband,  and  that  as  she  is  married  there  is  not
      necessarily the stigma of illegitimacy  attached  to  the  child,  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge has not explained in light of these factors,
      why he  considers  that  the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to  access
      sufficient protection from the authorities upon her return to Albania.
      The reasoning as to what his findings mean in terms of her ability  to
      access sufficient protection has not been adequately explained.


  26. I therefore do find that the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Henderson does contain material errors of law, and  given  that  these
      material errors of law do go to the questions of both credibility  and
      risk upon return, these errors are material, such that the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson is set aside and the matter is  to
      be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before  any
      Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson.


Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Henderson  containing  material
errors of law, the same is set aside;
The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing, to  be
heard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Henderson.

Signed                                                                 Dated
26th February 2016

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
