
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15th January 2015                 |On 12th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR A M Q
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents:   Mr D Lemer (instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State with regard to a  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Andonian) dated 2nd June 2014 by which he  allowed  the
    Respondent's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    him asylum and to return him to Pakistan.

 2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted by
    an Upper Tribunal Judge on 26th August 2014.  She thought  it  arguable
    that the Judge  had  erred  because  he  failed  to  consider  internal
    relocation and failed to make findings on challenges by  the  Secretary
    of State in the Letter of Refusal.

 3. I agree that the Judge made material errors of law  for  the  following
    reasons.

 4. The Appellant claimed that he was a poet and broadcaster  with  a  high
    profile, against whom Fatwas had been issued and who had been abducted.
     He publicly criticised the regime  and  was  at  risk  from  religious
    extremists including the Taliban.

 5. The Secretary of State issued  a  23  page,  very  detailed  Letter  of
    Refusal in  which  she  challenged  the  Appellant's  credibility.   In
    particular at paragraphs 71-76 the Secretary of State gave her  reasons
    for rejecting the claim that he had been kidnapped by the Taliban.   At
    paragraphs 77-79 she gave her reasons for rejecting the claim about the
    issue of Fatwas and at paragraphs 108 - 119 made her submissions as  to
    internal relocation.

 6. The Judge in a 6 page determination deals wholly inadequately with  the
    Secretary of State's case.   He  accepts  the  Appellant's  credibility
    without dealing with any of the issues raised by the Secretary of State
    as  referred  to  above  and  fails  entirely  to  deal  with  internal
    relocation. The Judge cannot be said to have applied  anxious  scrutiny
    to this case.  It  is  incumbent  upon  a  Judge  to  engage  with  the
    Secretary of State's case as set out in the Letter of Refusal.

 7. So inadequate are the findings in the determination,  it  must  be  set
    aside  in  its  entirety.   Both  representatives   agreed   that   the
    appropriate way forward is  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing on all matters.

 8. The appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.



Signed   Date 16th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
