

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Numbers:
AA/02937/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10 May 2017                        | On 16 June 2017                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between


                                     mJ
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Z Jaferjee of Counsel instructed by Royal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal shall  continue.  No
report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant.

1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy who had dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    based on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.    The basis of the Appellant's claim was noted by the Judge  to  be  one
    whereby the Appellant feared a  return  to  Pakistan  relating  to  her
    having had an affair and being divorced. The Appellant had  claimed  to
    be at risk  from  her  father,  her  parents-in-law  and  society.  The
    Appellant's case was that she had been forcibly married  to  a  British
    national. The union led to the birth of a British citizen.

3.    The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  had  contended  that  the
    Judge should have taken the broader  definition  of  domestic  violence
    into account, which includes, controlling conduct. The  Respondent  had
    failed to comply with directions in  respect  of  a  passport.  It  was
    contended that the Judge had failed  to  consider  what  the  Appellant
    could or should do if removed to secure her child's passport given that
    the attempts in  the  UK  had  been  unsuccessful.  In  addition,  what
    consequences the Appellant might suffer if she sought redress from  her
    husband's family and whether the ongoing controlling behaviour  without
    redress  was  causing  the   Appellant   serious   and   emotional   or
    psychological harm.

4.    In his submissions before me, Mr Jaferjee  informed  me  that  he  had
    discussed the matter with Mr McVeety and  that  it  was  conceded  that
    there was an error of law in respect of Article 8. The only  issue  was
    whether the matter ought to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  or
    retained and decided with the current findings at the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Mr Jaferjee said that the situation of the child  was  central  to  the
    Article 8 claim but also to the refugee claim.

5.    Mr McVeety said that he was happy to accept that there  was  an  error
    of law in respect of the British child and its effects on the Article 8
    aspect of the claim. He said that the difficulty was how to dispose  of
    the matter noting that the Judge had found against the Appellant  on  a
    raft of issues. It was submitted that the Judge had given good  reasons
    for doing so and the findings could stand. Not all of the findings were
    infected. Mr McVeety also said that he would  contact  the  nationality
    team at the Home Office to assist in due course.

6.    I heard from Mr Jaferjee in reply and had reserved my decision.

7.    In my judgment, the Judge materially erred in law in failing  to  deal
    with a central aspect of the case, as noted by the grant of  permission
    by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce.  The  concession  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent has been properly  made.  As  was  noted  in  the  grant  of
    permission, the Appellant's primary fear was being stranded in Pakistan
    whilst her ex-husband might bring their British  child  to  the  United
    Kingdom, thus denying her any future contact.

8.    It is quite clear that the findings and  matters  are  so  intertwined
    that it is not possible to decipher which can really only  be  said  to
    relate to the Article 8 aspect  and  which  to  the  Protection  claim.
    Attempts to do so  require  undertaking  mental  gymnastics  of  almost
    impossible  levels.  Therefore,   despite   Mr   McVeety's   persuasive
    submissions, I conclude that he is right to concede  that  there  is  a
    material error of law but that the whole decision has to be set  aside.
    There will be rehearing on all  issues.  None  of  the  findings  shall
    stand.  The appropriate venue for that is at the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal.
The decision is set aside.

An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date: 11 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

















