
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02834/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 4th February 2016                     |             On 29th February 2016  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON



                                   Between

                                    A R a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Hooper, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose date of birth is  given
    as 1st January 1997.  He was discovered concealed in  a  lorry  on  his
    arrival in the UK on 27th October 2010 on  which  day  he  applied  for
    asylum.  That application was refused on 22nd  December  2010,  but  on
    that date the Appellant was granted discretionary leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of his age until 22nd December 2013.  On  15th  January  2014
    the Appellant applied for a variation of that leave to remain on  human
    rights grounds.  That application was refused on 2nd February 2015  for
    the reasons given in the Respondent's letter of that date.

 2. The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Rowlands (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 22nd  June  2015.
    He decided to dismiss the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection,
    and human rights grounds for the reasons given in  his  Decision  dated
    23rd July 2015.  The Appellant sought leave to  appeal  that  decision,
    and on 16th October 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  I note  that  leave  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  only  on  the  ground
    that the Judge had failed to consider whether the Appellant would be at
    risk on return under the provisions of Article 15(c) of the  Directive.



 4. When I heard this appeal the Appellant was 19 years of age.  The  Judge
    accepted that the Appellant was an Afghan from the Hisarak District  of
    Jalalabad Province.  The Appellant's mother,  two  brothers,  and  four
    younger sisters still live  there.   Otherwise,  the  Judge  found  the
    Appellant's evidence to be  lacking  in  credibility  and  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant was at risk on return from the Taliban  as
    a consequence of his  father's  earlier  activities.    The  Judge  was
    satisfied that it was safe for the Appellant to return to Jalalabad and
    also as an alternative to Kabul.

 5. At the hearing before me, Miss Hooper argued that the Judge  had  erred
    in law in coming to this conclusion.  She argued that the  findings  of
    fact made by the Judge at paragraphs 43 and 44 of the Decision were not
    based on the objective evidence.  There was evidence before  the  Judge
    that it was not safe for the Appellant to return to his home area.   It
    was therefore perverse for the Judge to find  that  it  was  "perfectly
    safe" for the Appellant to return to Jalalabad.  The  Judge  failed  to
    explain adequately his reasons for this finding.  There was  no  proper
    analysis of  the  circumstances  in  the  Appellant's  home  area.   In
    particular, the Judge did not take into account  the  contents  of  the
    European Asylum Support Office (EASO) Report which was before him.

 6. In response, Mr Clarke submitted that there had been no such  error  of
    law.  He acknowledged that the Judge had not considered risk on  return
    in the context of Article  15(c),  but  argued  that  this  was  not  a
    material error of law.  Regardless of the situation in  Jalalabad,  the
    Judge had made a clear finding that it was safe and reasonable for  the
    Appellant to return to Kabul.  That decision was not challenged by  the
    Appellant.

 7. At the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give.

 8. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The terms of the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    restricted to a consideration of how the Judge dealt with the  argument
    that the Appellant was at risk on return in the terms of Article 15(c).
     It is true that the Judge made no finding in  this  respect  and  that
    must be an error of law.  It is trite law that a Judge must  deal  with
    all the Grounds of Appeal, and the issue of Article  15(c)  was  raised
    before the Judge in paragraphs 33 to 43 inclusive  of  the  Appellant's
    Skeleton Argument. I must now decide if such an error  is  material  so
    that the decision of the Judge should be set aside.

 9. Because of its limited terms, this  appeal  is  not  a  review  of  the
    Judge's findings as to credibility and fact.  Therefor any error of law
    will only be material if the facts as found by the Judge indicate  that
    the Appellant is at risk  according  to  Article  15(c).   The  current
    Country Guidance case on the issue is AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG
    [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC). There it was  held  that  those  returning  to
    Afghanistan would only be at risk in terms of Article  15(c)  if  their
    circumstances revealed an enhanced risk.  As the Judge  found  that  it
    was safe for the Appellant to return to both Jalalabad  and  Kabul,  he
    found that there was no  such  enhanced  risk.  If  he  had  considered
    Article 15(c) the Judge would have been bound to follow the decision in
    AK and would accordingly have found that the Appellant was not in  need
    of humanitarian protection.  It was not argued before the Judge that AK
    had been wrongly decided, or was no longer current.   It  must  the  be
    case therefore that any error of law  relating  to  the  Article  15(c)
    issue is not material and I so find.

Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making a material error of law on a point of law.

11. I do not set aside that decision.

12. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity which I continue.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton





