
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02017/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 September 2016                       |On 23 September 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    S S T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  on  7  November
    1981.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 June 2010 with leave as a
    student valid until 12 June 2012.  He  claimed  asylum  on  3  December
    2012.

 3. The appellant, who is a Tamil, claimed that he had joined the  LTTE  in
    Sri Lanka in 2005 and had worked for them monitoring the  movements  of
    the  Sri  Lankan  Army  in  Jaffna.   He  also  delivered  parcels  and
    transported LTTE fighters.  Following the collapse of the ceasefire  in
    August 2006, he was advised to create a cover in order to carry out his
    LTTE work and he first studied and then undertook work as an  operative
    in air-conditioning and refrigeration.  In 2007, he started work as  an
    air-conditioning operative for a company in Sri Lanka.  He continued to
    work for the LTTE until around June 2008.

 4. On 29 November 2009, the appellant claimed  that  he  was  abducted  by
    armed men in civilian clothes and taken to an old house  where  he  was
    tortured and asked about his involvement with the  LTTE.   During  that
    time, the appellant claims that he was stabbed in the  hip  and  beaten
    with sticks soaked in a liquid which caused a burning sensation on  his
    back.  He subsequently relied upon scarring on his back to substantiate
    his claim.

 5. The appellant was released after his uncle bribed  a  CID  officer  and
    thereafter arrangements were made for him to come  to  the  UK  on  the
    student visa he had previously obtained.

 6. On 16 January 2015, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds.



The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 11 April 2016, Judge Colvin  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

 8. The  judge  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  and  rejected  the
    appellant's account that he had been involved with  the  LTTE  and  had
    been detained and tortured as he claimed.

 9. In addition, before the judge  the  appellant  relied  upon  sur  place
    activities in the UK.  In particular, he relied upon his attendance  at
    demonstrations and his involvement with the Transnational Government of
    Tamil Eelam (TGTE) in the UK and also with the International Centre for
    Prevention and Prosecution of  Genocide  (ICPPG)  including  submitting
    evidence to the UN in relation to genocide and alleged  war  crimes  by
    the Sri Lankan government.  The judge accepted the appellants sur place
    activities but concluded that, applying the country guidance case of GJ
    and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  319
    (IAC), the appellant had failed to establish that he fell within a risk
    category on return to Sri Lanka.

10. The judge also dismissed the appellant's appeal under Article 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on four
    grounds.

12. Grounds 1 and 2 relate to the judge's decision that the  appellant  had
    not established he was at risk as a result of his sur place activities.

13. First, the judge erred in law in considering the risk category set  out
    in para 7(a) of the head note  in  GJ  and  Others  which,  putting  it
    broadly, applied to individuals who are perceived to be a threat to the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state or are  perceived  to  have  a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora.  The judge had failed properly to take into  account  the
    appellant's involvement with the TGTE in the UK which is  a  proscribed
    terrorist organisation in Sri Lanka.

14. Secondly, the judge had failed properly to apply the risk  category  in
    para 7(c)  of  the  head  note  in  GJ  and  Others  which  applied  to
    individuals who had given evidence against the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    in relation to war crimes.  The judge had failed properly  to  consider
    all the evidence concerning the  appellant's  evidence  given  via  the
    ICPPG to the UN in this regard.

15. Ground 3 argues that the judge  failed  properly  to  give  independent
    assessment to Art 3 of the ECHR having rejected the appellant's  asylum
    claim.

16. In her submissions before me, Ms Bayati placed no reliance upon  ground
    3 as a stand-alone point independent of the appellant's claim to be  at
    risk on return as a result  of  his  LTTE  involvement  and  sur  place
    activities.

17. Ground 4 argues that the judge failed to provide  adequate  reason  for
    not relying upon a psychiatric report identifying  that  the  appellant
    suffered from a number of  psychiatric  conditions  including  moderate
    depression  and  PTSD  consistent  with  his   claimed   torture.    In
    particular, it was argued that the judge had failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the report and had failed to take it into account
    as part of the "holistic assessment  of  credibility"  as  required  by
    Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

18. On 6 May 2016, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Macdonald)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

19. On 18 May 2016, the respondent filed a rule 24  response  opposing  the
    appeal.

20. Thus, the appeal came before me.

An Additional Ground

21. At the hearing, Ms Bayati sought permission to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal to add a fifth ground which challenged the judge's assessment of
    the medical evidence relating to the scarring present on his back.   In
    particular, the new ground sought to challenge the judge's approach  to
    the expert evidence of Dr Martin at para 48 of the determination  where
    the judge discounted his evidence  that  the  scarring  was  caused  by
    chemical burns consistent  with  the  appellant's  account  of  torture
    during his detention on the basis that he had done so on the assumption
    that air-conditioning technicians  in  Sri  Lanka  wear  clothing  when
    working and had not considered the possibility that the burns had  been
    caused from chemicals which permeated the  clothing.   The  new  ground
    argues that there was evidence before the judge from the appellant that
    he was wearing clothing and, in effect, the judge had speculated  about
    the working practices of air-conditioning technicians in Sri Lanka  and
    it was unfair that the matter had not been put to the appellant at  the
    hearing.

22. In addition, the new  ground  also  sought  to  challenge  the  judge's
    treatment of the separate medical report prepared by  Professor  Lingam
    on the basis that his conclusion was premised on the  appellant  as  an
    air-conditioning technician working with no chemicals.

23. Ms Bayati accepted that the new ground was raised at a late stage,  the
    application only having been served on the respondent  and  filed  with
    the Tribunal the day  before  the  hearing.   She  submitted  that  the
    alleged error was clear and obvious and was fundamental to  the  appeal
    given  the  nature  of  the  claim,  being  an  asylum  case,  and  the
    significance of the decision to the appellant it was  proper  to  allow
    the amendment.

24.  On  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Richards  opposed  the
    application to amend the grounds.  He pointed out that  the  error  had
    not been identified by  experienced  solicitors  and  Counsel  who  had
    drafted the earlier grounds of appeal.  He submitted that  it  was  not
    appropriate to allow  a  further  ground  of  appeal  so  late  in  the
    proceedings, in effect on  the  eve  of  the  hearing.   He  confirmed,
    however, that there was no obvious prejudice to the respondent and that
    he was in a position to deal with the ground if I granted the appellant
    permission.

25. The conclusion of the submissions, I accepted Ms  Bayati's  submissions
    and I granted the appellant's application to amend the grounds so as to
    include this new, Ground 5.  I also granted permission in  relation  to
    it.

26. The submissions, thereafter, address the (now) five  grounds  although,
    as I have already indicated, Ms Bayati accepted that ground 3 was not a
    "stand-alone" point and she made no specific submissions in relation to
    it.

Discussion

27. I deal first with grounds 4 and 5 which relate to the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding in relation to the appellant's account to have been
    involved with the LTTE and to have been detained and tortured.

28. Ground 4 concerns the psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad.  The judge dealt
    with this, principally at, paras 52 and 62 as follows:

         "52.      The  appellant  was  interviewed  in  May  2015  for  the
             Psychiatric Report prepared by Dr Dhumad.  This concludes that
             the appellant presents with a diagnosis of moderate Depressive
             Episode and he meets the  criteria  for  PTSD  which,  in  his
             opinion, started after the torture described by the  appellant
             whilst in detention in 2009/2010.  Whilst it is perfectly open
             for Dr Dhumad to accept the appellant's account of the torture
             as  being  the  trigger  for  the  PTSD,  but  this  does  not
             necessarily  determine  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
             account which is a matter that needs to be  considered  within
             the context of all the evidence.  In  other  words,  whilst  I
             have no reason not to accept the  diagnoses  set  out  in  the
             report, whether these mental states were caused by  the  claim
             of torture has to be considered in the round  particularly  in
             terms of the credibility issues raised.  This is a matter that
             I return to below."

     And then at para 62 the judge said this:

         "62.     In reaching these findings  on  credibility  I  have  also
             taken into account the Psychiatric Report and its  conclusions
             that the psychological distress in the form of  PTSD  suffered
             by the appellant started after the torture in 2009/2010 - that
             is, after exceptionally threatening  and  catastrophic  events
             namely torture.  As stated above, whilst I have no reason  not
             to accept the diagnoses in the report as  to  the  appellant's
             mental state, this conclusion in relation to the  cause  being
             torture is  based  on  an  acceptance  by  Dr  Dhumad  of  the
             appellant's account - which, of course, he was entitled to do.
              Whilst I accept that such medical evidence which  potentially
             corroborates an account of  torture  should  in  principle  be
             given considerable  weight,  it  nevertheless  must  still  be
             considered within the context of  all  the  evidence.   In  my
             view, there is other substantive evidence  as  detailed  above
             that significantly undermines the appellant's account of being
             detained and tortured.  In these circumstances and  for  these
             reasons I am unable to place weight  on  this  aspect  of  the
             Psychiatric Report."

29. Ms Bayati submitted that the judge had accepted the diagnosis  of  PTSD
    and that the expert's opinion was  that  it  was  consistent  with  the
    appellant's claim to have been tortured in 2009/2010.  Ms  Bayati  drew
    my attention to para 10 of  Dr  Dhumad's  report  at  page  29  of  the
    appellant's main bundle.  She further submitted that the judge had been
    wrong to discount the report when at para 62 he noted that  the  report
    was based upon an acceptance by Dr Dhumad of the  appellant's  account.
    That, she submitted, was not correct.  Further, in the  written  ground
    it is submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  holistically  deal  with
    credibility taking into account  the  psychiatric  report  and  thereby
    erred in law as identified in the case of Mibanga.

30. In my judgment, it is clear that  the  judge  did  not  fall  into  the
    Mibanga pitfall.  She clearly directed herself that she  must  consider
    all the evidence "in the round" at para 52 and then again  at  para  62
    identified by reference back to paras 56-61 a number of  matters  which
    undermined, in her view, the appellant's credibility.  This was  not  a
    case, therefore, where the judge determined the appellant's credibility
    and then, having done so, discounted the psychiatric evidence  said  to
    be consistent with his claim simply because it  was  inconsistent  with
    the already made adverse credibility finding.

31. Further, it is also clear that the judge took into account the expert's
    view and accepted that the appellant suffered from PTSD.   Even  if  it
    was, as the expert noted, consistent with the appellant's claim  to  be
    tortured in 2009/2010 the holistic approach which the  judge  took  was
    entirely proper.  The  judge  had  to  determine  looking  at  all  the
    evidence whether the appellant's account of being tortured was in  fact
    established.  The psychiatric evidence  was  some  evidence  supporting
    that but it was entirely open to the judge, having identified a  number
    of features of the evidence that  led  her  to  doubt  the  appellant's
    credibility, even in the light of the psychiatric evidence to find that
    the causal connection between  the  appellant's  PTSD  and  the  actual
    claimed torture as a result of being detained was not established.  The
    expert had the appellant's account and was entitled to his opinion that
    the PTSD was consistent with that account.  However, the assessment  of
    the appellant's credibility and whether that account was to be accepted
    was a matter for the judge looking, as she did,  at  all  the  evidence
    including  the  psychiatric  evidence.   Leaving  aside  the  issue  of
    scarring raised in ground 5, I see  nothing  legally  improper  in  the
    judge's treatment of the psychiatric evidence in the light of  all  the
    evidence concerning the credibility of the appellant's account.

32. For these reasons, I reject ground 4.

33. I now turn to ground 5,  the  new  ground  concerned  with  the  expert
    evidence of scarring.  The judge dealt with Professor Lingam's evidence
    at paras 45-47 as follows:

         "45.     The appellant  claims  that  he  was  tortured  whilst  in
             detention.  At his asylum interview he said 'They  stabbed  me
             with a knife.  They heated plastic pipes and hit me with them.
              They beat me with sticks.  They beat me  on  the  head'  (AIR
             Q145).  The respondent points out in the refusal  letter  that
             by the time the appellant was describing this ill-treatment to
             Professor Lingam, the wooden sticks  have  changed  to  wooden
             poles and that he made  no  mention  of  these  weapons  being
             soaked in - or in any other way -  used  in  conjunction  with
             some oil or liquid at the time of  the  asylum  interview  but
             only made this claim for the medical  report.   These  matters
             are considered to be significant inconsistencies to  undermine
             the appellant's credibility.  It is also noted in this context
             that the  appellant  worked  for  over  3  years  in  the  air
             conditioning  industry  as  a   technician   with   background
             information showing that a significant range of chemicals  are
             used in this industry.

         46.   Professor  Lingam  has  produced  two  medical  reports:   in
             September 2013 and an addendum in March 2016.  He has set  out
             his credentials (see above) that include writing more than 600
             medico-legal reports on victims  of  torture.   In  the  first
             medical report, he found the appellant to  have  very  serious
             burn scars which are referred to as 'blobs' on the full length
             and both sides of his back together with two or  more  on  the
             front of each thigh.  His conclusion is that  they  have  been
             caused by chemical burning and rules out that they could  have
             been self-inflicted injuries because of  their  location.   He
             found no reason to dispute the account given by the  appellant
             that they were caused by wooden poles  soaked  in  an  oil  or
             liquid that caused the burns.

         47.  The refusal letter refers to  aspects  of  Professor  Lingam's
             first medical report  which  are  said  to  be  unsatisfactory
             including his stated credentials.  Whilst I have  noted  these
             and would just make the  comment  that  it  is  not  the  most
             detailed or well-written report, I  consider  that  the  major
             significant issue which seriously undermines the value of  the
             report is the omission of no reference or consideration  being
             given to the fact  that  the  appellant  worked  in  the  air-
             conditioning industry for a number  of  years.   The  addendum
             report in March 2016 picks up this  latter  point  but  merely
             states: 'I took  note  today  that  the  patient  was  an  air
             condition technician.  He confirms that there is  no  chemical
             involved in his work.'  In my opinion, this does not alter the
             fact that Professor Lingam has failed to consider in any depth
             the significance of the appellant having worked in an industry
             where it is routine  to  handle  chemicals.   I  therefore  am
             unable to place any weight on this aspect  of  either  of  his
             reports in terms of causal factors for these burn 'blobs'.   I
             will consider the scar on the thigh/hip area below."

34. I would interpolate here that the judge accepted that the scar  on  the
    appellant's thigh/hip area was consistent with an injury  caused  by  a
    sharp instrument (see para 50).  Nothing in relation to  this  evidence
    was raised in the grounds or before me and I need say no more about it.

35. As regards the evidence of Dr Martin the judge set that out at paras 48-
    49 as follows:

         "48.     For the hearing the appellant submitted a further  medical
             report prepared by Mr Andres Izquierdo-Martin who examined the
             appellant a few days before the hearing.  He agrees  that  the
             appellant's scars on the back and thighs are  likely  to  have
             been caused  by  a  chemical  agent.   He  does  consider  the
             appellant's previous employment where  some  of  the  products
             handled could cause  chemical  burns.   In  his  opinion,  the
             appearance of the scars from such a chemical burn  with  these
             products would be very similar to those shown on the appellant
             but he considers this explanation less likely as the  possible
             cause in view of their  distribution  on  areas  of  the  back
             usually covered  with  clothing.   The  difficulty  with  this
             conclusion is that it is based on an assumption that all  air-
             conditioning technicians  in  Sri  Lanka  wear  clothing  when
             working.  The report does not say, for example,  whether  this
             needs to be special protective clothing or just  any  clothing
             and, if it is the latter, whether it is possible to have burns
             from chemicals that have permeated the clothing.  At the  same
             time, there is no reference in the report as  to  whether  the
             appellant was questioned about this and whether, for  example,
             he or anyone else he knew had had an accidental injury  whilst
             working in this industry.

         49.  I consider that these matters necessarily lessen the value  of
             this report in terms of the weight that can be attached to the
             opinion as regards causation of the chemical  burns.   At  the
             same time I have not been provided any background  information
             regarding chemical accidents in  this  industry  resulting  in
             burns in which to contextualise the appellant's  claim.   And,
             perhaps even more importantly, there is no evidence  from  the
             appellant's employer, Fujo Air-Conditioning Ltd known as 'Fuji
             Cool' as regards working practices  and  the  appellant's  own
             injury record if any."

36. Then, in the course of reaching her  adverse  credibility  finding  the
    judge returned to the expert  evidence  at  para  59  and,  in  effect,
    declined to give it any or any significant weight:

         "59.     As regards the claimed 'white van' kidnap and detention in
             November 2009 there are two main  matters:  first,  I  am  not
             satisfied on the medical evidence before me that the  chemical
             burns suffered by the appellant do  not  have  an  alternative
             cause related  to  his  work  as  a  technician  in  the  air-
             conditioning industry.  For the reasons stated above, I do not
             find any probative value in the reports of Professor Lingam on
             this question and I find that  the  report  of  Mr  Izquierdo-
             Martin lacks  sufficient  consideration  of  this  alternative
             possible cause for the burns so as to be able to place any  or
             any significant weight on his findings.  In addition, there is
             the inconsistency in the appellant's account that he  did  not
             refer to the sticks/poles being soaked in oil or liquid at the
             asylum interview.  In short, on the evidence before  me  I  am
             not satisfied even to the  low  standard  of  proof  that  the
             appellant has shown that his injuries were caused  by  torture
             at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities."

37. Both  expert  reports  were  supportive  of  the  appellant's  account.
    Professor Lingam's supplementary report (at page 3  of  the  additional
    extra supplementary bundle) confirm that the scar  was  "diagnostic  of
    corrosive burn".  However, Professor Lingam also states, as  the  judge
    pointed out, that the appellant confirmed to him that  there  were  "no
    chemicals involved in his work".  To that extent, therefore,  Professor
    Lingam did not consider the possibility that the  appellant's  injuries
    could have been  caused  through  his  work  rather  than  his  claimed
    torture. Standing alone, I would not conclude that the  judge  was  not
    entitled, seeing the evidence in the round, to take the view  that  she
    did of Professor Lingam's report.  Not every  judge  would  necessarily
    have rejected its supportive value on this basis, but  that  in  itself
    does not identify an error of law.

38. However, in my view, the judge did  err  in  her  consideration  of  Dr
    Martin's  report.   Even  if  Dr  Martin's  report  was  based  on  the
    "assumption that all air-conditioning technicians  in  Sri  Lanka  wear
    clothing when working", it was the appellant's own evidence that he was
    wearing clothing, in fact protective clothing at all times.  At para 47
    of his witness statement (at page 18 of the supplementary  bundle)  the
    appellant said this:

         "While I was working for Fuji Cool as a technician, I never let  my
         body to be exposed to dangerous chemicals.  I  always  took  safety
         measures and wore special protective clothes and boots, while I was
         working there."

39. There was, therefore, before the Judge a basis  on  which  Dr  Martin's
    report relevantly addressed the aetiology of the chemical burns on  the
    back of  the  appellant  on  the  basis,  if  the  Judge  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence, that the appellant  was  wearing  clothing.   The
    judge, in my view, speculated in para 48 of her determination about the
    effect of clothing, including protective clothing,  in  protecting  the
    appellant from burns by any chemicals as a  result  of  permeating  his
    clothing.  There was no evidence concerning this before the  judge  and
    she was not, as the grounds point out,  an  expert.   Further,  if  the
    judge considered that the issue of whether the  appellant  was  wearing
    protective clothing was relevant to assessing Dr  Martin's  report  and
    the appellant's credibility, that should  have  been  raised  with  the
    appellant (and his representative) at the hearing given the appellant's
    unchallenged evidence that he was wearing protective  clothing  at  all
    times.  Ms Bayati told me, and Mr Richards  did  not  seek  to  suggest
    otherwise, that no questions  were  asked  at  the  hearing  about  the
    appellant's clothing which he wore whilst working.  In my judgment, the
    judge's criticism of Dr Martin's report that he failed to deal with any
    "alternative cause"  relating  to  the  work  of  the  appellant  as  a
    technician  in  the  air-conditioning  industry  (at  para  59  of  the
    determination), was not, in the circumstances, an adequate  reason  for
    placing, in effect, no weight on the supportive evidence of Dr Martin.

40. For these reasons, I accept ground 5 and that the judge erred in law in
    reaching her  adverse  credibility  finding  in  her  treatment  of  Dr
    Martin's report.

41. Whilst I accept that the judge gave a number of reasons for her adverse
    credibility finding, I am satisfied that the error is a material one in
    the sense that I cannot be satisfied that her finding would necessarily
    have been the same.  Indeed, at  para  59,  the  judge  refers  to  the
    medical evidence scarring and its implication as one of the  "two  main
    matters" relevant to her assessment of the veracity of the  appellant's
    claim to have been kidnapped and detained in November 2009.

42. For these reasons, therefore, the judge's adverse  credibility  finding
    is materially flawed and cannot stand.

43. I now turn to the two grounds (Grounds 1  and  2)  concerned  with  the
    challenge to the judge's finding in  respect  of  the  appellant's  sur
    place activities.

44. The judge dealt with the evidence at paras 53-55 as follows:

         "53.      The  appellant  says  that  he  first  took  part  in   a
             demonstration in November 2010 and  that  since  then  he  has
             annually participated in the Great Heroes Day  event  held  in
             ExCel Hall and in the Mullivaikkal Genocide Day event.  In the
             latter part of 2013 he took part in two rallies held in London
             and in February 2014 he attended an  international  conference
             on the issue of Tamil land grabs.  He  submitted  evidence  to
             the UN appointed team looking at allegations of mass  killings
             and human rights violations  and  assisted  the  International
             Centre for Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide  (ICPPG)  in
             collecting evidence from war victims.  In 2015 he took part in
             two demonstrations outside Downing Street and in  Westminster.
             He is currently helping the Transnational Government of  Tamil
             Eelam (TGTE) in its million signature campaign.  He says  that
             he participated at these events but did not organise or  speak
             at them.

         54.  The appellant has submitted a letter from the National Liberal
             Party dated May 2015 confirming that the appellant is a member
             who has attended meetings and  taken  part  in  activities  on
             behalf of the NLP.  A letter from  the  British  Tamils  Forum
             dated  January  2015  to  the  appellant  confirms  his   life
             membership with the organisation.   A  letter  from  the  TGTE
             dated February 2016 states that the appellant has  volunteered
             in public events in the UK in support of creating a free Tamil
             Eelam in Sri Lanka by attending meetings,  events  and  public
             demonstrations.  A letter from the ICPPG dated  February  2016
             says that the appellant has  participated  in  meetings/events
             and has provided written evidence to be submitted to  the  UN.
             The appellant has also submitted two photographs  showing  his
             attendance at a TGTE meeting in January  2016.   He  has  also
             submitted six other photographs which he identified as  having
             been taken in 2015 at the  Downing  Street  demonstration  and
             when distributing leaflets for the NLP.

         55.  This evidence shows that the appellant has taken part  in  sur
             place activities as part of the Tamil diaspora.   However,  as
             Mr Clarke submitted for the respondent, there are only  a  few
             photographs and there is nothing to show that he has a profile
             either  at  the   demonstrations   or   within   the   various
             organisations.  He has not submitted a  copy  of  his  claimed
             evidence to the UN appointed investigation team."

45. At para 65, the judge then reached a  conclusion  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's sur place activities applying the risk category  identified
    in para 7(a) of GJ and Others as follows:

         "65.     A matter that might place the appellant  at  risk  is  his
             involvement in diaspora activities in the UK.  I do  not  find
             that the appellant's claim that these activities have come  to
             the attention of the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  as  shown  by
             family members being interrogated, arrested  and  required  to
             weekly report to the police.  This is  because  the  appellant
             has not attempted to obtain any independent  corroboration  of
             this, such as, the requirement on his  uncle  and  brother  to
             report to the police.  The  appellant  has  submitted  letters
             from  several  Tamil  diaspora  organisations  including   the
             British Tamil  Forum  which  was  proscribed  as  a  terrorist
             organisation but this was recently lifted as announced in  the
             Colombo Gazette (November  2015).   Whilst  he  sets  out  the
             demonstrations that he has attended - approximately five since
             2010 - the six photographs submitted appear to relate only  to
             one in 2015 outside Downing Street.  And, as stated above, the
             appellant accepts that he  has  not  organised  any  of  these
             events or spoken at them.  At the same time, the appellant has
             not corroborated his claim that he has given written  evidence
             to the UN investigating team.  On this evidence  I  find  that
             there is nothing to show that it  is  likely  that  he  has  a
             profile that would place him at risk under category (a) of GJ:
             'Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or
             are perceived to have a significant role in relation to  post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal
             of hostilities within Sri Lanka'."

46. Dealing first with ground 1, it is said that the judge failed  to  take
    into account that the TGTE is a proscribed  organisation.   Whilst  the
    judge refers to the fact that the British Tamil Forum has ceased to  be
    proscribed since November 2015, she erred by failing to  consider  that
    the  TGTE  remained  proscribed.   Ms  Bayati  pointed  out  that   the
    appellant's involvement was supported by a  letter  from  the  National
    Liberal Party and from the TGTE itself (at page 27 of the supplementary
    bundle  and  page   37   of   the   additional   supplementary   bundle
    respectively).  Ms Bayati submitted that applying the risk category  in
    para 7(a) of GJ and Others the appellant's involvement  with  the  TGTE
    was capable of being perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities on  return
    as giving the appellant a  "significant  role"  in  the  "post-conflict
    Tamil separatism within the diaspora".  Ms  Bayati  submitted  that  on
    return to Sri Lanka the appellant  was  likely  to  be  questioned  and
    following HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 the appellant  could  not  be
    required to lie about his involvement and he was, therefore, at risk of
    detention and subsequent ill-treatment.

47. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had found that the  appellant  did
    not have a profile at the demonstrations or in organisations  including
    the TGTE which would place him at risk on return to Sri  Lanka  and  he
    relied upon the judge's findings in paras 53-55.

48. I accept Ms Bayati's submission that the judge  did  not  consider  the
    implications to the appellant based upon the fact that the  TGTE  is  a
    proscribed terrorist organisation in Sri Lanka.  It is  well-recognised
    that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  have  a  sophisticated  intelligence
    monitoring those who pose a risk to  the  Sri  Lankan  state  in  their
    activities in the diaspora including in the UK (see,  for  example,  GJ
    and Others at para 8 of the head note).  The significance  to  the  Sri
    Lankan  authorities  of  the  appellant's  involvement  in  sur   place
    activities in the  UK  cannot  be  divorced  from  the  nature  of  the
    organisation to which those activities relate.  Whilst the judge made a
    finding that the appellant  did  not  have  a  significant  profile  to
    attract the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities, she did so without
    considering  the  fact  that  the  TGTE  is  a   proscribed   terrorist
    organisation.  It is not clear from the judge's reasoning what view she
    would have taken about the significance of his TGTE activities  if  she
    had had that factor in mind.  In assessing, therefore, the risk to  the
    appellant on return as a result of his activity with the TGTE the judge
    erred in law by failing to take into account the fact that the TGTE  is
    a proscribed terrorist organisation and whether that  gave  rise  to  a
    heightened significance for the Sri Lankan authorities on  return  and,
    if so, what if any risk he was likely to face on return.

49. As regards ground 2,  the  evidence  before  the  judge  was  that  the
    appellant had submitted through the ICPPG written evidence  to  the  UN
    concerned with genocide and war crimes.  A letter from the ICPPG  dated
    29 February 2016 (at page 39 of the  additional  supplementary  bundle)
    corroborated this fact.  The judge was, therefore, in error to state in
    para 65 of her determination that there was no  corroboration  for  the
    appellant's claim that he had given written evidence to the UN.  Whilst
    the risk category in para 7(c) of  the  head  note  of  GJ  and  Others
    relates to individuals who have given evidence to the "Lessons  Learned
    and Reconciliation Commission" implicating the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    in alleged war crimes, subsequent to that the UNHCHR appointed  experts
    and called for evidence in such matters.  The  potential  expansion  of
    the risk category set out in para 7(c) of  the  head  note  in  GJ  and
    Others was recognised by the Court of Appeal  in  MP  (Sri  Lanka)  and
    Another v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829 in respect of  witnesses  at  future
    similar enquiries into Sri Lankan war crimes.  The UN enquiry  is  just
    such "future enquiry".

50. In my judgment, the judge erred in law in failing to take into  account
    the evidence that the appellant had provided the very kind of  evidence
    against the Sri Lankan government which could, by analogy, fall  within
    the risk category in para 7(c) of the head note in GJ and Others.  I do
    not accept Mr Richards submission that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    submitted in confidence and that there was no  risk  of  the  appellant
    coming to the attention of the Sri Lankan  authorities.   As  is  clear
    from the letter dated 29 February 2016 from the  ICPPG,  the  appellant
    has consented to his evidence being used in future  criminal  or  civil
    prosecutions against Sri  Lankan  government  and  military  officials.
    Whilst the evidence may not, therefore, at present  be  in  the  public
    domain, that letter raises the real risk that it  will  fall  into  the
    public domain in the future.

51. In my judgment, therefore, grounds 1 and 2 are made out  and  that  the
    judge erred in law in assessing the risk to  the  appellant  on  return
    based upon his sur place activities.

Decision and Disposal

52. Consequently, for the reasons I have given, the judge materially  erred
    in law in dismissing the appeal.

53. Thus, the judge's decision is set aside and the appeal must be  reheard
    de novo.  Both representatives accepted that if this was my  conclusion
    then it was appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to be reheard.

54. Thus, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Colvin.



                               Signed


                                A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




