
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02095/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2018                         |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    MSMH
                                                                 Appellant
                                    -and-
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                              Respondent

Representation:
Appellant:                           Mrs A. Vatish of counsel, instructed
by MBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka.  He  applied  for  entry
    clearance as a student on 5 March 2008 but his application was refused.
    He did not appeal against this decision but made a further  application
    in the same capacity on 17  September  2008.   He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in October 2008, as a student, and was granted further leave in
    this capacity until 28 February 2015. However, his visa did not  permit
    him to work and he was encountered, whilst working, on 18 May 2013  and
    was detained for breaching his conditions of leave.

2.   The Appellant applied for asylum on 21 May 2013.  His  application  was
    refused on 22 January 2015 and he appealed against that decision. First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Stott  dismissed  his  appeal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 27 April 2015. Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  granted  him
    permission to appeal on 28 July 2015 and  on  6  November  2015  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Murray found that there had been an error  of  law
    and remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge dismissed  his  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 7 October 2016. Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted him
    permission to appeal on 8 February 2017 and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Grimes remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on 28 April 2017.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe dismissed  his  appeal  on  15  November
    2017. Upper Tribunal Judge Smith remitted the appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 19 March 2018.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge James dismissed  his  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 18 September 2018 and the Appellant appealed. First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lambert granted him permission to appeal on  15  October
    2018.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   At 10.00, counsel for the Appellant explained that she  had  only  been
    instructed the night before and asked for  time  to  take  instructions
    from the Appellant. As a consequence, I put his appeal to the  back  of
    the list. At the start of the hearing I asked Counsel for the Appellant
    to clarify the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal,  which  were  arguably
    generic in nature at many points. She confirmed that, despite paragraph
    6 of the grounds, the  Appellant  had  not  undertaken  any  activities
    within the Sri Lankan  diaspora  that  would  render  him  at  risk  of
    persecution on return. In relation to ground three, she also  explained
    that the "expert evidence" referred to was the evidence  from  the  two
    Sri Lankan lawyers. Counsel and the Home Office Presenting Officer then
    both made oral submissions and I have referred  to  these  submissions,
    where relevant, in my findings below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   In the refusal letter, the Respondent accepted that the Appellant is  a
    national of Sri Lanka. The basis of  the  Appellant's  application  for
    asylum was that he and his father  were  arrested  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in the first week of  January  in  2008.  They  fell  under
    suspicion when weapons and LTTE propaganda CDs were found in  a  family
    property, which had been transferred  into  the  Appellant's  name  and
    rented out to a person from the Tamil community. The Appellant was then
    detained, interrogated and tortured for ten days before his uncle  paid
    a bribe and provided  a  letter  from  his  school  to  facilitate  his
    release.

7.   He was not charged with any offence  at  that  time  and  continued  to
    attend school and complete his A levels and remained in Sri Lanka until
    he came to the United Kingdom, as a student, in October 2008.

8.   It is the Appellant's case that he was arrested  three  days  after  he
    returned to Sri Lanka on 25 December 2011 in order to visit his mother.
     He was detained at Dematuguda Police Station in Colombo for  ten  days
    and his uncle managed to obtain his release by bribery.  He  then  left
    Sri Lanka on 13 or 14 January 2012 after bribing the authorities at the
    airport. His mother subsequently informed him that a  warrant  for  his
    arrest had been issued in August 2012.

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert gave  permission  to  appeal  on  all
    five grounds of appeal but, as stated above, ground three is no  longer
    relied upon and grounds five and six were not relied upon at the  error
    of law hearing.  The first and second grounds  broadly  relate  to  the
    failure by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James  to  apply  the  country
    guidance contained in GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] 00319  (IAC).  The  failure  to  set  out  the  country
    guidance was not determinative of the sustainability of the decision of
    itself but it did indicate that the  manner  in  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  James  approached  the  appeal  was  not  sufficiently
    structured. The headnote of GJ and Others states that:

         "(2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
         since the civil war ended in May  2009.   The  LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka
         itself is a spent force and there have been no terrorist  incidents
         since the end of the civil war.


         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
         activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
         to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983,  which  prohibits  the
         'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
         separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within
         Sri Lanka.


         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.


         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
         person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.


         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport.  Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities are
         or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
         in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
         or police within a few days.


         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:


             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  are
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


             ...


             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.


         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.


         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual".

10.  It the Appellant were to be able to establish that  an  arrest  warrant
    had been issued in relation to him, it is likely that his name would be
    on the "watch list". Therefore, he would be detained at the airport and
    the treatment he  would  suffer  in  such  detention  would  amount  to
    persecution. Therefore, as counsel for  the  Appellant  submitted,  the
    findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge James  in  relation  to  the
    arrest warrant were of central importance.

11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge James  did  state  in  paragraph  22  of  his
    decision that he had looked  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and  in
    paragraph 23 he added  that  "at  the  heart  of  this  appeal  is  the
    Appellant's credibility and whether he remains a person of interest  to
    the Sri Lankan authorities". However, he did not remind himself of  the
    findings in GJ and  Others  which  are  more  complex  than  the  self-
    directions given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in paragraph 23".

12.  In Guidance Note 2011  No.  2  on  Reporting  Decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  confirmed  that   Practice
    Direction 12.2 stated that:

         "A reported determination of the  Tribunal,  the  AIT  or  the  IAT
         bearing the letters CG shall be treated as authoritative finding on
         the country guidance issue identified in the  determination,  based
         on the evidence before the members of Tribunal ...  that  determine
         the appeal. As a result, unless it has been expressly superseded or
         replaced by any later CG determination,  or  is  inconsistent  with
         other authority that is binding on the  Tribunal,  such  a  country
         guidance case is authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far  as
         that appeal:-


             a)   relates to the country guidance issue in question; and


             b)   depends upon the same or similar evidence".

13.  Furthermore, the  manner  in  which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James
    considered the existence of an arrest warrant,  which  was  of  central
    importance in the light of GJ and Others, was  arguably  flawed  for  a
    number of different reasons.

14.  In paragraph 24 of his decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James
    appeared to accept that "the Appellant had contradicted himself when he
    stated that no charges had been brought when he was  detained  yet  had
    subsequently stated that the charges were brought later". The fact that
    this was  the  view  formed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James  is
    confirmed by his finding in paragraph 30 of his decision that there was
    some inconsistency in the Appellant's answers in the  asylum  interview
    as to whether he faced charges in Sri Lanka and, if so, when they  were
    brought.

15.  In my view there  was  no  such  contradiction  as  the  Appellant  had
    clearly said in answer to question 46 in his substantive interview that
    he had not been charged when  he  was  detained  in  2008.  Hiss  other
    answers also indicate that subsequent to this time a legal process  had
    been initiated on the basis that his name  had  been  recorded  as  the
    owner of the property in which weapons and  LTTE  propaganda  had  been
    found. For example, in answer to paragraph 49 of the interview at  page
    C15 of the interview record, he stated that prior to his return in 2011
    his lawyer had guaranteed  that  the  charges  that  had  been  brought
    against him would be dropped and that this was more than likely because
    the LTTE had been wiped out.

16.  In answer to questions 45 and 46 at pages C14 and C15 of the  interview
    record, he explained that he  had  not  applied  for  asylum  when  his
    student visa was due to expire in October 2011, because  he  wished  to
    continue his studies in the United Kingdom and  also  he  had  received
    information from his lawyer in Sri Lanka  the  on-going  legal  process
    which had been initiated against him in relation to renting out a  room
    in which weapons and LTTE CDs were found was about to come  to  an  end
    and that he would need to appear at the court.

17.  In answer to question 55 at page C19 of the interview record,  he  also
    stated that he had trusted his lawyer and thought  that  he  would  not
    have a problem in Sri  Lanka.  (He  added  that  when  his  lawyer  was
    contacted after the Appellant had been arrested he  had  said  that  he
    could not help him as he himself was in difficulties).

18.  Furthermore, the  Appellant's  account  of  his  involvement  in  legal
    processes in Sri Lanka was potentially supported by a letter  from  his
    Sri Lankan lawyer, Mr. Marsook. This statement appeared  to  have  been
    dated 26 June 2012 but at paragraph  31  of  his  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James stated that "bearing in mind the letter refers  to
    an attendance and a search for documents made on 2  June  2013  and  18
    June 2013  respectively  it  is  possible  that  the  letter  has  been
    misdated". Taking into account the low standard of proof to be  applied
    in asylum appeals and the use of the word "possible", I find that First-
    tier Tribunal Judge James accepted that the date on the  letter  was  a
    typo and should be disregarded.

19.  When considering  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  this  evidence  in
    paragraph 43 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge James took into
    account the fact that he had not found the Appellant's account  of  his
    arrests and detention credible.  This  does  not  follow  the  approach
    adopted in Karanakaran v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  should  have  taken
    into account all of  the  evidence,  including  the  letters  from  Mr.
    Marsook and Mr. Seneviratne, before reaching a holistic decision as  to
    the credibility of the Appellant's account.

20.  Even if this was not the case and the  wording  of  this  paragraph  is
    somewhat opaque, the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied on  a  submission
    by the Respondent that such letters are  frequently  falsified  in  Sri
    Lanka but did not provide any reasons for finding  that  these  letters
    and the receipt on arrest or warrant of arrest had been  falsified.  He
    did not find that the identities of the authors of the letters were  in
    doubt. They had given their professional addresses and their  enrolment
    numbers as attorneys at law. The letters  were  also  cogent  and  well
    written and explained in detail  how  the  attorneys  had  checked  the
    validity of the arrest warrant. Similarly, no  reasons  were  given  in
    paragraph 34 of the decision for not giving weight to  the  content  of
    the Appellant's mother's letter. It correlated with other evidence  and
    there was nothing in it to suggest that it was not a  true  account  of
    the events in her knowledge. At most, the Judge is critical of the fact
    that a second letter from his mother had not been obtained.

21.  The Home Office Presenting Officer also relied on  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had not been arrested and charged with terrorism offences  in
    2008. However, she did not refer to any objective or  country  evidence
    to make good her submission.

22.  In addition, she relied on section 8 and  the  delay  in  applying  for
    asylum. However, this factor alone  could  not  render  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision sustainable in the light of  his  failure  to
    give proper weight and  consideration  to  the  letters  from  the  two
    attorneys at law and the arrest warrant they referred to.

23.  For these reasons the decision reached  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James contained errors of law and  must  be  set  aside.  Both  parties
    submitted that, even though the appeal had been remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal on a number of previous occasions, it was appropriate  to
    remit it again. In particular, I took into  account  the  view  of  the
    Respondent which was the confused nature of the grounds  of  appeal  in
    the current appeal and the fact that the Appellant was not currently in
    receipt of legal aid would not assist the  Upper  Tribunal  if  it  was
    asked to remake the appeal itself.

Decision
(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to Taylor House to  be  heard  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than  Mailer,  Broe,  Grimes,  Hodgkinson,  James,
    Keane, Lambert, Lodge or Murray.

Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 10 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



