
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02181/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th March 2015                           |                              |
|                                             |On 31st March 2015            |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |
|Before                                       |                              |


                             MR JUSTICE CRANSTON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     M G
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is an Iranian national born in  April  1984.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Russell  dated  19th
    August 2014 dismissing his appeal against removal on asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.



2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 11th December  2007  and
    claimed asylum as a minor. He was released  into  the  care  of  social
    services but failed to attend his interview on 17th January  2008.  The
    Appellant was encountered by police on 9th October 2010 and he attended
    his substantive asylum interview on 12th March 2014.

3.   In summary, the basis of the Appellant's claim is that  he  attended  a
    party  in  2006  in  Tehran  and  consumed  alcohol.  The   authorities
    discovered the party and arrested him  and  the  other  attendees.  The
    Appellant made disparaging comments about the regime. He was  taken  to
    court and sentenced to 80 lashes and detained for fifteen  days  before
    being  released.   On  release  he  was  required  to  report  to   the
    authorities on a regular basis and undertake community service.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant's  claim  lacked
    credibility because he had dishonestly claimed to be a  minor  when  he
    was not. The judge rejected the Appellant's  explanation  that  he  was
    misinterpreted when he repeated his claim to have  been  born  in  1990
    during his substantive interview in March 2014 and only stated his real
    date of birth when challenged. The judge considered Section  8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  and
    rejected the Appellant's explanation for absconding.  He found that the
    Appellant's  claim  to  have  left  Iran  in  search  of  international
    protection was not credible.

5.   Notwithstanding the judge  looked  at  the  Appellant's  claim  at  its
    highest and found that it involved a very minor  interaction  with  the
    authorities for which the Appellant was punished. There were no further
    problems with the authorities before the Appellant left Iran. The judge
    attached little weight to the writ of warning dated June 2009  and  the
    letters from the Appellant's brother and neighbour. He found  that  the
    Appellant was of no  further  interest  to  the  regime  prior  to  his
    departure from Iran and he was of no continuing interest to the  regime
    on return. The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal under the Refugee
    Convention, the Immigration  Rules  (humanitarian  protection)  and  on
    human rights grounds (Articles 2 and 3).

6.   In relation to Article 8, the judge found that the Appellant's  partner
    had not divorced her husband, who remained in Bulgaria, and  there  was
    no supporting evidence to show that the Appellant was living  with  his
    partner, an EEA national.  However, the Appellant and his partner had a
    child  and  therefore  the  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant   had
    established family life.

7.   The judge found that the Appellant had failed to  show  that  he  could
    not  enjoy  family  life  outside  the  UK.  It  was  conceded  by  the
    Appellant's representative that  the  Appellant's  partner  was  not  a
    qualified person for the purposes of the  EEA  Regulations.  The  judge
    considered the best interests of  the  child  and  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had not shown that his removal engaged Article 8.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor  on
    7th January 2015 on the following grounds:

    (1)  The judge had failed to give sufficient reasons for rejecting  the
         Appellant's explanation for absconding.


    (2)  The judge had failed to attach significant weight to  the  warning
         notice  given  the  background  evidence  of  the   arbitrary   and
         unpredictable nature of judicial procedures.


    (3)  The judge's finding that the  threat  to  life  contained  in  the
         letters was inconsistent with the  nature  of  the  offence  was  a
         finding which was not open to him on the evidence and that  if  the
         judge  accepted  the  Appellant  insulted  the  regime   this   was
         sufficient for him to be subject to execution.


    (4)  The judge's finding that the punishment, 80  lashes,  received  by
         the Appellant was not persecutory although it did amount to inhuman
         and degrading treatment was contradictory and unsustainable.


    (5)  In relation to Article 8, the judge's finding that  there  was  no
         interference with family life because it could continue in Bulgaria
         was not open to him because the Appellant would be unable to obtain
         a travel document,  and  secondly  the  judge's  finding  that  the
         Appellant's partner had no status in the UK was contrary to her  EU
         citizenship.

9.   In submissions Mr Gayle stated that the  initial  interview  transcript
    indicated that the officer had asked the Appellant if he  had  anything
    to say before he was returned to Iran. This supported  the  Appellant's
    explanation that he had  absconded  because  he  was  afraid  of  being
    returned.  It was also plausible that the Appellant had claimed to be a
    minor because he was following the instructions of the agent. The judge
    had failed to give sufficient reasons for rejecting these explanations.
     The judge had also failed to take into account the ongoing interest of
    the authorities given  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  his  substantive
    interview that he was doing community service which amounted to ongoing
    harassment.

10.   In  relation  to  ground  2  the  background  evidence  indicated  the
    arbitrary nature of the regime. Therefore it was not  implausible  that
    the writ of warning was issued some  years  after  the  Appellant  left
    Iran.  This  background  evidence  enhanced  the  plausibility  of  the
    document and the judge's finding that he attached little weight  to  it
    was therefore not sustainable in the light of the background evidence.

11.  In relation to Article 8 Mr Gayle submitted that the Appellant was  not
    entitled to any form of travel document and therefore he was unable  to
    leave  the  UK.  This  was  relevant  to  the  judge's  assessment   of
    proportionality.

12.  On behalf of the Respondent Ms Brocklesby submitted that the  Appellant
    was here without status and it was conceded that his  partner  was  not
    exercising treaty rights. Therefore there was no reason for  either  of
    them to remain in the UK since neither had any basis of stay. The judge
    considered all the evidence and found that the Appellant had failed  to
    show that he was not able to live in Bulgaria.

13.  In relation to the asylum claim the judge considered all  the  evidence
    and assessed it  in  a  holistic  manner.   He  accepted  part  of  the
    Appellant's claim but not that he had made comments  which  were  anti-
    regime or that he had fled Iran in search of international  protection.
    The judge rejected the Appellant's explanation for  absconding  because
    his brother was an asylum seeker in the UK and had  not  been  removed.
    The Appellant absconded for a significant period of time.

14.  The judge engaged with the writ of warning and found  that  there  were
    no further writs in the period since June 2009.   The  judge's  finding
    that the Appellant was not at risk on return was open  to  him  on  the
    evidence and the judge was entitled to reject the Appellant's claim  to
    have been subjected to community  service.  The  judge  had  taken  the
    background evidence into account in coming to these conclusions.

15.  In response  Mr  Gayle  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  partner  was
    currently a qualified person and was now working.  Her status had  been
    vague at the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal because
    she had just had a baby and was not working at that  time.   There  was
    nothing to suggest that she was not entitled  to  be  in  the  UK.  The
    Appellant's explanation for absconding was credible because  there  was
    no reason for him to abscond unless he feared  return  given  that  his
    brother was an asylum seeker.

16.  The Appellant had given a consistent account of  the  main  events  and
    the judge had failed to  engage  with  the  ongoing  harassment  during
    community service.  The judge had a duty to deal with this matter given
    that it was the Appellant's reason  for  leaving  Iran  and  there  was
    evidence in the letters from the Appellant's  family  that  he  was  of
    ongoing interest.


Discussion and Conclusions

17.  It is worth noting  at  the  outset  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's dishonesty in claiming to be a minor  and  his  failure  to
    pursue his asylum claim until he was encountered  by  police  seriously
    damaged his credibility.  However, the judge went on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's claim taken at its highest. With that in mind we shall deal
    with each of the grounds of appeal in turn.


     Ground 1

18.  The Appellant claimed that he had absconded soon after arriving in  the
    UK because he was terrified that he  would  be  returned  to  Iran.  At
    paragraph 31 of  the  decision  the  judge  rejected  this  explanation
    because the Appellant had contacted his brother, who had been in the UK
    for some time, soon after the Appellant arrived in  the  UK.   We  find
    that these  reasons  were  sufficient  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    explanation.  The judge found that the Appellant's claim to  have  left
    Iran in need of international protection was not credible. This finding
    was open to him on the evidence. The Appellant had arrived in the UK in
    2007, given a false date of birth, absconded and only sought to  pursue
    his asylum claim after his arrest in October 2010.


    Ground 2


19.  The weight to be attached to the writ  of  warning  dated  2009  was  a
    matter for the judge. At paragraph 33 of the decision  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for why he attached little weight  to  this  document.
    The writ of warning was issued three years after the incident  and  two
    years after the Appellant's departure  from  Iran,  and  there  was  no
    further interest in the Appellant since 2009. The judge's finding  that
    the Appellant was not of ongoing  interest  was  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.


    Ground 3


20.  The judge found that the threat to the Appellant's  life  contained  in
    the letters  from  the  Appellant's  brother  and  his  neighbour  were
    inconsistent with his claim to have  been  arrested  and  punished  for
    consuming alcohol. Contrary to the grounds the  judge  did  not  accept
    that the Appellant insulted the regime. He found at paragraph  35  that
    this part of the Appellant's claim was not credible. This  finding  was
    open to the judge on the evidence and  he  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    coming to that conclusion. The judge did not find the Appellant to be a
    credible witness for the reasons given at paragraphs 30 to 32.


    Ground 4


21.  The judge found that  the  Appellant  was  arrested  and  punished  for
    drinking alcohol  at  a  party  in  2006.  He  took  into  account  the
    background evidence, at paragraphs 9, 10, 23, 26, 36, 37  and  38,  and
    found that the Appellant was not persecuted prior to leaving  Iran  and
    he would be of no interest upon return. The judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant had failed to show to  the  lower  standard  that  he  was  a
    refugee was open to the judge on the evidence before him.

22.  We find that grounds 1 to 4 disclose no error of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision to dismiss the Appellant's asylum claim.


    Article 8

23.  The Appellant has been in the UK illegally and  formed  a  relationship
    with a Bulgarian  national.   It  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    partner was not a qualified person exercising treaty rights in the  UK.
    The judge found that it was in the best interests  of  their  child  to
    remain with the parents. The Appellant had failed to provide sufficient
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to show that family life  could
    not be enjoyed outside the UK. This finding was open to  the  judge  on
    the evidence. The grounds of appeal disclose no material error  of  law
    because the Appellant's removal was not  disproportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances.

24.  Accordingly we find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated  19th  August  2014  and  the
    decision shall stand. We dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 31st March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award



Signed                                  Date 31st March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
