
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02157/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 20th July 2015                    |On 22nd July 2015                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     IM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge V A Osborne promulgated on the 23rd December 2013 in which  she
       dismissed the Appellants appeal  against  the  removal  direction  to
       Pakistan that accompanied the refusal of his claim for asylum.

Discussion

    2. The Judge noted at paragraph 51 of the determination:

           "In respect of the Appellant's fear that he is likely to be made
           the subject of an honour killing because  he  has  breached  the
           family honour by failing to pursue his proposed marriage to WB I
           find that there was some sort of an agreement  between  the  two
           families that a marriage, in due course would take place.  This,
           in any event is conceded by the Respondent and  I  am  satisfied
           that  the  arrangements  described  by  the  Appellant  are   in
           accordance with cultural norms. He described  how  his  father's
           uncle, AI, had brokered the agreement with a view to uniting two
           parts of the same extended family."

    3. Notwithstanding the above the Judge made the following  findings:  "I
       therefore find that,  at  most,  there  was  some  sort  of  informal
       agreement between the two sides of the family about the  marriage  at
       some point in the  future  but  there  had  been  no  formalities  in
       connection with the arrangement" [para 52]. "I have therefore  formed
       the view and find that some preliminary negotiations had taken  place
       with regard to a marriage between the Appellant and  WB  but  nothing
       had been finalised or  formally  agreed.  On  that  basis  I  am  not
       satisfied that the Appellant would have  been  seen  as  dishonouring
       WB's family by indicating some time later than he did not wish to  go
       through with the arrangement."[para 54].  "It  is  Professor  Bluth's
       opinion that a verbal agreement would suffice but I am not  satisfied
       that the formal introductions had even taken place and  thus  neither
       family were in a position to regard the  engagement  as  having  been
       formalised" [para 56].

    4. Failure to follow a concession can amount to legal  error.  In  SS  v
       Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2010]  CSIH  72  the
       Secretary of State considered that it was credible that the  Claimant
       had been involved in film production.  The Judge did not accept  that
       the Claimant was a filmmaker.  The Court of Sessions noted  that  the
       Judge had before him, as a starting point as to the veracity  of  the
       Claimant's version of events, an acceptance by the Secretary of State
       that the Claimant was a filmmaker. Although the Judge was  not  bound
       to accept that conclusion, any departure from a position  established
       as true by both parties would require explanation.  In  its  absence,
       the reasonable inference was that the Judge had misunderstood or left
       the evidence out. The error was therefore properly categorised as one
       of law.

    5. Permisison to appeal against  the  determination  of  the  Judge  was
       refused by both the First-tier and Upper Tribunal on the papers.  The
       matter was renewed on a  Cart  challenge  to  the  High  Court  where
       permission was granted by Mr Justice Holman  whose  observations  are
       record as follows:

           "It is arguable that at paras. 52 and 54 FTT Judge  Osborne  did
           impermissibly go behind the concession of the  SSHD  that  there
           had been a verbal agreement to marry: and,  as  a  result,  side
           stepped at paras. 56 and 57 the clear evidence of the danger  of
           honour killing in the unchallenged report  of  Professor  Bluth.
           The judge's treatment of  safe  relocation  in  para.  72  seems
           completely to ignore the clear opinion  of  Professor  Bluth  at
           para 5.2.13 that the C. could not be safe anywhere in  Pakistan.
           This would render the decision of the FTT, and of the judges who
           refused PTA, wrong in law.  The gravity of the case is such that
           CPR rule 54.7.A(7)(b) (ii) is satisfied ("some other  compelling
           reason").

    6. Permisison to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal accordingly.

    7. I find the Judge has made  an  arguable  material  legal  error.  The
       Respondent conceded the marriage issue and  has  not  challenged  the
       experts report although that  is  not  determinative.  There  was  no
       notice to the parties that  the  Judge  intended  to  go  behind  the
       concession and, even though some reasoning is given, it  is  arguable
       that it is insufficient.

    8. The Appellants case was supported by an experts report.  The fact the
       report was not specifically challenged does not mean  it  is  agreed.
       In SI (expert evidence - Kurd - SM confirmed) Iraq  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
       00094 the Tribunal held that failure by the respondent to adduce  her
       own expert evidence cannot imbue  expert  evidence  submitted  by  an
       appellant with any greater  value  than  it  merits  when  considered
       alongside the rest of the evidence.

    9. The opinion of the expert is that in light of the  honour  issue  the
       Appellant will be at risk, there is no sufficiency of protection, and
       no internal flight option. The Judge failed to adequately explain why
       such conclusions were rejected although it maybe as a result  of  the
       findings in relation to the marriage issue.

   10. In all the circumstances I find the Judge  has  materially  erred  in
       law. The determination is set aside.  There  shall  be  no  preserved
       findings.

   11. The parties agreed that the best course  is  for  the  matter  to  be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Stoke to be reheard by
       a salaried judge other than Judge Osborne.

Decision

   12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is remitted.

Consequential Directions

   13. The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (IAC) sitting
       at Stoke to be heard by a  salaried  judge  of  that  Tribunal.  Time
       estimate 3 hours taking into account the availability of Mr Draycott,
       and for a CMR no later than 28 days before  the  date  of  the  final
       hearing before the nominated  salaried  judge  with  conduct  of  the
       substantive hearing, if possible.

   14. A Punjabi (Pakistan) interpreter is required.

   15. The Respondent shall, no later than 28 days  from  the  date  of  the
       sending of this determination, on the basis of the concession:

       a. Confirm  to  the  Tribunal  and  Appellants  representatives  what
       elements of Professor Bluth's report  are  accepted/conceded  and  in
       relation to the elements in dispute, the reasons why by reference  to
       country material and applicable case law.

       b. Whether it is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  suffered  past
       persecution in Pakistan on the facts.

Anonymity.

   16. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
       continue that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21st July 2015

