
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02360/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21 October 2014                        |On 7 November 2014               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                             mr abraham solomon
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N Mallick
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea with the date of  birth
    of 6 May 1988.  The respondent does not accept that he proved "even  to
    the lowest standard of proof" that he is Eritrean and a  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal came to the same conclusion  on  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse the appellant asylum.

 2. The appellant claimed that if he were returned to Eritrea he would face
    a real risk of suffering serious harm at  the  hands  of  the  Eritrean
    authorities.  On appeal the judge found that the appellant is  in  fact
    an Ethiopian national and that he had not established  that  he  has  a
    well-founded fear of persecution and that he is not therefore  entitled
    to a grant of asylum.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision of the judge and
    this was granted on the basis that it  is  arguable  that  the  judge's
    conclusions on the  appellant's  nationality  were  "disproportionately
    based on the appellant's familiarity with the Amharic language".

 4. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response opposing the appellant's appeal
    noting that amongst other things the grounds of appeal state  that  the
    judge should have had regard to the  fact  that  the  appellant  is  an
    Amiche and placed undue  weight  on  the  Sprakab  (Language  Analysis)
    Report.  The respondent pointed out that the judge stated that  he  had
    read and considered all the papers before him and had taken "everything
    in the round" when making his finding that the appellant was Ethiopian.
     The submission by the respondent is that  the  judge's  findings  were
    open to him on the evidence before him.

 5. In her submissions before me Miss Mallick relied on her grounds seeking
    permission to appeal.  In essence these were that the  judge  erred  in
    law by focusing on the appellant's (un)familiarity  with  the  Tigrinya
    language rather than focusing on the appellant's nationality which  was
    the primary question agreed  between  the  parties;  the  judge  placed
    disproportionate weight on the language  issue  as  a  result  of  that
    error; the judge failed to place sufficient weight on  the  appellant's
    evidence as to why he continued to  speak  Amharic;  the  judge  placed
    undue weight (without considering in balance the  background  material)
    on the Sprakab Report which  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant was an Amiche who spoke Amharic, was brought up in  Ethiopia,
    was deported to Assab and that the appellant's wife is from Assab.

 6. I do not find that there can be any real quarrel  with  how  the  judge
    came to his conclusions.  In  paragraph  24  of  the  determination  he
    stated "An important issue in this appeal, relevant to establishing the
    appellant's  nationality,  is  his  understanding   of   language;   in
    particular, whether he is a Tigrinya speaker."  The  judge  found  that
    the appellant's answers concerning his inability to speak Tigrinya were
    inconsistent and the judge then gave examples of how he  came  to  that
    conclusion.  He found that it should be clear to the appellant  whether
    or not he actually speaks Tigrinya and this  should  not  be  something
    about which he is in doubt.

 7. The judge took into account the  Sprakab  Report  commissioned  by  the
    respondent and concluded that the appellant does  not  speak  Tigrinya.
    The report was clear in its findings stating that  the  appellant  used
    and formed words and sentences in a manner typical of Amharic spoken in
    Ethiopia.  The judge concluded that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is an Eritrean national and that conclusion is  supported  by
    the appellant's lack of understanding and knowledge of,  amongst  other
    things, Eritrean place names, police uniforms and the local  church  in
    Assab in which town he was said to have lived for a time.

 8. The judge considered the evidence in the round  and  for  good  reasons
    attached no weight to the letter produced from the  Eritrean  community
    in Lambeth.  There was the  appellant's  personal  statement  and  oral
    evidence, but little else to support his contention that he is Eritrean
    and the judge gave sustainable reasons for finding against him  on  the
    matter.  It is clear that the appellant and those advising him did  not
    agree with the judge's conclusions and reasons, but the judge has  made
    sustainable findings and because of that he has  not  made  a  material
    error of law and there is no other good reason for  the  appeal  to  be
    reheard.

My Decision

 9. It follows from  what  is  said  above  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision is upheld as I announced at the hearing.

10. I note that an anonymity direction was given in the First-tier Tribunal
    determination.  The judge found that in view of the  assertions  raised
    by the appellant he should be granted anonymity.  I was  not  addressed
    on the matter of anonymity, but I consider that such a direction is not
    required to protect the appellant or anyone  else  and  therefore  that
    direction does not continue.




Signed                              Date 6 November 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


