
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02434/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th August 2015                  |On 28th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MS Z S R
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Smith (instructed Maya Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
         Secretary of State in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Designated Judge Appleyard) promulgated on 9th
         May 2014 by which he allowed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

    2.   The Appellant, a Bangladeshi woman, claimed to be  the  victim  of
         domestic violence at the hands of her husband while he was  in  the
         UK.

    3.   The Designated Judge accepted  the  facts  as  claimed;  that  the
         Appellant was indeed the victim of domestic abuse, that her husband
         had returned to Bangladesh, that he had  threatened  the  Appellant
         with acid, that he  would  kill  her  and  he  had  threatened  her
         parents.

    4.   At paragraph 58 the Designated Judge said:-

             "The Appellant is a victim of domestic violence and as such  I
             have looked at her case in the context of the  above-mentioned
             background material.  I appreciate that I look  at  each  case
             individually and in so doing I remind myself in particular  of
             the above-mentioned Country Guidance case of SA.  I find  this
             Appellant to be a  woman  who  is  at  real  risk  of  further
             domestic violence on return to  Bangladesh  and  that  in  the
             circumstances of a lone woman so returning there is no  viable
             internal relocation alternative.  Despite the efforts  of  the
             government to improve the situation of such women, on  account
             of the disinclination of the police to act upon complaints  of
             domestic violence, this is an Appellant who may not be able to
             obtain a sufficiency of protection by reason of the fact  that
             she is  a  woman.   The  persecution  she  fears  is  domestic
             violence and I am satisfied  that  in  all  the  circumstances
             there is no protection for her.  I therefore find that she has
             shown to the required standard that there is a  real  risk  of
             serious  harm  for  a  Refugee  Convention  reason  being  her
             membership of a  particular  social  group,  namely  women  in
             Bangladesh".

    5.   The Designated Judge had previously set out the relevant parts  of
         the  country  information  and  also  the  pertinent  parts  of  SA
         (Divorced woman - illegitimate child)  Bangladesh  CG  [2011]  UKUT
         00254 (IAC).

    6.   The Secretary of State's  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
         argue that the Judge erred in  failing  to  adequately  assess  the
         protection available in the light of SA because this Appellant  had
         familial support and thus was not  a  lone  woman.   Secondly,  the
         grounds argue that the Judge failed to consider the availability of
         shelters and women's' organisations  in  Bangladesh.   Thirdly,  he
         erred in failing to consider the option of relocation.

    7.   Mr Harrison confirmed there was no  challenge  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's credibility findings.

    8.   It is clear that the Judge took all  the  circumstances  carefully
         into account. He has given a detailed assessment to  the  available
         COIS and OGN and to the case of SA.  He  made  clear  that  on  the
         basis  of  the  evidence  there  was  no  availability   of   State
         Protection.

    9.   It may be that the Judge did not take into account  that  although
         returning alone, the Appellant has family in Bangladesh.   However,
         in light of the Judge's positive credibility findings the fact that
         her parents  had  themselves  been  targeted  by  her  husband  was
         accepted.  At paragraph 23 he  noted  that  in  December  2013  she
         learned from her father that her husband had returned to Bangladesh
         and had vandalised their home.  Her father reported the incident to
         the police.  He had threatened to kill the Appellant and  to  throw
         acid at her.  He sent a warning letter to her father.

    10.  It is clear from that that the  Appellant  cannot  return  to  the
         family home and be supported by her parents which means that she is
         effectively a lone  woman.   That  being  the  case  any  error  to
         specifically deal with that was not material to the  outcome.   The
         remainder of his findings are properly based on  an  assessment  of
         all of the evidence and he reached his conclusion having taken full
         account of the guidance in SA.

    11.  The decision of the Designated Judge containing no material  error
         of law the Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
         dismissed.

    12.  The First-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity direction I order
         it to continue.




    Signed   Dated 27th August 2015


    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin






    Direction regarding anonymity

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.




    Signed        Date 27th August 2015


    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
