
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/02966/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2017                        | On 15 February 2018             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                   MR S P
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1984.  He is a Tamil.

 2. In summary, his immigration history  is  that  he  entered  the  UK  in
    November 2010 in possession  of  a  Tier  4  student  visa,  which  was
    subsequently extended to November 2015 but curtailed in September 2013.
     He made an asylum claim in  November  2013  which  was  refused  on  4
    February 2015.


 3. The basis of his claim is that he worked for the LTTE in Colombo and in
    Trincomalee, gathering intelligence.  He was  arrested  in  April  2008
    during a round up, detained for one night but not  questioned  and  was
    then released.  He was told  by  the  LTTE  that  he  could  leave  the
    organisation in January 2009 and he then went to Malaysia for one year,
    returning to Sri Lanka in June 2010.  He was questioned upon his return
    but allowed to leave the airport.  He was  arrested  three  days  later
    from home, interrogated, tortured  and  escaped  on  28  June  2010  by
    payment of a bribe.


 4. The crux of the refusal was that although the April 2008 detention  was
    accepted, the other aspects of his claim including the  2010  detention
    and release by payment of  a  bribe  were  not  believed.  Considerable
    emphasis was placed on inconsistencies in his interview answers.


 5. He appealed.

 6. The case was first heard by a judge of the First-Tier who in a decision
    promulgated on 30 July 2015 dismissed the appeal.   That  decision  was
    subsequently found to contain material error of law such  that  it  was
    set aside to be reheard in the First-Tier.

 7. In a decision promulgated on 29 September 2016 a different judge of the
    First-Tier  again  dismissed  the  appeal.   That  decision,  too,  was
    subsequently found to contain  material error of law and it  was  again
    set aside and remitted to be reheard in the First-Tier.


    First tier hearing


 8. It came, the third time, before Judge of the First-Tier MA Khan who  in
    a decision promulgated on 18  April  2017  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant did not give oral evidence.


 9. The judge's findings are at paragraphs 31ff.  In  summary  he  did  not
    believe the appellant's historical account.


10. He found against the appellant that he was 'extremely vague' about  his
    intelligence activities [31]; that the LTTE would have  let  him  leave
    the organisation 'at their hour of need' [32]; that having been allowed
    to leave the LTTE he would have rejoined in Malaysia [35]; that  if  on
    return to Sri Lanka from Malaysia he would as a wanted  man  have  been
    able to get to the British High Commission to provide fingerprints  and
    to have exited via the airport on his own passport albeit with the help
    of an agent [34].


11. The judge then noted significant delay in the appellant claiming asylum
    in 2013 having arrived in 2010 [35].


12. The judge went on to place no weight on a  letter  from  a  Sri  Lankan
    lawyer, Mr de Silva, mainly because he did not mention it at  interview
    [36]; also, a letter from another  Sri  Lankan  lawyer  Mr  Kalupahana,
    supporting the claim that there is an arrest warrant for the appellant.
     Again, he did not mention an arrest warrant at  interview.   Also,  he
    would have been got by the authorities.  Again, no weight was placed on
    that letter [37].


13. The judge,  further,  dismissed  as  self-serving  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's father stating that the authorities were looking  for  him.
    The judge questioned why the authorities would not have  acted  on  the
    warrant, issued in 2010, until 2013.


14. Finally, the judge, who had noted  that  the  appellant  did  not  give
    evidence because of significant mental  health  issues,  noted  several
    medical reports about his psychiatric condition [44-48].   He  attached
    'due weight'  to  these  considering  that  they  gave  'little  or  no
    information as to when and what caused the appellant's condition to get
    so bad, they paint rather a subjective picture with regard to his  fear
    in Sri Lanka ... (they) do not venture to mention any other causes that
    may be responsible for his medical condition.'  Also  the  approach  is
    'with a narrow point of view, which comes from information provided  by
    the appellant or his family members.'


    Error of law hearing


15. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  29
    September 2017.


16. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Jegarajah made  the  following
    main points.  First, the starting point in  assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility should have been his mental health especially where  it  is
    so poor as it is  in  this  case.   Such  infected  the  judge's  whole
    findings including his failure to  mention  aspects  of  his  claim  at
    interview.  Second, his approach to  the  evidence  from  the  two  Sri
    Lankan lawyers was inadequate.  The evidence submitted was on all fours
    with PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.  No adequate explanation  had
    been given as to why the lawyer's evidence should not be believed.  The
    judge also failed to have regard to the evidence relating to his mental
    health in particular its likely cause or the  risk  he  would  face  on
    return given his overall mental health.


17. Mr Nath's position was that the grounds amount to a mere  disagreement.
    His findings on credibility were open to him for the reasons  he  gave.
    He had dealt adequately with the medical evidence.


    Decision on error of law


18. In considering this matter I concluded that the judge's decision showed
    material error of law.  The  core  problem  was  his  approach  to  the
    appellant's mental state and its relevance in  the  assessment  of  his
    account.  The judge merely noted (at [8]) 'The appellant did  not  give
    evidence because of his mental condition.'  And at [29] he  states  'In
    coming to my conclusions on the  appellant's  credibility,  I  am  have
    (sic) taken into account the appellant's claim that  he  has  a  mental
    problem, his medical evidence including reports'.  He then moves to his
    assessment of the historical account and the  criticisms  of  it  noted
    above.


19. The problem is that neither the respondent nor the  judge  appeared  to
    dispute that the appellant  has  significant  mental  health  problems.
    Compelling evidence in support of  that  was  before  the  judge.   For
    example, there is evidence from Springfield University Hospital (p S31-
    89  -  appellant's  supplementary  bundle)  which  confirmed  that  the
    appellant  has  PTSD  and  psychosis  (S53);  Dr  Mansfield  'A  Highly
    Specialised Clinical Psychologist' confirms that he suffers  from  PTSD
    to such a severe extent that 'he is unable to track conversation';  his
    medical records which track the deterioration in his mental health date
    back to 2014  where  the  provisional  diagnosis  following  his  first
    psychotic episode was schizophrenia; a report by Dr Fahmy which  states
    that as at 2016 he was still suffering from PTSD and suicidal ideation.




20. The judge did not refer to the medical evidence other than in the  most
    perfunctory way (at [29]),  when  considering  credibility  and  making
    findings of fact. I am satisfied that must amount to a  material  error
    of law. The appellant's mental state was  crucial  to  his  ability  to
    provide clear and consistent information in response  to  questions  in
    interview. The  medical  evidence  is  potentially  supportive  of  the
    appellant's case in the absence of any alternative explanation for  his
    symptoms. The absence of any analysis of the medical  evidence  in  the
    context of credibility is fatal to the decision.


21. I would add that in terms of the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  (No
    2) of 2010: 'Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant  guidance'
    the appellant is a 'vulnerable  adult'.   Unfortunately,  there  is  no
    indication in the decision that the judge was alert to that matter  and
    the possible consequences  in  respect  of  the  carrying  out  of  the
    credibility assessment (see para [13] - [15] of the  Guidance)  and  AM
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 (particularly at [30]).


22.   I find for these reasons that the  judge's  decision  shows  material
    error of law such that the decision be set aside to be remade.


    Resumed hearing


23. Ms Jegarajah, having noted that the appellant's  case  had  been  three
    times to the First-Tier Tribunal and three times to the Upper  Tribunal
    said that the appellant continued to be unfit to give evidence and  she
    wished the matter to be dealt with by submissions which I proceeded  to
    hear.  Mr Nath had nothing to add.


24. I refer to the submissions as necessary in the course of  my  analysis.
    Before me were the two appellant's  bundles  (main  and  supplementary)
    that had  been  before  the  First  tier  judge.  They  included  short
    statements by the appellant and his brother who is in the UK.  Most  of
    the rest of the material was medical evidence and background material.


25. I consider it appropriate to look first in more detail at  the  medical
    evidence.  It is extensive.  The following,  in  roughly  chronological
    order, suffices.  The first reference is  a  referral  to  Enfield  and
    Haringey Care Services by a GP dated August 2013.  The reason given  is
    that 'this patient was tortured in Sri Lanka 2 years ago.  His  brother
    was recently arrested and tortured too.  He is in  permanent  fear  and
    depressed' (S73).  A report (January 2014) from Dr Ashraph,  Consultant
    Psychiatrist, Wandsworth Early Intervention in Psychosis  Service  make
    the diagnosis 'First Episode psychosis, most likely schizophrenia'.


26. A report by Dr Fahmy,  Consultant  Psychiatrist  (January  2015)  (S45)
    notes a diagnosis of 'unspecified non-organic psychosis (in  remission)
    and PTSD.'  Under 'Impression' the  doctor  writes:  'Deterioration  in
    mental state in context of recent detailed interview  at  Home  Office.
    This is consistent with a diagnosis  of  PTSD  and  the  experience  of
    having had to relive the traumatic events through the interview ...  of
    note there are no clear symptoms of psychosis at today's review and the
    paranoid ideation he experiences would be consistent with the PTSD.'


27. I note a report from Dr Ferguson, Springfield University  Hospital  (21
    July 2015). He had known the appellant for over a year. He stated  that
    the appellant was suffering persecutory delusions of being followed  by
    the Sri Lankan army and suffered psychotic  sensations  in  2013  after
    receiving a letter from his father stating that the Sri Lankan army had
    abducted his brother. He was paranoid  with  acute  psychotic  symptoms
    including experiences of being tortured by the Sri Lankan army. He  had
    multiple reviews but showed symptoms of PTSD.  His  condition  worsened
    after the first asylum interview and in early 2015  he  felt  that  the
    Metropolitan Police were the Sri Lankan army. Dr Ferguson first met the
    appellant in early 2015 and then on three subsequent occasions. He  did
    not recognise Dr Ferguson and lacked  insight  and  capacity  into  his
    mental state. He could not make a decision or instruct a lawyer. He was
    at high risk of suicide and relapse.


28. Finally, further reviews by Dr Fahmy in 2015  (S51)  and  January  2016
    (S34) state the same diagnosis as he gave in January 2015,  the  latter
    indicating some improvement due to his medication.   A  further  review
    (May 2016) (S39)  maintains  the  diagnosis  and  states  that  despite
    improvement he 'remains significantly functionally impaired'.  A letter
    (September 2016) from a psychiatric nurse shows that his  'presentation
    is in keeping with PTSD' and gives the opinion that  the  appellant  is
    not able to instruct  a  solicitor  or  give  evidence  as  such  would
    'significantly impact on his mental health' (S3).

29. I was not referred to an up to date medical report, however, I conclude
    from the mass of medical evidence that the appellant  is  a  vulnerable
    adult  and  in  assessing  his  account  particularly  in  respect   of
    discrepancies and  lack  of  clarity,  paragraphs  14  and  15  of  the
    Presidential Guidance apply.


30. As indicated much of the respondent's concern was what were  considered
    to be vague and inconsistent  answers  given  at  interview  about  his
    involvement with the LTTE (paragraphs 42-45  of  refusal  letter),  who
    paid the bribe to get him  released  [55],  who  helped  him  exit  the
    country [56], whether he was in hiding when he went  to  get  the  visa
    [65], and the circumstances  surrounding  the  claimed  arrest  of  his
    father and brother [63, 64].


31. The appellant attended for a substantive interview on 4 February  2014.
    It is recorded in  the  SEF  form  (respondent's  bundle  B1)  that  he
    attended with a community nurse, a  care  coordinator  from  Wandsworth
    Early Intervention Centre in Psychosis.' Although he answered the first
    few  introductory  questions  concerns  regarding  his  fitness  to  be
    interviewed were identified at an early stage  and  the  interview  was
    suspended. The interviewer's comments are recorded 'applicant  answered
    questions slowly and often appeared unresponsive/"zoned  out".  May  be
    due to medication being taken.'


32. I note  the  following  from  the  reconvened  interview  record    (24
    December 2014). At the start, 'Applicant looks a little distracted  and
    providing responses very  slowly.   He  has  very  slurred  speech  and
    stuttering.  Keeps looking around does not make eye  contact.   He  has
    his carer - relative with him' (main bundle p137);  at  Q43  'applicant
    looks a bit drowsy and closing eyes'; Q61 'very  slurred  speech';  Q65
    'applicant looking around'; Q87 'applicant looks very tired given water
    to drink'; Q97 'applicant  finding  it  very  difficult  to  speak-very
    slurred speech'; Q100 'applicant holding his face'; Q103 'applicant not
    responding just rubbing his hands'; Q107 'applicant very upset'.


33. Of course, no criticism is made of the respondent for  seeking  to  get
    the appellant to give his account and many of the  appellant's  answers
    appear to be detailed and coherent.  However, it is patently clear that
    at that time and subsequently  he  was  suffering  serious  mental  ill
    health for which he was receiving treatment.  In  light  of  the  clear
    difficulties experienced by the appellant (and of sufficient concern to
    be noted by the respondent), I do  not  find  it  appropriate  to  hold
    against the appellant the various inconsistencies and lack  of  clarity
    and detail in the interview answers referred to in the refusal  letter.
    As paragraph 14 of the Guidance states:


    'Consider the evidence, allowing  for  possible  different  degrees  of
    understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to those who are  not
    vulnerable, in the context of evidence from others associated with  the
    appellant and the background evidence  before  you.  Where  there  were
    clear discrepancies in the oral evidence, consider the extent to  which
    the age, vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element  of
    that discrepancy or lack of clarity.'


34. In this case the appellant did not  give  oral  evidence  nor  did  any
    witnesses. However, I see no reason not to apply the  Guidance  in  the
    context of the evidence given at interview.


35. As indicated the Guidance advises that in  assessing  the  evidence  of
    vulnerable applicants the claim should be examined in  the  context  of
    the background information.   In this case, for  example,  'The  Hindu'
    newspaper reports that Malaysia was  being  used  by  the  LTTE  'as  a
    transit point, hideout and new base of operation' (p99).   Whilst  that
    report is dated some time after the appellant says he was in Malaysia I
    consider it gives a measure of support for his claim of LTTE activities
    there.


36. Further, the criticism at [53] of the refusal letter that had  he  been
    of interest to the authorities he would not have been allowed to  leave
    the airport only to be arrested days later is addressed  in  GJ  (post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 where  the  Tribunal
    held, inter alia,  that  there  are  no  detention  facilities  at  the
    airport. Only those whose  names  appear  on  a  'stop'  list  will  be
    detained from the airport. Any risk for those in whom  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities are or become interested exists not  at  the  airport,  but
    after arrival in their home area, where their arrival will be  verified
    by the CID or police within a few days. Such is  thus  consistent  with
    the appellant's account. By his account he returned to Sri  Lanka  from
    Malaysia in June 2010 (witness statement para 14) moving to the  family
    house. He was detained a few days later. The  arrest  warrant  was  not
    issued until August 2010 (p12). Again, his account is  consistent  with
    the background material.


37. I would add that his claim  to  have  been  able  to  escape  from  the
    detention in 2010 and exit the airport with the help  of  an  agent  is
    consistent with the background material which  indicates  that  bribery
    and corruption are endemic in Sri Lanka (see GJ at eg [424]).


38. A further point taken by the respondent was that  there  was  no  court
    order or warrant against the appellant.  There is  now  a  considerable
    amount in that regard.  It purports to be presented by two  Sri  Lankan
    attorneys.


39. The first, an item from Mr De Silva is a one  page  letter  dated  July
    2015. It states he was instructed by the appellant's uncle to represent
    him after he was  arrested  in  June  2010.  He  states  that  he  made
    representations but as the appellant was detained under the  Prevention
    of  Terrorism  Act  the  officers  were  not  obliged  to  provide  any
    information or to produce him in court.


40. He states that having made further enquiries, 'the authorities  records
    show that (he) is an absconder from the custody and he will be arrested
    on return from Sri Lanka'. He also understood that 'a summons has  been
    issued against him to surrender at the TID office'. He had been  unable
    to obtain a copy of the summons. He states that if he  returns  to  Sri
    Lanka the appellant will be  taken  into  custody  under  the  Criminal
    Procedure Act 1979.


41. In itself the assessment of the reliability  of  such  a  brief  letter
    commissioned by the family is likely to be approached with caution.

42.  However, Mr Kalupahana's evidence is later and  more  substantial.  It
    was not received at the behest of  the  family  but,  as  Ms  Jegarajah
    emphasised, by the appellant's  British  solicitors  who  wrote  to  Mr
    Kalupahana in August 2016 (p19) asking him to investigate. That  letter
    was placed in the bundle. His response (p4) sending a copy of the  case
    file from the Magistrates Court in Colombo is at p9ff.  From my reading
    of them they are the equivalent of  records  of  court  proceedings  in
    which the court is asked by the Director of the Terrorist Investigation
    Department to grant an order to detain the appellant ('Informations  to
    the Magistrate') (p9), and, later, the granting of an arrest warrant by
    the  Magistrate  (p11,12)  information  having  been  given  that   the
    appellant had 'fled away.' The envelope containing the records sent  by
    DHL by the Sri Lankan lawyer is in the bundle. The documents sent  from
    Mr  Kalupahana  have  been  certified  as  true  copies  by  the  Court
    Registrar. The court reference corresponds to the arrest warrant and is
    internally consistent.


43. In considering these items it is not suggested that Mr  Kalupahana  and
    Mr De Silva are anything other than bona  fide  Sri  Lankan  attorneys.
    There is also no suggestion that the lawyers had been involved  in  any
    discreditable conduct.


44. It seems to me that the evidence submitted is similar  to  that  of  PJ
    (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA  Civ  1011  which  at  [38-41]  provides  where
    evidence is adduced from Sri Lankan attorneys weight ought to be  given
    to it.

    At [41] ' ... Whilst it is undoubtedly the case  that  false  documents
    are widely available in Sri Lanka, once it  was  established  that  the
    documents in question originated from a Sri Lankan court, a  sufficient
    justification was required for the conclusion that the  appellant  does
    not have a well-founded fear of persecution. Prima facie, this material
    reveals that the appellant has previously been arrested  in  connection
    with a bomb, three members of his family had close LTTE connections and
    he is wanted for questioning "to decide whether he had been engaged  in
    LTTE terrorist activities". But perhaps of greatest significance, there
    is a letter from the Magistrate of the relevant court to the Controller
    of Immigration and Emigration stating that  the  appellant  is  in  the
    United Kingdom and that he is to be  arrested  on  his  return  to  Sri
    Lanka. In the absence of a sufficient reason for concluding  otherwise,
    the inescapable conclusion to be drawn from this material  -  retrieved
    independently,  it  is  to  be  stressed,  by  two  lawyers  from   the
    Magistrates' court on separate occasions - is that the  appellant  will
    be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka as a result of  links  with  the
    LTTE and their activities ... without an adequate  explanation,  it  is
    difficult to understand how the appellant could have falsified a letter
    from the  Magistrate  of  the  relevant  court  to  the  Controller  of
    Immigration and Emigration ordering the  appellant's  arrest  which  he
    then placed in the court records so that it could later be retrieved by
    two separate lawyers. At the very least, this feature of  the  evidence
    required detailed analysis and explanation.'


45. Applying that reasoning to the documentary evidence looked  at  in  the
    round,  particularly,  that  the  items  submitted  by  Mr  Kalupahana,
    included certified copies of the Sri Lankan  court  file  and  an  open
    arrest warrant,  I see no basis for giving anything other  than  strong
    weight to that evidence.

46. In summary, to the lower standard the appellant satisfies me as to  the
    truthfulness of the material aspects of his account,  namely,  that  he
    was involved to the extent claimed with  the  LTTE,  was  detained  and
    severely ill treated  by  the  authorities  in  2010  on  suspicion  of
    involvement with the LTTE, that he escaped detention by  payment  of  a
    bribe and the country by using an agent, and that there  is  a  warrant
    for his arrest.


47. It is held against the appellant that having arrived in the UK in  2010
    he did not claim asylum for three years. I  find  plausible  his  claim
    that, as he had leave and hoped to return  when,  as  he  said  in  his
    statement, the situation returned to normal, there was no need to.  And
    that the trigger for his doing so in 2013 was the arrest of his father,
    briefly, and of his brother.


48. I would add at  this  stage  that  I  find  persuasive  Ms  Jegarajah's
    submission  that  the  appellant's  serious  mental  health   problems,
    primarily PTSD, are  reasonably likely to be a consequence not only  of
    his  own  experiences  at  the  hands  of  the  authorities  but  also,
    particularly, of learning of the detention of his brother in 2013.  His
    problems and initial referral date from that time.  He referred  to  it
    to his doctors (supra at [25]). I find, to  the  lower  standard  of  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, that his brother was  arrested.  There
    is an absence of any alternative explanation for his symptoms.

49. There remains the issue of risk on return.


50. The documents provide prima facie evidence that go to the issue of risk
    on return to Sri Lanka in light of [7](d) of the headnote in  GJ  which
    provides inter alia:


    'The current categories of persons  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm in return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise,
    are:


    ...(d) A person whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
    accessible at the airport, comprising a  list  of  those  against  whom
    there is an extant court order or  arrest  warrant.  Individuals  whose
    name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the airport and handed
    over to the appropriate authorities, in  pursuance  of  such  order  or
    warrant.'


51. It was not suggested that  the  conclusions  of  the  country  guidance
    should be diverted from.


52. As the appellant satisfies me for the reasons given that he is in  that
    category his appeal succeeds.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal showed material error  of  law.   It
is set aside and remade as follows:-

      The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                             Date 12 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway





