
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02322/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran of Counsel, JD Spicer Zeb, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is an Afghan national whose date of birth is given  as  1
    January 1995.  In February 2009 he arrived in the United Kingdom as  an
    unaccompanied minor and five days later claimed  subsidiary  protection
    because he feared persecution on return to Afghanistan  on  account  of
    his father's involvement with the Taliban.

 3. The Respondent granted him discretionary leave until 1 July  2012.   In
    time, on 22 June 2012 the Appellant made  an  application  for  further
    leave to remain which on 8 January  2015  the  Respondent  refused  and
    proposed to make  directions  for  his  removal  to  Afghanistan.   The
    reasons for the decision were given in a letter of 8 January 2015  (the
    reasons letter).   The  Respondent  did  not  address  the  Appellant's
    subsidiary protection claim to any extent because she found he had  not
    appealed  the   refusal   of   subsidiary   protection   when   granted
    discretionary leave in September  2009  and  this  cast  doubt  on  the
    credibility of his protection claim: see paragraph 12  of  the  reasons
    letter.

 4. The Respondent went on to consider the return of the Appellant to Kabul
    referring extensively to various determinations of the  Upper  Tribunal
    and concluded that his return would not place  the  United  Kingdom  in
    breach of its obligations under  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
    Convention.  The Respondent then addressed the Appellant's claim  under
    Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  with  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules.  She dealt at length  on  the  time
    critical factors imposed  in  the  Rules  and  dealt  very  briefly  at
    paragraph 80 with the issue of ties to Afghanistan as  referred  to  by
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  She went  on  to  consider  his  claim  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules  and
    concluded his parents and siblings remained in Afghanistan and it would
    not be disproportionate to return him.

 5. On 10 February 2015 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds  are  formulaic  and  include  a  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds referring to  Articles  2,  3,  13  and  14  of  the
    European Convention and also to the Refugee Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 6. By a decision promulgated on 24 August 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I. Malcolm dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 7. On 29 September 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett  granted
    permission to appeal on the ground that it was arguable the  Judge  had
    failed to make a finding on the Appellant's credibility and to consider
    the latest background evidence on the situation in Kabul.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Appellant attended, accompanied by  his  uncle  and  a  friend.   I
    explained the purpose of  and  the  procedure  to  be  adopted  at  the
    hearing.



Submissions for the Appellant

 9. Ms Loughran addressed the  two  grounds  for  appeal  set  out  in  the
    permission application and for which permission had been granted.   The
    Judge had  not  made  an  express  finding  whether  she  accepted  the
    Appellant's account why he had left Afghanistan.  Even  the  Respondent
    in her response of 13 October  2015  under  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended) accepted it was only
    implicit upon reading the decision as a whole that the Judge had  found
    the Appellant not to be credible was inadequate.  The Judge had  failed
    to consider whether if the Appellant's account were credible  he  would
    not be at risk on return.  All  her  findings  had  been  adverse.   At
    paragraph  48  of  her  decision  she   had   accepted   the   apparent
    inconsistencies identified in the interview replies were  not  material
    and had placed more weight on the implausibility of the claim that  the
    Appellant had left Afghanistan and had come to the United  Kingdom  and
    had no contact details for his mother.

10. At paragraph 51, the Judge had noted the Respondent  had  accepted  the
    Appellant's nationality but she  had  not  made  any  findings  on  the
    Appellant's subjective evidence and had relied on  background  evidence
    only when making her express finding that  the  Appellant  was  neither
    credible nor a witness of truth.

11. At paragraph 55 of her decision the Judge had failed to make a  finding
    whether the Appellant on return would be at risk in his home area.  She
    had considered internal relocation in Kabul.  At paragraph 54, she  had
    referred to the country guidance case of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan
    CG [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  and  noted  she  was  required  to  give
    consideration to it.  The Appellant's argument was that  since  AK  had
    been reported the security situation in Afghanistan and  in  Kabul  had
    deteriorated.  The attention  of  the  Judge  had  been  drawn  to  the
    background evidence prepared subsequent to  the  reporting  of  AK  and
    which was in the Appellant's bundle at the hearing before the Judge.  I
    see it was expressly referred to in  submissions  as  recorded  by  the
    Judge in her Record of Proceedings.

12. The Judge was obliged to give consideration to AK but in  view  of  the
    submissions made  about  the  change  of  situation  evidenced  in  the
    background information, the Judge was obliged to consider such evidence
    and whether she was still bound to follow AK as there were very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence not to do so:  see  paragraphs  46
    and 47 of the judgment in SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ  940.   The
    Judge had erred in failing to consider  the  details  of  AK  and  then
    whether she should depart from AK in the light of  the  additional  and
    subsequent background evidence which the Appellant had submitted and to
    which  reference  had  been  made  in  submissions   on   his   behalf.
    Additionally, I noted  that  since  AK  was  reported  the  US  and  UK
    governments have withdrawn their combat troops from Afghanistan.

13. Ms Loughran continued that the Judge had failed to consider whether the
    Appellant could safely return to his home area but had immediately  and
    only considered whether Kabul offered an internal  flight  alternative.
    She had erred in failing to apply the appropriate tests of  safety  and
    in finding whether the Appellant would be safe in Kabul and whether  it
    would not be unduly harsh  to  require  him  to  relocate  there.   The
    decision should be set aside in its entirety.

Submissions for the Respondent

14. Mr Staunton considered that looking at the Judge's decision as a  whole
    and in particular paragraphs 48-53 it was clear that even if there  was
    no express finding, the Judge did not accept  the  Appellant's  account
    was credible.  She was entitled to note there was no objective evidence
    to support the Appellant's claims about his father's  involvement  with
    the Taliban.  At paragraph  53  she  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    account about his family and the limited  extent  of  efforts  made  to
    trace them.  At paragraph 55 although she had not made express findings
    about whether return to Kabul would be safe and not  unduly  harsh  for
    the Appellant, she clearly had these matters in mind when she found  he
    was a fit young adult with skills acquired in the United Kingdom  which
    he could be put to use in Afghanistan.

15. The Judge at paragraph 54 of her decision had stated she had considered
    all matters including AK.  The 2015 background information  was  before
    her in the Appellant's bundle and this ground of appeal amounted to  no
    more than a disagreement with the Judge's  conclusions.   The  decision
    should be upheld.

Response for the Appellant

16. Ms Loughran argued in relation to the  first  ground  for  appeal  that
    there  was  no  requirement  in  subsidiary  claims  for  corroborative
    evidence to be available.  The Judge had made  certain  findings  which
    were not adverse to the Appellant's credibility and  had  placed  undue
    weight  on  his  lack  of  contact  information  for  his   mother   in
    Afghanistan.  In any event, this was not  central  to  the  Appellant's
    claim.  The lack of objective evidence about the Appellant's family did
    not absolve the Judge from the requirement to make  a  finding  whether
    the Appellant's account was accepted in whole, in part or  not  at  all
    and to give reasons for it.  The limited efforts or results of  efforts
    to trace the Appellant's family in Afghanistan did  not  alleviate  the
    need for the Judge to make specific findings on the  Appellant's  claim
    about his father's involvement with the Taliban.  The lack of objective
    evidence for this referred to in paragraph 52 of the decision was not a
    reason to reject  the  claim  because  there  is  no  requirement  that
    subsidiary protection claims must be corroborated.

17. Ms Loughran repeated the submission that the Judge had failed  to  make
    any finding whether the Appellant would be at risk in his home area but
    had proceeded at paragraph 55 of her decision to consider the  risk  to
    him in Kabul.  Paragraph 55 amounted to a mis-direction in law  because
    it failed to take account of  the  submissions  made,  relying  on  the
    background evidence before the Judge about security in Afghanistan  and
    the submissions made on it.  There was a wealth of evidence to  support
    the submission that the security situation in Afghanistan, including in
    Kabul, had changed considerably since AK although it was  open  to  the
    Judge to rely on AK she had failed to consider whether the more  recent
    evidence was reason enough to depart from AK.  She had  not  considered
    which was an error of law.

18. There was no clarification about the nature of the efforts to trace the
    Appellant's family and was referred to the letter from the British  Red
    Cross at page 101 of the Appellant's bundle.  The  fact  was  that  the
    Appellant had made efforts to trace his family but the  Respondent  had
    not.

Findings and Consideration

19. I find that for the reasons  stated  in  the  Appellant's  grounds  for
    permission to appeal as explained by Ms Loughran in her submissions  in
    the Upper Tribunal, the Judge has made errors of law  as  described  in
    the grounds for and in the grant of permission to  appeal.   The  Judge
    failed to make any express findings or even  any  express  or  adequate
    findings on the credibility of  the  Appellant's  claim,  supported  by
    reference to his evidence.  Other than relying on AK, she has failed to
    address the specific points made for the Appellant about the changes in
    the security situation in Kabul and Afghanistan since AK  was  reported
    in 2012 and as described in the documents in the Appellant's  objective
    bundle of evidence, notwithstanding the submission noted  at  paragraph
    37 about continuing violence in Kabul.  The Judge needed to  have  made
    findings on the background evidence relevant to the security  situation
    in the Appellant's home  area  because  his  safety  there  had  to  be
    assessed before the reasonableness of  internal  re-location  to  Kabul
    could be considered.  Further, whether or not she found  the  Appellant
    credible, she  needed  to  consider  the  risk  to  him  on  return  to
    Afghanistan simply as a failed asylum seeker.

20. For these reasons  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    contained errors of law such that it cannot stand  and  should  be  set
    aside in its entirety.

21. Having regard to the extent of the fact finding which will be  required
    to re-make the decision and the provisions of s.12(2) of the  Tribunals
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  at  7.2(b)  I
    consider the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    decide. The First-tier Tribunal may wish to consider the judgment in TN
    and MA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2015] UKSC 40  and  the  EASO  Country  of
    Origin Information Report of January 2015.

Anonymity

22. No reference was made to the discontinuance of the anonymity  direction
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and in the circumstances I direct  that
    it should continue.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    of law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the  appeal
    remitted to be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 29. xii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

