
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02336/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Date Sent                  |
|On 4th July 2013                                |On 12th July 2013          |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     S N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, Counsel instructed on behalf of Irving &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity  direction  that  no  report  or
    other publication of these proceedings or any part  or  parts  of  them
    shall name or directly or indirectly identify the claimant.   Reference
    to the claimant may be by use of his initials but not by name.  Failure
    by any person, body or institution  whether  corporate  or  incorporate
    (for the avoidance of doubt to include either party to this appeal)  to
    comply with this direction may lead to  a  contempt  of  Court.    This
    direction shall continue in force until the Upper Tribunal (IAC) or  an
    appropriate Court lifts or varies it.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran, born  in  1987.   He  appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hodgkinson), who in a determination  promulgated  on  16th  April  2013
    dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's decision of 22nd February
    2013 to refuse to grant him asylum under paragraph 336 of  HC  395  (as
    amended) and to issue  directions  for  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. The history of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant  left  Iran  in
    February 2012, with the assistance of an agent who, he claims, provided
    him with two false passports.  The  Appellant  arrived  in  Abu  Dhabi,
    where he successfully applied for a Tier 4 Student visa  on  7th  March
    2012, which visa was valid from 18th March 2012 until 29th May 2013.

 4. The Appellant spent time in Qatar and Dubai before coming to the United
    Kingdom.  He transited for three  hours  in  Egypt  in  addition.   The
    Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom, at Heathrow  Airport  on  22nd
    March 2012 and claims to have travelled  using  one  of  the  passports
    which, he claims, was provided by the  agent,  although  this  was  not
    accepted by the Respondent.  In that respect it was asserted on  behalf
    of the Respondent that the Appellant had not used a false  passport  to
    enter the United Kingdom.  This is based on information that  they  had
    received from the National Border Targeting Centre (the NBTC), part  of
    the intelligence, targeting and watch listing  command  within  customs
    and National Operations Directorate, who had conducted checks with  the
    airlines on the Appellant's air travel.  It was said by the  Respondent
    that the Appellant had left Cairo International  Airport  in  Egypt  on
    21st March 2012, by Egyptair flight MS0777 at 9.20 a.m. and arrived  at
    London Heathrow, with the Appellant using his  own  valid  passport  on
    which he had applied for his visa.  The Respondent therefore considered
    that he had withheld his true details of his journey to the UK.

 5. The Appellant having arrived in the United Kingdom on 5th April he made
    an appointment to attend the Respondent's Asylum Screening  Unit  (ASU)
    and he claimed asylum on 28th May 2012.

 6. The basis of the Appellant's claim related to his  activities  in  Iran
    and in particular his involvement with a group  called  Sonat  Bavaran,
    the Appellant being the head of the group.  This was a group  that  the
    Appellant with six others had begun to help Sunni Muslims by  providing
    them with assistance in financial, educational and social  issues.   It
    was asserted that during the first part of those activities  on  behalf
    of Sonat Bavaran, the Appellant was involved in distributing  leaflets.
    In October 2006, the Iranian government announced that Sunnis could not
    conduct their special prayers for Eid in  their  own  mosque  thus  the
    Appellant and a few of his friends went to the house of  a  Sunni  Imam
    and that was subsequently raided.  The Appellant and five  other  young
    men were arrested and taken to a detention centre during which time  he
    was beaten during detention.  On 1st November  2006  he  was  taken  to
    court and found guilty of public disorder  and  sentenced  to  eighteen
    months' imprisonment with 36 months' suspended  imprisonment.   He  was
    released on 21st April 2008.

 7.   The Appellant returned then to Chabahar and began to assist the  Imam
    in organising celebrations.  The Sonat Bavaran group started work in an
    office of the mosque known as the  Youth  Branch.   The  Appellant  and
    others would hold  meetings  and  write  articles  and  leaflets.   The
    Appellant had been introduced to the Imam of the mosque in Zahedan  and
    continued to find financial resources for the mosque there.   He  would
    travel to Dubai to find a  sponsor  to  help  expand  the  mosque.   In
    November 2010 the Appellant was there for three days to obtain finance.
     Upon return to Iran he was arrested and charged with  obtaining  money
    from foreign authorities for expanding a Sunni mosque.  He was held for
    three months in a detention centre and during  interrogation  was  told
    that the office at the mosque was  raided  and  their  belongings  were
    taken.   The  Appellant  was  subjected  to  mental   pressure   during
    detention.  After three months he was released  in  or  about  February
    2011 and  the  conditions  of  release  were  that  he  was  to  report
    fortnightly.  He was taken to  court  but  there  was  insufficient  to
    proceed with the hearing and he was released on bail.  His release  was
    secured by his father and uncle offering money by way  of  bail  bonds.
    After his release, he returned to his parents' house  in  Shiraz.   The
    activities of Sonat Bavaran continued through the Appellant creating  a
    group page on Facebook.  The Facebook page for Sonat Bavaran was set up
    approximately two months following his release.   The  privacy  setting
    was "secret" and the membership grew to just over 2,450 members.  Their
    activities continued in Chabahar.   On  4th  July  2011  the  Appellant
    reported to the authorities but on 8th July the security forces came to
    his father's home, seeking to arrest the Appellant who was out  of  the
    house at the time.  The  Appellant's  computer  was  confiscated.   The
    Appellant did not return home, went into hiding  and  managed  to  flee
    Iran in February 2012.  On 28th February 2013 a court hearing  in  Iran
    went ahead without the Appellant who had been found  guilty.   Sentence
    was yet to be passed.  The Appellant claimed that he could  not  return
    to Iran as his life was in danger.

 8.  The  Respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  22nd  February  2013
    considered the factual aspect of the Appellant's claim  in  respect  of
    his membership of the Sonat Bavaran, the  circumstances  of  his  first
    arrest, his second arrest, the  charges  that  were  allegedly  brought
    against him, the raid on the house and his  Facebook  activities.   The
    Respondent also considered the delay in making his asylum claim and the
    issue of the Appellant's use of a passport to enter the United Kingdom.
     In doing so, the Respondent did not accept  as  credible  the  account
    given by the Appellant concerning the material facts for  a  number  of
    reasons set out in the refusal  letter  citing  that  his  account  was
    inconsistent in material respects and was not credible.  The Respondent
    relied on Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and found that to be a matter to  affect  his
    credibility and further in respect of his claim  to  have  entered  the
    United Kingdom by the use of a false passport  was  considered  in  the
    light of intelligence information from National Border Targeting Centre
    which had conducted checks with the  airline  on  the  Appellant's  air
    travel noting that the Appellant had used his own valid  passport  thus
    it was considered he had withheld his true details of  the  journey  to
    the UK in order to facilitate a  false  claim  for  asylum.   Thus  the
    Respondent did not find the Appellant had demonstrated  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution and refused his application.  The Respondent issued
    directions directing his removal to Iran.

 9.  The Appellant exercised his right to appeal that decision and  it  led
    to the appeal coming before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Hodgkinson)
    sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  10th  April  2013.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 16th April 2013 Judge Hodgkinson dismissed  his  appeal.
    This was a comprehensive determination in which  the  judge  considered
    the factual account given by the Appellant and set out findings of fact
    from paragraphs 35 to 77 concluding at paragraphs 75 and 76 that:-

         "75. Having taken into account the totality of the  evidence  which
             is before me I conclude, even applying the lower  standard  of
             proof, that the Appellant is, in fact an individual whose core
             account is a completely fabricated one and that he  is  not  a
             witness of credibility.  I arrive at this  conclusion,  having
             considered all of the evidence before, to salient  aspects  of
             which I have referred above.

         76.  Consequently, and specifically, I find  as  a  fact  that  the
             Appellant was never a member of  Sonat  Bavaran.   I  conclude
             that the Appellant was never arrested and  detained  in  2006,
             that he was not arrested in 2010 or at all.  I  conclude  that
             the Appellant's house was not  raided  at  any  stage  by  the
             authorities and I find as a fact that the Appellant never went
             into hiding.  I reiterate that I conclude that  the  Appellant
             actually  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  using  his  own
             properly issued Iranian passport.  I find as a  fact  that  no
             court  proceedings  have  ever  been  instigated  against  the
             Appellant, or against any member of his family, and I find the
             various documents relied upon by the  Appellant,  in  relation
             thereto, to be thoroughly unreliable."

10. Thus the judge was satisfied that the Appellant had left Iran  entirely
    legally and that he had fabricated his account of leaving clandestinely
    with an agent.  He concluded that the Appellant was not, and never  had
    been, of any adverse interest to the Iranian authorities  and  that  he
    had fabricated his entire account to falsely establish an asylum  claim
    (see paragraph 77 of the determination).  In summary, he  rejected  the
    entirety of the Appellant's core account of events.  Thus he  dismissed
    the appeal.

11.   The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  on  four
    principal grounds and on 9th May 2013 permission  was  granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) for the following reasons:-

         "The grounds are arguable for the reasons given in the application,
         and in particular a possible misunderstanding of  a  key  document.
         All grounds may be argued."

12. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  At the hearing Mr Halim, on
    behalf of the Appellant relied upon  the  grounds.   The  first  ground
    related to the documentary evidence in the appeal.  The  Appellant  had
    provided six documents including the court verdict, documents  relating
    to sureties, and a court summons.   It  was  asserted  that  the  judge
    incorrectly  noted  that  the  summons  dated  12th  October  2011  was
    addressed to the Appellant's father and that the  summons  specifically
    stated that "The court has called  Mr  S  N  and  not  the  Appellant's
    father" as said by the judge.  Because of this error of  fact,  it  was
    submitted that the judge erroneously suspected the credibility  of  the
    Appellant's fifth  document,  which  was  a  notice  from  the  Justice
    Department of Fars Province dated 20th January 2013, stating a  hearing
    date for the applicant.  It was due to  the  judge's  belief  that  the
    October 2007 letter was sent to the applicant's father that  the  judge
    did not find the following  document  to  be  plausible  and  that  the
    Iranian authorities would issue the 20th January 2013 notice.

13.   In respect of a further document namely  a  court  verdict  from  1st
    November 2006 this was a document the judge omitted to  consider.   The
    judge found that the court verdict  could  not  be  relied  upon.   The
    return date for the applicant to return to court was  recorded  on  the
    translation as 30th May 2012 rather than  30th  May  2013.   The  judge
    found that that damaged the Appellant's credibility.  However the judge
    had given considerable weight to what would appear to be no more than a
    translation error that did not give any weight to  the  four  documents
    (confirmation  of  surety  and  summons,  the  notice  of  the  Justice
    Department) that he finds to be consistent with the Appellant's  claim.
    The judge did not give proper consideration to the  documents  "in  the
    round" as set out in the decision of Tanveer Ahmed.  Mr Halim submitted
    that this was even more important as the documents, save for  the  2013
    court verdict, although they were served on  the  Respondent  were  not
    referred to in the refusal letter.

14. As to Ground 2 this relates  to  the  failure  to  consider  the  court
    verdict dated 1st November 2006.   It  was  submitted  that  the  judge
    referred to the court verdict of 1st November only in finding  that  it
    was consistent with his account of being arrested.  The judge failed to
    consider what weight should have been attached to that document.

15. In respect of Ground 3, this related to the  judge's  reliance  on  the
    screening interview.  It was submitted that the  judge  relied  on  two
    purported discrepancies arising out of  information  given  during  the
    Appellant's screening interview.  The first  related  to  his  evidence
    concerning the passport he used to travel to the UK (paragraphs  64  to
    66 of the determination) and secondly,  the  discrepancy  over  whether
    other members of Sonat Bavaran were arrested with  the  applicant  (see
    findings of fact at paragraphs 59 to 62).  Mr  Halim  relied  upon  the
    decision of the Tribunal in JL (Rely on SEF) China [2004]  UKIAT  00145
    and  that  the  judge  placed  considerable  weight  on  those  alleged
    discrepancies notwithstanding the  Appellant's  explanations.   In  any
    event, it was submitted that the Appellant's evidence  as  recorded  in
    the screening interview was not clearly inconsistent with  the  account
    given in his asylum interview.  With regard to the passport, the  judge
    noted in the screening interview that when  asked  about  his  national
    passport, the Appellant said that he had lost it last week however what
    was not recorded by the judge was that when he was asked "What document
    did you use to travel to the UK?" the  Appellant  replied  "A  passport
    provided by the agent because in Iran they were after me and I did  not
    have a passport."  It  was  submitted  that  at  best  the  applicant's
    evidence regarding when he had last had his own passport was not  clear
    from the screening interview and it was wrong  to  rely  upon  it.   In
    respect of whether others were arrested  with  the  applicant,  it  was
    submitted that it was not clear from the response at  question  4.2  of
    the screening interview whether he was referring to his first or second
    arrest.  It was contended that the judge had erred in  law  by  placing
    such significance at best on clear statements in a screening interview.

16. Ground 4 relates to  an  alleged  misunderstanding  of  fact.   It  was
    submitted on the Appellant's  behalf  that  the  judge  relied  upon  a
    discrepancy regarding the date the applicant was arrested in  2006  (at
    paragraphs 51 to 57 of the determination).  The judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant stated in his asylum interview and witness statement that  he
    was arrested on  23rd  October  2006  but  the  judge  found  that  the
    applicant had discrepantly stated that he was arrested on 6th  and  7th
    November 2006.  The applicant was  referring  to  the  2010  arrest  as
    regards the 6th to 7th November date.  As recorded in the determination
    the applicant sought clarification during asylum interview  over  which
    arrest the questioner was referring to at the end of question  198  and
    states "It was the same day and month but it was on my second arrest in
    2010".  This, contrary  to  the  findings  of  the  judge  is  entirely
    consistent with his statement and why he did not believe  there  to  be
    any consistency in the evidence given during his interview.

17.   For all of those reasons it was submitted that this was a case  where
    there was a clear error of law and the decision should be set aside and
    there should be a "de novo" hearing by way of a remittal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

18. Mr Tufan on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon  the  Rule  24
    response dated 29th May 2013.  In that response, the Respondent opposed
    the Appellant's appeal.  In summary, it was submitted  that  the  judge
    directed himself appropriately and that the judge had  made  a  careful
    assessment of the Appellant's evidence and the  documents  produced  in
    paragraphs 35 to 80 of the determination.   It  was  further  submitted
    that the Appellant had been considered in the round and the  judge  had
    reached sustainable findings.  Mr Tufan submitted that irrespective  of
    the grounds the judge had made  a  finding  at  paragraphs  65  and  66
    concerning the Appellant's journey to  the  United  Kingdom  and  those
    findings made the grounds  in  any  event  irrelevant.   The  Appellant
    arrived in the UK using his own passport which was a  genuine  passport
    checked by the authorities and was found to be genuine  and  the  judge
    made a finding to that respect.  The Appellant therefore  travelled  on
    his own personal Iranian passport and that damaged his  credibility  to
    the extent of undermining the entirety of his account.  He could not be
    at risk of persecution at the hands of the Iranian  authorities  if  he
    had travelled using his properly issued Iranian  passport  in  the  way
    asserted by the Respondent.

19. Nonetheless, in addressing the grounds, the first ground relied upon by
    the Appellant was factually incorrect.  It was asserted that the  judge
    incorrectly  noted  that  the  summons  dated  12th  October  2011  was
    addressed to the applicant's father and because of that error the judge
    erroneously suspected the  credibility  of  a  further  document  dated
    January 2013 and thus it was due to the judge's incorrect consideration
    of the document of October 2011 that he did not find it plausible  that
    the Iranian authorities would issue the 20th January 2013 notice.

20.   Mr Tufan submitted that it was clear from the face of  that  document
    that it was, as the judge correctly noted, a document addressed to  the
    Appellant's father.  It sets out the Appellant's father's  name,  gives
    his occupation as "pensioner" and that clearly did not  relate  to  the
    Appellant and looking at the body and  content  of  the  document,  the
    reasons for him to attend were clear and that was on the basis that the
    Appellant had not attended court.  In those circumstances it was  clear
    that it referred to the Appellant's father and what was drafted in  the
    grounds was wholly erroneous.  However if it  is  right  that  all  the
    mistakes started from this, that also is erroneous  because  the  judge
    started on the right premise from the start.

21.   In respect of the assertion that the court verdict was not relied  on
    because this was a "translation error" as the judge noted it had  never
    been put to the judge that there  was  any  translation  error  or  any
    typographical error and there was no evidence before him that that  was
    the decision and the translation and  the  document  both  appeared  to
    state the year as 2013 thus there was no error in  the  way  the  judge
    assessed the document.

22.   As to the grounds advanced in respect of the screening interview,  Mr
    Tufan submitted that the decision of the Tribunal in YL (China) did not
    say that a screening interview could never been  relied  upon.   Whilst
    detailed reasons  are  not  asked,  the  screening  interview  and  its
    contents may be relied upon and the Appellant should  tell  the  truth.
    It is also stated that a screening interview may be well conducted when
    an asylum seeker is tired after a long journey.  No such  issue  arises
    in this appeal as the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom for some
    time before he undertook the screening interview.  As to the Ground  4,
    the judge did not make a misunderstanding of fact and in any event  the
    Appellant's account as a whole as in respect of other matters was found
    to be inconsistent and not credible.  In particular, the fact  that  he
    had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  using  his  own  Iranian   passport
    demonstrated that he was not at risk from the  Iranian  authorities  in
    the way that was claimed.

23. By way of reply, Mr Halim submitted that whilst the Presenting  Officer
    had stated that the grounds were irrelevant in view of the Respondent's
    case that the Appellant had entered the United Kingdom  using  his  own
    Iranian passport, that was only a discrete part  of  the  evidence  and
    could not determine all the issues and does not go to the heart of  the
    claim.  He further submitted in respect of Tanveer Ahmed, that all  the
    evidence must be looked at in the round and the judge did not  do  that
    in this appeal.  When asked by the Tribunal whether  he  accepted  that
    paragraph 3 of Ground 1 as drafted was incorrect and that the judge did
    not erroneously note the contents of the summons, Counsel then accepted
    that the grounds as drafted were incorrect.  Nonetheless he relied upon
    the Tanveer Ahmed  point  that  the  judge  should  have  made  overall
    credibility findings by looking at the evidence "in the round".

24. I reserved my determination.





Conclusions on the error of law:

25. There  are  four  grounds  of  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.  I shall deal with each ground.  The first and second grounds
    relate to  the  documentary  evidence  produced  by  the  Appellant  in
    furtherance of his appeal.  As noted in the grounds,  he  had  provided
    six documents in support of the appeal namely  a  court  verdict  dated
    31st August 2013, two court  documents  stating  that  the  applicant's
    father and uncle had previously acted as sureties for  the  applicant's
    bail, a summons dated 12th October 2011,  a  court  verdict  dated  1st
    November 2006 and a notice from the Justice Department of Fars Province
    dated 20th January 2013 stating a hearing date for the applicant.

26. The grounds assert the judge in error noted that the summons dated 12th
    October 2011 is addressed  to  the  Appellant's  father.   The  grounds
    state:-

         "The summons specifically states that the court has called Mr S  N,
         because of  the  error  of  fact,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         erroneously suspects  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  fifth
         document, a notice from the Justice  Department  of  Fars  Province
         dated 20th January 2013 stating a hearing date for  the  applicant.
         It was due to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  belief  that  the
         October 2007 letter was sent to the applicant's father that did  he
         did not find it plausible that the Iranian authorities would  issue
         the 20th January 2013 notice."

27. Thus is can be seen that the grounds  allege  that  the  judge  made  a
    mistake of fact by stating that the summons of 12th  October  2011  was
    addressed to the Appellant's father and it was this that led the  judge
    to suspect the credibility of the document  dated  12th  January  2013.
    This ground  was  initially  relied  upon  by  Mr  Halim  in  his  oral
    submissions.  It was  not  until  the  submissions  of  the  Presenting
    Officer that the grounds had wholly misconceived the evidence  that  it
    was  accepted  that  the  grounds  in  that  respect  as  drafted  were
    erroneous.  The judge deals with that document at  paragraph  69.   The
    judge said this:-

         "69. At pages  18-19  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  is  a  document
             entitled Warning paper, with translation  thereof,  purporting
             to have been issued by the Ministry of Justice in Iran. It  is
             addressed to the Appellant's father and is  dated  12  October
             2011.  It  requires  the  Appellant's  father  to  attend  the
             prosecution office three days after the receipt of the letter,
             on the basis that the Appellant himself had refused to attend.
             It indicates that an arrest warrant would  be  issued  if  the
             Appellant's father does not attend. Again, the content of this
             document is broadly consistent with the Appellant's account of
             going into hiding after 8 July 2011."

    The judge at paragraph 70 considers this document in the light  of  the
    document exhibited at pages 22 to 23 which was the  document  allegedly
    issued by the Justice Department on 20th  January  2013  notifying  the
    Appellant  that  he  should  attend  court  with  regard   to   certain
    accusations against him.  As the judge records:-

         "That document  does  not  explain  why  the  Appellant  should  be
         required to attend  a  court  hearing  over  18  months  after  his
         'disappearance' and in circumstances where his father  had  already
         been summoned to attend the Ministry of Justice  in  October  2011,
         because the Appellant had refused to attend there.  Again, it is  a
         document which is broadly  consistent  with  the  Appellant's  core
         account but I have  concerns  regarding  its  reliability  for  the
         reasons I have set out within this paragraph of my determination."

28. It is entirely clear from reading the contents of  the  document  dated
    12th October 2011 that this was  indeed  a  document  relating  to  the
    Appellant's father.  It gives his name, N N and gives his occupation as
    "pensioner".  It further gives the reasons for his  attendance  because
    the court had called S N (the Appellant) as the accused to  attend  the
    court office as required to do so.   It  then  refers  to  "you"  which
    refers to the Appellant's father should attend.

29.   In those circumstances the grounds are founded on an  entirely  false
    premise.  It is plain from the determination that the judge  considered
    both documents in the light of the Appellant's account as a  whole  and
    whilst on the face of it the documents seem to  be  broadly  consistent
    with his account, the judge reached the conclusion that in  respect  of
    the document issued on 20th January 2013, it was a document he did  not
    find reliable because it did not explain why this Appellant  should  be
    required  to  attend  a  court  hearing  eighteen  months   after   his
    "disappearance" and in the circumstances where his father  had  already
    been summoned to attend at the Justice Ministry as long ago as  October
    2011.  It was a finding entirely open to  the  judge  to  make  on  the
    evidence before him and to assess its reliability in that context.

30. In the  context  of  the  documentary  evidence,  there  is  a  general
    criticism advanced on behalf of the Appellant that the judge failed  to
    give a proper consideration to all the documents "in the round" and  in
    the light of the guidance given to judges in the case of Tanveer Ahmed.
     Furthermore, the judge appeared to give weight to what appeared to  be
    a translation error or failed to consider properly what  weight  should
    be attached to a court verdict dated 1st November 2006 (see Ground  2).



31. I have considered those submissions and I  do  so  in  the  context  of
    considering the  determination  as  a  whole.   This  was  a  carefully
    considered decision which took into account all the evidence before the
    judge, both documentary and oral and in making an overall assessment of
    the Appellant's claim.

32. When considering documentation, I remind myself of the  guidance  given
    in the decision of the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439  in
    which the  Tribunal  acknowledged  the  argument  that  "documents  and
    information contained in them may be either genuine or false; documents
    may be genuine but that information itself may be false; documents  may
    not be genuine but the  information  may  nonetheless  be  true."   The
    Tribunal in that case went on to state

         "It is trite in immigration and asylum law that we must  not  judge
         what is or is not likely to happen in other countries by  reference
         to our perception of what is normal within in the  United  Kingdom.
         The principle applies as much to documents as to any other form  of
         evidence.  We know from experience  and  country  information  that
         there  are  countries  where  it  is  easy  and  often   relatively
         inexpensive to obtain 'forged' documents.  Some of them  are  false
         in that they are not made by whoever purports to be the author  and
         the information they contain is wholly or partially  untrue.   Some
         are 'genuine' to the extent that they emanate from a proper source,
         in the proper form, on the proper paper, with the proper seals, but
         the information they contain is wholly or  partially  untrue.   ...
         The permutations of truth, untruth, validity and 'genuineness'  are
         enormous.  At its simplest we need to  differentiate  between  form
         and content; that is whether a document is properly issued  by  the
         purported author and whether  the  contents  are  true.   They  are
         separate questions.  It is a dangerous oversimplification merely to
         ask whether a document is 'forged' or even 'not genuine'."

    The only question is whether the document is one  upon  which  reliance
    should properly be placed.  Such documentation should be not looked  at
    in isolation but should be assessed along with other pieces of evidence
    and therefore "in the round."




33. It is clear from the determination that the judge plainly had  in  mind
    the decision of Tanveer Ahmed and how it  should  be  applied  when  he
    stated at paragraph 36:-

         "36. I would comment at this stage that the Appellant has  produced
             various documents in support of his claim  and  appeal  and  I
             have referred below to  specific  documents  of  relevance.  I
             would confirm  at  this  stage  that  I  have  considered  all
             documents  submitted  in   accordance   with   Tanveer   Ahmed
             principles (Tanveer Ahmed (Documents  unreliable  and  forged)
             Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 00439), by considering them as part of
             my consideration of the evidence before me as a whole  and  in
             the round. I would add that none of those documents was  taken
             into account by the Respondent when refusing  the  Appellant's
             asylum claim, even though it would appear that the majority of
             them had been submitted to the Respondent some days  prior  to
             the date of refusal."

34. It is further plain from reading the determination a  whole  that  this
    was the test that the judge applied when considering the documents  and
    the evidence as a whole.

35. The judge's findings are  comprehensive.   They  are  set  out  in  the
    determination at length at paragraphs  35  to  37.   The  core  of  the
    Appellant's account related to his involvement with the  group  he  had
    started with six others called the Sonat Bavaran, the  Appellant  being
    the head of the group.  There were  three  different  stages  to  Sonat
    Bavaran activities.  In  summary,  the  first  stage,  or  period,  was
    between when the Appellant started university and the time that he  was
    first arrested in October 2006. At the time of his arrest, he had  been
    expelled from university.  The second stage, or period,  started  after
    the Appellant returned to Chabahar,  up  until  his  second  arrest  in
    November 2010.  During this period, the Appellant  and  his  associates
    used to work in the Youth Branch office of the mosque and limited their
    activities between themselves; i.e. not trying to encourage  others  or
    to expand the faith.  The third stage, or period, was  from  the  point
    that the Appellant moved to Shiraz, until the time that he fled Iran.

36. In respect of the Appellant's release in 2007 when he returned  to  his
    parents' house in Shiraz, it was claimed that he set up a Facebook page
    for Sonat Bavaran two months after his release and  that  on  8th  July
    2011 security forces came to the house to arrest him, his computer  was
    confiscated and he left Iran.  The judge made a number of  findings  in
    relation to the group  known  as  Sonat  Bavaran  and  the  Appellant's
    alleged activities.  At paragraph 41 and 42 the judge said this:-


         "41. At page 13 of the Appellant's bundle is a  screenshot  of  the
             Sonat Bavaran Facebook group page and, on that page, reference
             is made to there being 2,452 members, which is consistent with
             the Appellant's evidence, in his asylum interview, that  Sonat
             Bavaran on Facebook had 2,450-2,460 members, as as referred to
             above (AIR Q 43). In cross-examination of  the  Appellant,  Ms
             Jannath noted that the Sonat Bavaran Facebook  page  indicated
             that there was a post on that page as  recently  as  30  April
             2012, which is significant, bearing in mind evidence to  which
             I refer below.

         42.  As noted in paragraph 59 of the RFRL, the Appellant's evidence
             in his asylum interview was to the effect that  the  group  of
             which he is a member, Sonat Bavaran, joined Facebook  in  2011
             (AIR Q 35). The Appellant confirmed that he stopped using  the
             Sonat Bavaran Facebook account on 8 July 2011, because, around
             August time (no year provided) 'they' raided  the  Appellant's
             house and told the Appellant's family that he had to stop  the
             Facebook activity (AIR Q 53-54). The Respondent noted that the
             Appellant made no mention of any raid occurring in  August  in
             any other part of his evidence.  Furthermore,  the  Respondent
             indicated that, if the raid on the Appellant's house  occurred
             in August 2011, then this would have occurred after  the  date
             upon which the Appellant claimed to have stopped his  Facebook
             activity, thereby negating the reason he gave for his Facebook
             activity stopping. The Respondent added that, if the Appellant
             had meant that the raid had occurred in 2010, then this  would
             have been before the date on which the  Appellant  claimed  to
             have  joined  Facebook  (AIR  Q  35).  The   Respondent   also
             considered that this element of the  Appellant's  account  was
             inconsistent."

37. The judge deals with the  Appellant's  evidence  concerning  the  Sonat
    Bavaran "Facebook" account at paragraphs 38 to 47.  Those findings  can
    be summarised as follows.  With reference  to  the  Sonat  Bavaran  the
    Appellant had provided detail regarding the  Facebook  group  which  he
    claimed to have set up but that in his evidence he had claimed that  it
    was a top secret group which  was  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's
    account that it had 2,450 - 2,460  members.   The  judge  considered  a
    printout of the Facebook page and  upon  it  noted  that  there  was  a
    reference about how to create  a  "small  group"  on  Facebook  as  the
    Appellant claims he did and also it referred to  the  ability  to  make
    such an account secret.  However, the judge found  it  inconsistent  in
    the Appellant's claim that there were 2,450  -  2,460  members  of  the
    Facebook group.  The Appellant in his evidence acknowledged  there  had
    been any face-to-face contact between, on the one  hand  the  Appellant
    and his small group of Sonat Bavaran associates, and on the other  hand
    the additional people who were permitted to join  the  Facebook  group.
    The judge found  that  that  appeared  to  "fly  in  the  face  of  the
    contention that it was a secret group."  At page 13 of the bundle there
    was a screenshot of the Sonat Bavaran Facebook.   In  cross-examination
    of the Appellant, it was noted that the Facebook page  indicated  there
    was a post on that page as recently as  30th  April  2012.   The  judge
    found that to be significant for the reasons that he gave at  paragraph
    42.  The Appellant's evidence was to the effect that the group of which
    he was a member Sonat Bavaran, joined Facebook in  2011  (see  question
    35).  He had confirmed that he had  stopped  using  the  Sonat  Bavaran
    Facebook account on 8th July 2011 because at around August time  "they"
    raided the Appellant's house and told the family that he  had  to  stop
    the Facebook activity (questions 53 to 54).  The Respondent noted  that
    the Appellant had made no mention of any raid occurring  in  August  in
    any other part of his evidence.  Furthermore it was indicated  that  if
    the raid on the house occurred in August 2011, this would have occurred
    after the date upon which the Appellant claimed  to  have  stopped  his
    Facebook activity, thereby negating the reason he gave for his Facebook
    activity stopping.  The Respondent added  that  if  the  Appellant  had
    meant that the raid had occurred in 2010, then  this  would  have  been
    before the date on which the Appellant claimed to have joined Facebook.
     The judge noted that in cross-examination, the Appellant was  referred
    to the Sonat Bavaran Facebook at page 13 and  he  was  asked  when  the
    Facebook page was closed.  The Appellant replied that after the raid on
    the house, the group did not use it.  He also stated that after a while
    the Appellant closed it confirming that the Facebook page was closed on
    8th July 2011 and the judge noted that that was the  Appellant's  given
    date for the claimed raid on the house rather than August which was the
    date that he had given earlier.

38. The judge at paragraph 44 then notes that the Appellant was referred to
    the Facebook page at page 10 of the bundle and confirmed that this  was
    his personal Facebook page and that the Facebook page at  page  13  was
    the Sonat Bavaran page.  The judge records that it  was  noted  by  the
    Presenting Officer and raised with the  Appellant  the  fact  that  the
    Sonat Bavaran Facebook page indicated that the page had action on it on
    30th April 2012 which was inconsistent with the Appellant's  indication
    that he had closed  it  on  8th  July  2011.   The  judge  records  the
    Appellant's explanation at paragraph 45 namely that he thought it  took
    a few months for a Facebook page to be closed  completely.   The  judge
    found that explanation as  "seriously  inconsistent  with  his  earlier
    indication that he closed it  in  July  2011,  there  being  no  cogent
    evidence before me to indicate that it would take several months for  a
    Facebook page to be closed down."   In  re-examination,  the  Appellant
    gave further inconsistent evidence.  He then stated it took a while for
    the Facebook page to be  closed  because  he  was  in  hiding  with  no
    internet access.  The judge then records that the Appellant  stated  in
    his evidence that he had closed the  Sonat  Bavaran  Facebook  page  in
    April 2012.  The judge noted that that was  clearly  inconsistent  with
    his earlier indication that he had closed it in July 2011.

39. Thus the judge found at paragraph 47:-

         "47.  In  all  the  circumstances,  I  find  this  element  of  the
             Appellant's evidence to be both inconsistent and  damaging  to
             his credibility. Whilst there is documentary  evidence  before
             me to indicate that there was a Sonat Bavaran Facebook page in
             April 2012, there is no evidence before me  which  establishes
             that Sonat Bavaran's Facebook account existed before 2012  or,
             indeed, that the Appellant  himself  was  ever  involved  with
             Sonat Bavaran, whatever the purpose of that organisation might
             actually be."

    The grounds do not challenge any of those findings of fact which form a
    central part of the Appellant's account.

40. The judge then dealt with the Appellant's account of being arrested  in
    2006.  Those matters are dealt  with  at  paragraph  51  and  52.   The
    Appellant's claim was  that  it  had  been  announced  by  the  Iranian
    government that Sunnis were not allowed to undertake different  prayers
    from Shias and it was noted that the Appellant was trying to  celebrate
    the end of Ramadan and that he and others got together at the house  of
    an Imam.  It was his account that while the meeting was  happening  the
    security forces came in and arrested  them.   It  was  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he was arrested the day before Eid on 23rd  October  2006
    however later in his interview he stated that his first arrest occurred
    on 6th or 7th November 2006.  The Respondent noted  that  there  was  a
    difference of thirteen to fourteen days between the two dates provided,
    and bearing in mind that the Appellant was an educated person  who  had
    provided consistent dates in the rest of his account,  considered  that
    this inconsistency damaged the credibility of the Appellant in terms of
    that claimed arrest.

41. It is clear from the account given in the Appellant's asylum  interview
    that the Appellant had given inconsistent dates  concerning  his  first
    arrest, an event that it is reasonable to expect the  Appellant  to  be
    consistent about in the light of his education and of the importance of
    that  event.   The  judge  in  that  context  considered   a   document
    purportedly issued by the Justice Ministry in Iran dated  1st  November
    2006.  At Ground 2 it is asserted that the judge failed to consider the
    document or in the alternative failed to consider what weight should be
    attached to it.

42. The judge looked at the  document  noting  at  paragraph  53  that  the
    document referred to an investigation of 1st November 2006 and referred
    to the Appellant as being the defendant in the  prosecution.   It  also
    referred to a hearing taking place on 1st October 2006  and  a  verdict
    having been passed in relation to the Appellant in which he  was  found
    guilty and that he was sentenced  to  eighteen  months  and  36  months
    suspended.  The judge found that on the face of  it  the  document  was
    consistent with his indication that he was sentenced but found that  it
    was inconsistent in terms of the  suggestion  that  the  Appellant  was
    arrested on 6th or 7th November 2006 which is what  the  Appellant  had
    said in his interview.

43. The judge when making  an  assessment  of  this  issue  considered  the
    Appellant's account as given  in  his  witness  statement.   The  judge
    records this:-

         "54. In paragraph 26 of his statement, the Appellant indicates that
             he believed that there was confusion in terms of his preceding
             account. He adds that he and his colleagues used to work in an
             office during the second period; that is, the period following
             the Appellant's claimed release from detention  following  the
             service of his 18-month term of imprisonment.  He  adds  that,
             when he was arrested at the airport (in November 2010), 'they'
             raided the office of the mosque and that, for a  short  period
             of time, they arrested his colleagues, but that they  released
             his colleagues shortly after confiscating the contents of  the
             office. So far as I can understand it, the  Appellant  appears
             to be seeking to explain, in his statement, that the reference
             to an arrest on 6/7 November was, in fact, a reference to  the
             raid on the office of the mosque in November 2010, rather than
             a reference to the Appellant's arrest in 2006.


         55.  Consequently, the Appellant's indication, in his statement, is
             to the effect that he did not believe that there had been  any
             inconsistency in his evidence. He adds that he  believed  that
             the interpreter, at his asylum interview, made  some  mistakes
             as, for  example,  at  question  144  of  the  interview,  she
             admitted that she had made a mistake. However, it  appears  to
             me that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Appellant  appears  to  be
             suggesting that there is no inconsistency in relation  to  the
             preceding element of his evidence whereas, on the other  hand,
             he appears to be suggesting that any inconsistencies might  be
             explained away by the interpreter making mistakes.


         56.  I would add that, at question 198 of his asylum interview,  it
             is recorded that the Appellant was  asked  on  what  date  the
             mosque office was raided and his recorded response is:  '06/07
             November 2006, the day I was  arrested.  You  mean  when  they
             actually raided the office?'. At question 199 the interviewing
             officer confirmed that this was a reference to  the  day  that
             the mosque office was raided and the  Appellant  replied:  'It
             was the same day and month but it was on my second  arrest  in
             2010'. Such evidence is, I find, broadly consistent  with  the
             Appellant's core account of events.


         57.  However, whilst I have borne in mind the Appellant's evidence,
             and explanation for the above discrepancy, I do not find  that
             it explains why the Appellant initially  said,  in  answer  to
             question 198 of his asylum interview, that he was arrested  on
             6/7 November 2006, or why  he  initially  indicated  that  the
             mosque office was raided on that date,  even  though  he  then
             changed this  to  2010.  The  Appellant's  evidence  does  not
             adequately explain why, earlier in his  asylum  interview,  he
             clearly stated that he was arrested on 23 October 2006. I find
             such discrepancy to be damaging to the Appellant's credibility
             and with specific reference to his claim that he was  arrested
             at all. I would add  that  there  is  no  persuasive  evidence
             before  me  which  might  cause  me  to  conclude   that   the
             interpreter  wrongly   interpreted   this   element   of   the
             Appellant's evidence, despite his suggestion otherwise, and  I
             note that, in the Appellant's solicitors' written  submissions
             of 8 February 2013, there is no suggestion that  this  element
             of the Appellant's evidence is wrongly recorded.


         58.  In paragraph 50 of the RFRL, the  Respondent  noted  that  the
             Appellant claimed that, following  the  2006  arrest,  he  was
             placed in detention, where three of them were put in one  cell
             and that they were detained for three days  (AIR  Q  18).  His
             evidence was that he  was  then  taken  to  Shiraz,  where  he
             continued to be detained (AIR Q 19). The Appellant's  evidence
             is that, after initial procedures, he was taken  to  a  prison
             (AIR Q 20) and that, after one week, he had a court hearing in
             Shiraz (AIR Q 20-21). He added, in his asylum interview,  that
             a court verdict was issued against him on 1 November 2006 (AIR
             Q5) which, again, the Respondent considered  was  inconsistent
             with the Appellant's answer to  question  198  of  his  asylum
             interview, when he stated that he was not arrested  until  6/7
             November 2006."

44. It is plain from these paragraphs that the judge took into account  the
    assertions made by the  Appellant  that  he  believed  there  to  be  a
    confusion in terms of the preceding account.  At paragraph 54,  on  the
    basis that the Appellant sought to explain the discrepancy  by  stating
    the reference to his arrest on 6th or 7th November was a  reference  to
    the raid on the office of the mosque in November 2010, rather than  the
    arrest in 2006.  The judge also took into account the witness statement
    and the Appellant's account that he did not believe that there had been
    any inconsistencies in his evidence  and  also  his  account  that  the
    interpreter in the asylum interview had made a mistake.  As  the  judge
    observed at paragraph 55:-

             "However, it appears to me that, on  one  hand  the  Appellant
             appears to be suggesting that there  is  no  inconsistency  in
             relation to the preceding element of his evidence whereas,  on
             the  other  hand,  he  appears  to  be  suggesting  that   any
             inconsistencies might be explained  away  by  the  interpreter
             making mistakes."

45. The judge then considers the asylum interview  and  the  chronology  of
    those questions and answers given by the Appellant.  After having  done
    so at  paragraph  57,  considering  all  the  matters  he  reaches  the
    conclusion that:-


         "57. However, whilst I have borne in mind the Appellant's evidence,
             and explanation for the above discrepancy, I do not find  that
             it explains why the Appellant initially  said,  in  answer  to
             question 198 of his asylum interview, that he was arrested  on
             6/7 November 2006, or why  he  initially  indicated  that  the
             mosque office was raided on that date,  even  though  he  then
             changed this  to  2010.  The  Appellant's  evidence  does  not
             adequately explain why, earlier in his  asylum  interview,  he
             clearly stated that he was arrested on 23 October 2006. I find
             such discrepancy to be damaging to the Appellant's credibility
             and with specific reference to his claim that he was  arrested
             at all. I would add  that  there  is  no  persuasive  evidence
             before  me  which  might  cause  me  to  conclude   that   the
             interpreter  wrongly   interpreted   this   element   of   the
             Appellant's evidence, despite his suggestion otherwise, and  I
             note that, in the Appellant's solicitors' written  submissions
             of 8 February 2013, there is no suggestion that  this  element
             of the Appellant's evidence is wrongly recorded."

46. This was a finding that entirely open to  the  judge  on  the  evidence
    before him.  There is no misunderstanding of fact as alleged in  Ground
    4.  The judge considered the explanation given by the Appellant  as  to
    the discrepancy and did so in the light of the court  judgment  however
    he did not accept the Appellant's evidence for the reasons that he gave
    which were ones that were entirely open to him.

47.   The judge also dealt with other inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence and the circumstances of his last arrest.  At paragraphs 60 to
    63 the judge makes reference  to  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
    account as to the events in Iran dealing with the applicant's  evidence
    concerning the passport he used to travel to the UK (see paragraphs  64
    to 66) and secondly, a discrepancy  concerning  the  members  of  Sonat
    Bavaran and whether they  were  arrested  with  the  applicant.   These
    findings are challenged in the grounds specifically at Ground 3.

48.   Thus I turn to deal with Ground 3 at this stage.

49. It is asserted on behalf of the Appellant that the judge was  wrong  to
    have placed weight on what he considered to  be  discrepancies  arising
    out of information given during the  Appellant's  screening  interview.
    There are two  discrepancies  identified  by  the  judge;  firstly  the
    discrepancy over whether members of the  Sonat  Bavaran  were  arrested
    with the applicant and secondly, the  Appellant's  evidence  concerning
    the passport he used to travel to the UK.

50. Reliance is placed on the decision of YL (Rely  on  SEF)  China  [2004]
    UKIAT 00145 at paragraph  19.   It  is  submitted  that  the  screening
    interview is not intended to be a statement of  a  case  and  therefore
    errors are more likely to occur and further, the Appellant's  solicitor
    had written to the Respondent on 8th February 2013 and  that  when  the
    applicant had tried to give a fuller explanation during  his  screening
    interview he was cut short and told he would have a chance  to  explain
    himself during the asylum interview.  Furthermore, it was asserted that
    the Appellant's evidence as recorded in the screening interview was not
    inconsistent with the account that he gave.

51. It is therefore necessary to consider the findings of fact made by  the
    judge dealing with these two issues.  The judge dealt with the issue of
    the inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence relating  to  whether  or
    not other members of Sonat Bavaran were arrested at paragraphs 59 to 62
    of the determination.  The judge stated this:-

         "59. In paragraphs 57-59 of the RFRL, the Respondent addressed  the
             Appellant's claim that charges were raised against  him,  that
             his house was raided, and his evidence regarding  his  claimed
             Facebook activities,  to  which  last  issue  I  have  already
             referred above.

         60.  In paragraph 57 of the RFRL, the  Respondent  noted  that  the
             Appellant's evidence, in his  asylum  interview,  was  to  the
             effect that he last reported to the authorities, in accordance
             with the reporting requirement, on 4 July  2011  and  that  he
             stopped reporting after that because,  on  8  July  2011,  the
             security forces came to his house, seeking  unsuccessfully  to
             arrest the Appellant (AIR Q132-133). The Respondent noted that
             the Appellant's evidence was that he was out of the  house  at
             the time, taking his grandfather to the hospital (AIR Q  135).
             The Appellant's evidence is that none of the other members  of
             the group was involved and that no one  was  arrested  at  the
             office (AIR Q193, 201). However, in  his  screening  interview
             the Appellant stated that  his  colleagues  were  arrested  in
             their office (SI 4.2).  The  Respondent  concluded  that  this
             inconsistency was damaging to the Appellant's credibility.  In
             paragraph 30 of his statement,  the  Appellant  simply  states
             that he does not  think  that  he  was  inconsistent  in  this
             element of his evidence, although he clearly was.

         61.  In the written submissions of the Appellant's solicitors, of 8
             February 2013, they  state  as  follows  in  relation  to  the
             preceding evidence:

                  'In the screening interview S N was asked at question  4.2
                  to explain briefly why he cannot return to Iran.  He  went
                  on to explain, however S N states that he was  cut  short,
                  saying that he should give a full explanation  during  his
                  asylum interview. In any event he wants  to  clarify  that
                  his colleagues were not arrested as it has been  recorded.
                  They were instead given a warning.'

         62.  However, I bear in mind that it is clearly recorded, in answer
             to  question  4.2  of  his  screening  interview,   that   the
             Appellant's evidence at that stage was to the effect that  his
             colleagues were arrested, and there is no  cogent  explanation
             before me as to why that evidence should have been incorrectly
             recorded in the SIR.  Consequently,  I  find  the  Appellant's
             attempt now to amend that element of his  evidence,  it  being
             inconsistent with his evidence in his asylum interview, to  be
             wholly unconvincing."

52. In the asylum interview it is clear from questions 200 and 201 and  the
    preceding questions that the Appellant was  giving  answers  concerning
    the second arrest in 2010 and the raid on  the  office.   Question  200
    deals with the raid on the office and at question 201 he is asked  "Was
    anyone arrested at the office?" the answer "They only gave  a  warning.
    They had not been arrested anyone they had just given warning."

53. As the judge records there was a clear discrepancy  concerning  whether
    the Appellant's colleagues were arrested or not in  the  light  of  the
    answers that the Appellant had given in the  screening  interview.   At
    the screening interview at question 4.1 the Appellant was asked

         "Question:    When did the problems begin?
         Answer:  First time arrested in 2006 and in 2010 but nothing proven
                    at this time.  Then 8/7/2011 they came after  me  and  I
                    ran."

    At question 4.2, the Appellant was asked, briefly to explain,  why  you
    cannot return home to your home country?

         "Answer: My life is in danger.


         Question:     But they did not prove anything so why is  your  life
                    in danger?
         Answer:  Last time the problem was much more serious.


         Question:     Why was that?
         Answer:  My office was in a different city to where I was and I was
                    informed that my office had been raided  and  colleagues
                    had been arrested.  My computer was also seized  and  my
                    house was raided."

    It is clear from reading those answers at paragraph 4.1  and  4.2  that
    the raid that he was referring to in  which  the  colleagues  had  been
    arrested was the last arrest in 2010.  That is indicated  not  only  by
    the Appellant stating that it was "last time" therefore relying on  the
    raid in 2010 but also the circumstances of that raid in which  he  said
    his computer had been seized and his house was raided and that was  the
    account that he was later to give in relation to the raid in 2010.

54. The judge records the Appellant in his statement asserting that he  did
    not think that was inconsistent but as the judge recorded he found that
    to be a clear inconsistency.  The judge was right to identify that this
    was a discrepancy and this  had  also  been  recorded  in  the  refusal
    letter.  The judge took into account the  written  submissions  of  the
    Appellant and his solicitors set out at paragraph  61.   However  after
    taking that into account, he weighed that in the balance but found that
    it had been an answer that was clearly recorded and there had  been  no
    cogent explanation as to why the evidence would have  been  incorrectly
    recorded  in  the  screening  interview.   The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's attempt to amend that element of his evidence to be "wholly
    unconvincing".

55. It was submitted in the grounds and by Mr Halim that it was not evident
    from the responses at questions 4.1 and 4.2 whether he was referring to
    his first or his second arrest.  As I have set out it is plain from the
    screening interview at 4.2 that the  Appellant  was  referring  to  the
    second raid in 2010.

56. The decision in YL (China) is not authority for  the  proposition  that
    evidence in a screening interview can never be taken  into  account  or
    afforded  weight  in  making  an  assessment  of  credibility  or   the
    consistency of an Appellant's account.  The Tribunal gives guidance  to
    judges concerning screening interviews and the  general  assessment  of
    evidence contained in those documents at paragraph  19.   It  is  noted
    that the purpose of the screening is

         "to establish the general nature of the claimant's case so that the
         Home Office can decide how best to process  it.   It  is  concerned
         with the country of  origin,  means  of  travel,  circumstances  of
         arrival in the United Kingdom, preferred language and other matters
         that might help the Secretary of State understand the case."

    It is clear from paragraph 19 that

         "Asylum seekers are still expected to tell the  truth  and  answers
         given in screening interviews can be compared fairly  with  answers
         given later.  However, it has to be  remembered  that  a  screening
         interview is not done to establish in detail the reasons  a  person
         gives to support their claim for asylum.  It would not normally  be
         appropriate  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  ask  supplementary
         questions or to  entertain  elaborate  answers  and  an  inaccurate
         summary  by  an  interviewing  officer  at  that  stage  would   be
         excusable.  Further the screening interview may well  be  conducted
         when the asylum seeker is tired after a long journey.  These things
         have  to  be  considered  when  any  inconsistencies  between   the
         screening interview and the later case are evaluated."

57. Thus judges are asked to consider and evaluate those matters as set out
    by the Tribunal.  As Mr Tufan submits, the last matter does not  apply.
    The Appellant completed the screening interview on 28th May 2012 having
    arrived in the UK either on 21st or 22nd March 2012 and thus  it  could
    not be said that the interview was conducted when he was tired after  a
    long journey as there was a significant period of  time  where  he  had
    been in the United Kingdom before the interview even took  place.   The
    judge assessed the Appellant's evidence as set out in his determination
    and applied the guidance  of  the  Tribunal  at  paragraph  19.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge weighed up those matters and having  done  so,
    was entitled to reach the conclusion that he did.

58.  The second issue relates to the evidence concerning  the  passport  he
    used to travel to the UK.  Contrary  to  the  assertions  made  in  the
    grounds, the judge's findings on this issue are  not  confined  to  any
    discrepancy in the screening interview  but  from  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, including information produced by the Respondent in relation  to
    the visa and checks carried out by the National Border Targeting Centre
    (NBTC) part of the intelligence, targeting and  watch  listing  command
    within customs and National Operations Directorate which had  conducted
    checks with the airlines the Appellant had used.

59.   Those findings are set  out  at  paragraphs  64  -  66  and  also  at
    paragraph 77.  The judge said this:-

         "64. In paragraphs 62-63 of the RFRL, the Respondent addressed  the
             issue of the passport used by the Appellant to travel  to  the
             United Kingdom. It is noted that the Appellant's  evidence  is
             to the effect that he travelled to the United Kingdom using  a
             false Iranian passport, although that passport  contained  the
             Appellant's name and photograph,  as  also  confirmed  by  the
             Appellant in his  oral  evidence  before  me  (SIR  2.1).  The
             Respondent noted that the Appellant obtained a valid  visa  to
             enter the United Kingdom, which  application,  the  Respondent
             asserted, required a valid passport. The Respondent  concluded
             that the Appellant had failed to substantiate why he needed to
             obtain the services of an agent, and to use a false  passport,
             if he had his own genuine  passport  with  a  valid  UK  visa.
             Consequently, the Respondent did not accept that the Appellant
             used a false passport to enter the United Kingdom.


         65.  In re-examination before  me,  the  Appellant  said  that  his
             genuine Iranian passport  was  confiscated  in  2010  when  he
             returned from Dubai, this logically being a reference  to  the
             occasion when he returned and was detained.  However,  in  his
             screening interview, the Appellant was asked  whether  he  had
             ever had his own national passport and it is clearly  recorded
             therein that the Appellant responded by  saying:  'Yes  but  I
             lost it last week Thursday.' (SIR 2.2). He then confirmed that
             he could not produce his own passport because he lost it  (SIR
             2.3).


         66.  However, subsequently, in his asylum interview  the  Appellant
             indicated that it was the false Iranian passport, which he had
             used to travel to the United Kingdom, which he  had  lost,  he
             adding that he could not remember the exact  date  upon  which
             the loss occurred but that it was 'on the bus'. The  Appellant
             replied that he lost his passport, money and Oyster  card  and
             that he reported it lost (AIR Q165-169). I have  to  question,
             first,  the  discrepancy  between  the  Appellant's  screening
             interview and asylum interview in respect of  this  particular
             passport and, second, why he would report as missing a  forged
             passport. In  all  the  circumstances,  I  conclude  that  the
             Appellant actually travelled to the United Kingdom  using  his
             own properly-issued Iranian national passport, which  fact,  I
             find, is damaging to the credibility of his entire account.


         77.  In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the  Appellant  left
             Iran entirely legally and that he has fabricated  his  account
             of leaving clandestinely with the assistance of  an  agent.  I
             conclude that the Appellant is not, and never has been, of any
             adverse interest to the Iranian authorities and  that  he  has
             fabricated his entire  account  of  his  political  or  quasi-
             political activities in an  effort  falsely  to  establish  an
             asylum claim in the United Kingdom. In  short,  I  reject  the
             entirety of  the  Appellant's  relevant  or  core  account  of
             events."

60. The Appellant gave an account concerning his journey in  the  screening
    interview at question 2.1.  The questions are related  to  how  he  had
    entered  or  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  including   countries
    travelled through, documentation used and when he arrived.  The answers
    given are as follows:-

         "I entered the UK by air using fake passport.  I arrived in the  UK
         on 22nd March 2012."

    As to the countries he travelled through, it was  noted  "Dubai  (three
    weeks), Egypt".  As to the documentation used for the travel he said "I
    used a passport provided by an agent" and then gave the arrival date as
    22nd March 2012 at Heathrow Airport.

61. Questions 2.2 onwards deal with documentation.  He was asked "Have  you
    ever had your own national passport?" Answer: "Yes but I lost  it  last
    week Thursday".  At question 2.3 "Can you  produce  your  own  national
    passport today?" Answer: "No I lost it".

62. The account given by the Appellant in the screening interview  is  that
    he had travelled on a fake passport provided by an agent.  At  question
    2.5 he was asked to give details of the document that he used to travel
    to the UK and the Appellant  said  "Used  a  passport  provided  by  an
    agent".  When asked why he had used an agent the reply was "Because  in
    Iran they were after me and I did not have a passport".   However  that
    answer is not consistent with  the  earlier  answer  that  he  gave  at
    paragraph 2.2 when  asked  if  he  had  ever  owned  his  own  national
    passport.  The Appellant had said that he did but that he had  lost  it
    last week (Thursday).  However  before  the  judge,  the  Appellant  is
    recorded as saying that his genuine Iranian passport was confiscated in
    2010 when he returned from Dubai (referring to when he returned and was
    detained).  This is clearly inconsistent with his  screening  interview
    when he said that he had had one but had lost it last Thursday.  In the
    asylum interview,  the  Appellant  indicated  that  it  was  the  false
    passport that he had used to  travel  to  the  UK  which  he  had  lost
    (questions 165 to 169) but as the judge records,  he  had  to  question
    this discrepancy with care between the asylum screening  interview  and
    the asylum interview and particularly, why, the Appellant would  report
    as missing a forged passport?  The judge concluded that  the  Appellant
    had travelled using his own properly issued Iranian  national  passport
    which he found to damage the credibility of his entire account, because
    if he had travelled  using  his  own  national  Iranian  passport,  the
    account that he had given of being of adverse interest to  the  Iranian
    authorities  and  for  court  documentation  seeking  his  arrest  were
    entirely false.

63.  There was significant evidence before the judge which  led  ultimately
    to the conclusion that the Appellant had used his own  properly  issued
    passport which did not rely  on  any  discrepancies  in  the  screening
    interview.  Whilst he had claimed to have entered the  UK  on  a  false
    passport, the Appellant's own evidence was that the  passport  had  the
    Appellant's name  and  photograph  in  it  (see  oral  evidence).   The
    Respondent had provided evidence clearly set out at paragraph 73 of the
    refusal letter and referred to by the judge, that  he  had  obtained  a
    valid visit visa to enter the UK VAF/797508 which would have required a
    valid passport.  The Respondent had recorded that the NBTC as  part  of
    its intelligence, targeting and watch listing  command  within  customs
    conducted checks with the airline the Appellant had travelled  on.   It
    was found that he had left Cairo in Egypt on 21st March by Egyptair and
    had arrived at Heathrow using his own valid passport which he had  used
    to apply for a visa.  The judge finally noted at paragraph 66 that  the
    Appellant travelled to the UK using his own Iranian  national  passport
    which damaged the entire credibility of his account.  Thus at paragraph
    77 the judge was satisfied that he had left entirely  legally  and  had
    fabricated his account of leaving clandestinely with the assistance  of
    an agent.

64. These findings were entirely open to the  judge  and  were  sustainable
    ones based on the evidence that was placed before him.  I find no merit
    in Ground 3 for the reasons that I have set out.  As noted by the judge
    the issue of the passport was a matter that went entirely to the  heart
    of the claim.  He did not rely on the screening  interview  discrepancy
    but relied upon matters contained in verifiable evidence.

65. I return back to the grounds relating to the documentary evidence.  The
    judge then considered other documents produced at paragraphs 67 to  70.
    The first document in  time  is  the  document  purporting  to  be  the
    acceptance  of  collateral  by  the  Appellant's   father   and   uncle
    respectively dated February 2011.  The judge sets out the  contents  of
    those documents at paragraph 68.  He found the content of the documents
    to be consistent with that element of the  Appellant's  evidence.   The
    judge then dealt with the next document  in  time  which  is  with  the
    warning paper (pages 18 and 19) dated 12th October 2011.  I have  dealt
    with that document  in  detail  when  dealing  with  Ground  1  of  the
    challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   He  then
    considered at paragraph 70 the document purporting to be issued by  the
    Justice Ministry at paragraph 70.  It is clear that the judge  did  not
    find it reliable for the reasons given:-

         "The document does not explain why the Appellant should be required
         to attend a court hearing over 18 months after his 'disappearance',
         and in circumstances where his father had already been summoned  to
         attend the  Ministry  of  Justice  in  October  2011,  because  the
         Appellant had refused to attend there."

66. The judge also  dealt  with  the  document  dated  4th  March  2013  at
    paragraph 67.  He considered the contents of this document when  making
    an assessment of its reliability and hence the weight  that  he  should
    attach to it.  The document referred to  a  court  hearing  which  took
    place on 28th February 2013 where the  Appellant  was  allegedly  found
    guilty of acting against national security and having connections  with
    foreigners.  The document proceeds by  indicating  the  issuance  of  a
    verdict being postponed until another hearing scheduled  for  30th  May
    2012.  As the judge notes

         "Bearing in mind the document relates to a hearing which took place
         on 28 February 2013, I fail to see how it can properly refer  to  a
         further postponed hearing which took place in May  2012;  that  is,
         prior to the hearing in  February  2013.   I  appreciate  that  the
         Appellant may assert that  the  reference  to  30  May  2012  is  a
         typographical  error  but,  at  the  hearing  before  me  no   such
         contention was raised.  Having considered the inconsistency in this
         document, and I having in any event  considered  this  document  as
         part of my consideration of the evidence before me as a  whole  and
         in the round, I find this document to be wholly  unreliable  which,
         in turn, is a factor, but not the only one, calling  into  question
         the  reliability  generally  of  the  documents  produced  by   the
         Appellant."

67. There  are  two  observations  to  be  made  concerning  that  finding.
    Firstly, the grounds submit that the judge gave weight  to  what  would
    appear to be no more than a translation error.  However, as  the  judge
    noted at  the  hearing  no  contention  was  raised  that  this  was  a
    translation  error  or  a  typographical  error.   Nor  was  there  any
    submission made at any time prior to the  hearing  by  the  Appellant's
    representatives that there was a translation error.  It is not said  on
    behalf of the Appellant nor has it been at any time that  the  document
    was wrongly translated  and  the  inference  raised  from  the  judge's
    finding is that this was not a reliable document as  because  if,  what
    purported to be a legal document emanating from  a  court,  indeed  the
    Ministry of Justice  concerning  a  court  hearing  involving  national
    security, that this was a document that was not even consistent in  its
    own contents on the face of it.

68.  The  judge  therefore  gave  adequate  reasons  for  considering   the
    documentation and what weight he placed on those documents.

69. The judge's findings then deal with  Section  8  of  the  2004  Act  at
    paragraphs 71 to 73 and found that the Appellant failed to claim asylum
    at the airport despite his claim to have fled  Iran  in  fear  for  his
    safety and that he waited two weeks before he made  an  appointment  to
    claim asylum.  At paragraph 73  the  judge  considers  the  Appellant's
    evidence in which he asserted he had called the  Respondent's  ASU  the
    day after his arrival but the judge found that that did not explain why
    the Appellant had  not  claimed  asylum  at  the  airport  on  arrival.
    Furthermore the Appellant's evidence was inconsistent with what he  had
    said in his statement at paragraph 31 and thus looking at the  evidence
    as a whole he attached weight to  the  Appellant's  delay  in  claiming
    asylum as a matter to damage his credibility.

70.   I have considered the case overall and the submissions made that  the
    judge failed to deal with the documentary evidence "in  the  round"  in
    accordance with the guidance given to the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed.  I
    reject that submission.  I have set out earlier in  this  decision  how
    the judge dealt with the documentary evidence throughout his assessment
    of the evidence. It is plain from paragraph 36 that the judge  directed
    himself in accordance with  that  decision  where  he  noted  "I  would
    confirm at this stage that I have considered all documents submitted in
    accordance with Tanveer Ahmed principles, by considering them  as  part
    of my consideration of the evidence before me as a  whole  and  in  the
    round."

    When considering the documents and the reliability of them and thus the
    weight to be attached to them, the judge recorded at paragraph  67  (in
    relation to the document dated 4th March 2012)

         "Having considered the inconsistency in this document, and I having
         in any event considered this document as part of  my  consideration
         of the evidence before me as a whole and in the round, I find  this
         document to be wholly unreliable which, in turn, is a  factor,  but
         not the only one, calling into question the  reliability  generally
         of the documents produced by the Appellant."

71. Whilst it is submitted in the grounds that the judge found some of  the
    documents to be consistent with the claim, and that the judge failed to
    attach weight to them that is a misreading of the  determination  as  a
    whole.  The judge records at paragraphs 68 and 69 that the document  of
    25th February are broadly consistent with the  Appellant's  account  as
    was the warning paper in October but the judge then considered  further
    the content of the documents themselves when  reaching  a  view  as  to
    their reliability and gave reasons for that at paragraph 70 and why  he
    found it to be an unreliable document given the length of time  between
    the summons and the eighteen months later that the Appellant  was  told
    that he should attend court.  There were also other  reasons  given  in
    the determination concerning the documentation  which  I  have  already
    referred to.  The judge thus considered the evidence as  a  whole  that
    called into question the reliability generally  of  all  the  documents
    produced (see paragraph 67).

72. It is plain from the determination that  the  judge  did  consider  the
    documents "in the round" and in  accordance  with  the  evidence  as  a
    whole.  The judge after having done so said this at paragraphs  74  and
    75:-


         "74. I confirm that  I  have  considered  the  credibility  of  the
             Appellant's  account  in  the  context  of  relevant   country
             material which is before me, and in the  context  of  relevant
             Country Guidance caselaw, and I accept  that  the  Appellant's
             account of events is  broadly  consistent  therewith,  as  are
             various of the documents upon which he seeks to rely. I  would
             add that much of the Appellant's account  is  also  internally
             consistent, save for the  inconsistencies  highlighted  by  me
             above which, I find,  are  very  significant.  Clearly,  broad
             consistency with the country situation,  whilst  a  factor  of
             relevance in assessing credibility, is not the only factor and
             is not necessarily of itself determinative.


         75.  Having taken into account the totality of the  evidence  which
             is before me, I conclude, even applying the lower standard  of
             proof, that the Appellant is, in  fact,  an  individual  whose
             core account is a completely fabricated one and that he is not
             a witness of credibility. I arrive at this conclusion,  having
             considered all of the evidence before me, to  salient  aspects
             of which I have referred above. "

73. The judge therefore draws together all  of  the  preceding  credibility
    matters, not only concerning the documents produced, but to  the  other
    inconsistencies (relating to his arrest, circumstances of  his  arrest,
    issue of the passport, the failure  to  claim  asylum,  inconsistencies
    concerning the Sonat Bavaran Facebook evidence).  Having done  so  this
    led to the conclusions at paragraphs 76 and 77:-


         "76. Consequently, and specifically, I find  as  a  fact  that  the
             Appellant was never a member of Sonat Bavaran. I conclude that
             the Appellant was never arrested and detained in 2006, that he
             was not arrested in 2010, or  at  all.  I  conclude  that  the
             Appellant's  house  was  not  raided  at  any  stage  by   the
             authorities and I find as a fact that the Appellant never went
             into hiding. I reiterate that I conclude  that  the  Appellant
             actually  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  using  his  own
             properly issued Iranian passport. I find as  a  fact  that  no
             court  proceedings  have  ever  been  instigated  against  the
             Appellant, or against any member of his family, and I find the
             various documents relied upon by the  Appellant,  in  relation
             thereto, to be thoroughly unreliable.

         77.  In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the  Appellant  left
             Iran entirely legally and that he has fabricated  his  account
             of leaving clandestinely with the assistance of  an  agent.  I
             conclude that the Appellant is not, and never has been, of any
             adverse interest to the Iranian authorities and  that  he  has
             fabricated his entire  account  of  his  political  or  quasi-
             political activities in an  effort  falsely  to  establish  an
             asylum claim in the United Kingdom. In  short,  I  reject  the
             entirety of  the  Appellant's  relevant  or  core  account  of
             events."

74. The judge carried out a comprehensive and  careful  assessment  of  the
    evidence concerning the  Appellant's  account.   A  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings were made concerning the  Appellant's  account  as
    outlined above, all of which I find were open to  the  judge  to  make.
    There is no merit in  the  ground  that  the  judge  misunderstood  any
    evidence or failed to take into  account  any  evidence.   This  was  a
    carefully reasoned and balanced determination and the reasons given for
    the decision were entirely sustainable ones and  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.  Thus there is no error of law disclosed in this decision.

Decision
    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law; the decision shall stand.


      The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed                              Date 11/7/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

