

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/02963/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On April 7, 2015                     |On April 17, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         MR ABDIRAHMAN ABDI IBRAHIM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mrs Johnrose (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who arrived in the United Kingdom
    on February 22, 2014 and claimed  asylum  on  February  24,  2014.  The
    respondent refused his application for asylum under  paragraph  336  HC
    395 on April 9, 2014 and also took a  decision  to  remove  him  as  an
    illegal entrant by way of directions under paragraphs 8-10 of  schedule
    2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on April 30,  2014  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Brookfield  on
    May 28, 2014 and in a decision promulgated on June 4, 2014 she  refused
    the appellant's  appeal.  The  appellant  appealed  that  decision  and
    eventually the matter came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Birrell (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on September 26,  2014.
    In a determination promulgated on October 6, 2014 she found  there  had
    been an error in law and she remitted the matter back to the First-tier
    tribunal and she heard the appellant's full appeal de novo in the First-
    tier Tribunal on January 6, 2015. She refused the appeal.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on January 30,  2015  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred by:

      a. Departing from the country guidance case of MOJ &  Ors  (Return  to
         Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).

      b. Failing to make clear findings on the effect  of  the  respondent's
         concession.

      c. Failure to consider all of the evidence relating to the appellant's
         involvement with the Somali government.

      d. Failure to consider risk within the  scope  of  HJ  (Iran)  v  SSHD
         [2010] UKSC 31.

      e. Failure to put alleged discrepancies to the appellant.

 5. On February 10, 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  gave
    permission to appeal finding the FtTJ may have erred in her approach to
    the respondent's concession and future risk to the appellant.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant was in attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mrs Johnrose adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted:

      a. The FtTJ had materially erred in her  approach  to  the  concession
         contained in the refusal letter. When finding an error of  law  the
         FtTJ stated the judge was not bound to accept the  conclusion  that
         Al Shabaab would be interested in people who showed  allegiance  to
         the Somali government but any departure from that concession  would
         require an explanation. Similarly, the same was argued  in  respect
         of the concession that  employees  may  face  persecution  from  Al
         Shabaab. The FtTJ failed to  explain  why  she  departed  from  the
         concession and in particular  failed  to  consider  whether  as  an
         employee this demonstrated allegiance to the Somali government.

      b. The FtTJ had materially erred because she found the  appellant  was
         an employee of the Somali government and this meant he fell  within
         one of the risk categories set out  in  MOJ.  There  was  evidence,
         other than Facebook that  demonstrated  he  was  connected  to  the
         government and therefore at risk of  persecution.  He  was  not  an
         ordinary citizen and was at risk of persecution and the FtTJ  erred
         in her approach to his case.

      c. The FtTJ failed to have regard to the evidence contained  at  pages
         19-22, 25-26, 33 and 36 of the appellant's  bundle.  This  evidence
         was not challenged and undermined the FtTJ's finding  at  paragraph
         [38] that "there was nothing to link him with the government  other
         than a Facebook page...."

      d. The FtTJ failed to consider that the appellant would be  forced  to
         lie to hide his past activities and this breached the doctrine  set
         out in HJ.

      e. The FtTJ should have put her concerns, expressed in paragraph  [30]
         to the appellant during the hearing.

 8. Ms Johnstone relied on the rule 24 letter dated February 20, 2015.  She
    submitted:

      a. The FtTJ had had regard to the concession contain  in  the  refusal
         letter. The concession did not mean every employee would be at risk
         and she found in paragraph  [37]  of  her  determination  that  the
         appellant had embellished his importance and found he would not  be
         at risk because of his brief employment  in  Mozambique.  The  FtTJ
         also rejected his claim that he  had  either  experienced  problems
         prior to leaving Somalia or he had lived with the Ambassador on his
         return. The FtTJ considered the appellant's claim in line with  the
         concession statement and she was satisfied he did not  come  within
         either concession.

      b. The appellant did not come within the any of  the  risk  categories
         identified in MOJ and the FtTJ concluded in paragraph [40]  of  her
         determination that the appellant could live safely in Mogadishu, in
         line with the findings in MOJ.

      c. Although the appellant produced some additional material  over  and
         above the Facebook entry there was no evidence that evidence on the
         internet was either locatable or would lead to him  being  targeted
         and in any event the FtTJ accepted he had been employed.

      d. There was no evidence that  upon  return  the  appellant  would  be
         questioned and be required to  disclose  that  he  worked  for  the
         government in 2012 or come within paragraph [82] of HJ.

      e. The FtTJ considered the evidence and  the  appellant's  solicitor's
         letter.  She  made  findings  open  to  her   about   his   claimed
         difficulties with Al Shabaab. The  appellant  was  aware  of  those
         discrepancies and addressed them as best he could but the FtTJ  was
         entitled to make the findings he did on the evidence.

 9. Mrs Johnrose responded to these submissions and questions posed  by  Ms
    Johnson and myself as follows:

      a. The appellant fell within the category of persons  covered  in  MOJ
         and neither the FtTJ nor the respondent considered the fact he  was
         associated with the  Somali  government.  The  fact  he  worked  in
         Mozambique did not mean he was not covered by the MOJ  decision  or
         concession. The FtTJ failed to make a finding  on  whether  working
         for the government showed an allegiance to the government.

      b. The FtTJ's  findings  in  paragraph  [40]  referred  to  internally
         displaced persons as against failed asylum seekers.

      c. The appellant has an immutable character and the FtTJ  should  have
         considered his case in light of HJ. If he  has  to  lie  about  his
         history or hide the fact he worked for the  Somali  government  and
         applied for asylum then he is covered by HJ.

10. Having heard the submissions I reserved my decision.

    ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

11.  The  appellant's  case  came  before  me  following  the  granting  of
    permission by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes.  In  granting
    permission the judge found:

         "The acceptance that the appellant  had  worked  for  the  Embassy,
         albeit that this position was abroad and  not  in  Somalia,  raises
         concerns about the Judge's approach  to  the  concession  that  the
         Secretary of State and the future risk to the  Appellant.  On  that
         basis  the  grounds  are  arguable  and  permission  to  appeal  is
         granted."

12. Mrs Johnrose argued a number of  points  (as  set  out  above)  but  in
    particular she argued that the  FtTJ  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
    concession contained in the refusal letter and in applying the  country
    guidance decision of MOJ.

13. The FtTJ had concluded at paragraph [36] of her determination  that  it
    was reasonably likely the appellant worked as a secretary for diplomats
    who were trying to establish an Embassy in Mozambique  between  January
    and August 2012. The FtTJ made this finding after taking  into  account
    paragraph [13] of the appellant's  witness  statement  (dated  May  21,
    2014) and Farah Samatar's letter of support and oral evidence.

14. Mrs Johnrose submitted that this finding meant the appellant was not an
    "ordinary citizen" and this fact was recognised by  the  respondent  in
    her refusal letter at paragraph 2(c) when the  author  of  the  refusal
    letter wrote-

         "In light of the information above it is accepted that  Al  Shabaab
         would be interested in people who showed allegiance to  the  Somali
         government and that employees of the  Somali  government  may  face
         treatment  at  the  hands  of  Al  Shabaab  that  would  amount  to
         persecution on account of imputed political opinion."

15. Between paragraphs  [397]  and  [425]  of  MOJ  the  Tribunal  provided
    guidance on how to approach cases  involving  applicants  from  Somalia
    with particular reference to the  risk  posed  by  Al  Shabaab  and  in
    addition to considering whether a person is an  "ordinary  citizen"  it
    was necessary to carry out a careful assessment of the person's overall
    circumstances.

16. In her first determination the FtTJ noted at paragraph  [13]  that  the
    appellant worked for a member of the Somali  government  and  that  the
    respondent conceded that an employee of the Somali  government  was  at
    risk. She went on to find that whilst the judge had not been  bound  to
    accept that latter statement but if she rejected  it  then  she  should
    have given reasons for departing from that concession. She remitted the
    matter back to the  First-tier  and  in  her  subsequent  decision  she
    acknowledged the respondent's  concession  in  paragraph  [18]  of  her
    determination and then having set  out  the  facts  and  case  law  she
    rejected his earlier claims of problems with Al  Shabaab  but  accepted
    his claim to have worked as a secretary for diplomats in Mozambique  as
    claimed but she then found he embellished his claim concerning what  he
    did after he returned to Somalia. The FtTJ went on to reject his  claim
    that Al Shabaab came  looking  for  him  or  that  he  lived  with  the
    Ambassador in Somalia.

17. At paragraph [39] of her  determination  she  concluded  the  appellant
    could return to Mogadishu because it was only targeted individuals that
    were at risk and that he was  not  someone  who  was  or  would  be  of
    interest to Al Shabaab despite the fact she accepted he worked for  the
    government for a brief period.

18. I have considered the FtTJ's approach  in  light  of  the  respondent's
    concession. The  decision  of  MOJ  and  the  submissions  of  the  two
    representatives.

19. Dealing with the respondent's concession I am satisfied that  this  did
    not mean that every employee was at risk of persecution. He worked  for
    the government as a secretary in Mozambique  for  no  more  than  eight
    months and the concession did not mean  that  every  employee  faced  a
    risk. The first part of the concession refers  to  the  fact  that  the
    respondent accepted that Al Shabaab would be interested in  people  who
    showed allegiance to the Somali government and the FtTJ had to consider
    whether the appellant's role engaged that concession. Clearly, the FtTJ
    did not reach that conclusion for the reasons set out in paragraph [39]
    of her determination. Whilst she did not state he was not a person  who
    Al Shabaab may believe had shown allegiance to the Somali government  I
    am satisfied that her findings can be interpreted  that  way.  She  was
    entitled to find he was not at risk as an employee and merely being  an
    employee does not demonstrate allegiance to the government  because  if
    it did then the concession would have said so.

20. Mrs Johnrose argued that taking into account the FtTJ's acceptance that
    he worked for the government and the concession at  paragraph  2(c)  of
    the Refusal letter the FtTJ had erred when she concluded he  would  not
    face a risk of persecution. In short,  she  submitted  he  was  not  an
    "ordinary citizen" and consequently the FtTJ should have then found  he
    was at risk of persecution. She also reminded me that it was  the  FtTJ
    who had originally found an error in law in  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Brookfield's decision.

21. Whilst not using the language set out in MOJ I am  satisfied  the  FtTJ
    concluded the appellant was an "ordinary citizen." She  had  regard  to
    his role, the length of time he worked at the Embassy and what  he  did
    when he returned to Somalia. She accepted at paragraph [36] he  was  an
    employee but only an employee and she then concluded that the appellant
    was not at risk if he  were  returned  to  Mogadishu  because  she  was
    satisfied he was not associated with the security forces; any aspect of
    government or official  administration  or  any  NGO  or  international
    organisation.

22. The appellant did not claim to be a member of the government or part of
    official administration. He worked for Somali diplomats  in  Mozambique
    when they attempted to set up an embassy. I am satisfied the  FtTJ  did
    not err when considering the respondent's concession in relation to the
    appellant and was entitled to conclude he was an "ordinary citizen."

23. The Tribunal noted in MOJ the risk to members of target groups such  as
    politicians, police officers and government officials was reducing. The
    Tribunal made clear that where a person returned to Mogadishu  and  had
    no nuclear family or close relative  then  an  assessment  of  all  the
    circumstances was necessary. The FtTJ carried out  this  assessment  in
    paragraph [40] and it was open to her to find not only could he  return
    safely to Mogadishu but he would be able to support himself  and  there
    was a girlfriend and some extended family to support him.

24. It cannot be said the FtTJ did not consider either  the  concession  or
    the conclusions of MOJ and I am satisfied the findings she reached were
    open to her.

25. The third ground of  appeal  related  to  evidence  the  FtTJ  did  not
    specifically refer to in her determination. The FtTJ  made  clear  that
    she had before her the appellant's bundle and  at  paragraph  [29]  she
    stated she had had regard to all of the evidence in the  round.  Whilst
    the FtTJ did not specifically refer to the report from Allidmaale  News
    Centre and other articles  and  pictures  the  fact  remains  the  FtTJ
    accepted his claim to be employed but made findings about what happened
    after he returned. She considered his role and reached  findings  about
    his role that were open to her. There is no error in her approach.

26. Mrs Johnrose's fourth ground of appeal centred on her  submission  that
    the FtTJ failed to consider the  implications  of  HJ  and  what  would
    happen to the appellant if he were returned. Mrs Johnrose submitted  HJ
    does not merely apply to point  of  entry  and  paragraph  [82]  of  HJ
    confirms this. The country evidence before the FtTJ pointed to the fact
    that Al Shabaad would  not  present  a  problem  to  the  appellant  in
    Mogadishu especially in light of the FtTJ's finding he was not at risk.
    I am therefore satisfied that based  on  those  factors  the  FtTJ  was
    entitled to conclude there was no future risk.

27. The final ground of appeal related to credibility and in particular the
    FtTJ's findings at paragraph [30] of her determination. I am  satisfied
    the FtTJ was entitled to make the findings she did. The FtTJ had regard
    to the fact the appellant  claimed  the  solicitor's  letter  contained
    errors but she rejected his explanation. The findings were open to  her
    and do not demonstrate an error.

28.  Having  considered  all  of  the  arguments  put   forward   by   both
    representatives I am satisfied there was no material error.

    DECISION

29. There was no material error. The original decision is upheld.

30. The First-tier Tribunal did make an anonymity direction and pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.



Signed:     Dated: April 7, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated: April 7, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

