
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02152/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 21 August 2013                             |On 3 September 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Incidor Nezaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is an 18 year  old  citizen  of  Albania  (born  27  June
    1995).  He has appealed, with permission, against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge K S H Miller who, in a determination promulgated on
    21 June 2013 dismissed his claim for asylum which had been based on his
    fear of return to Albania due to a family blood feud.  The judge  found
    his claims to lack credibility but that, even if there were some  truth
    in the claims, there is adequate sufficiency of protection in Albania.

2.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  12  July  2013  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett in the briefest of  terms:  she  stated  simply
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  "may  not  have  considered  the
    evidence in the round".  It remains nevertheless for the  appellant  to
    satisfy us that there was such an error of law in the determination  of
    Judge Miller that his determination should be set aside.

3.   In making his submissions,  Mr  Bonavero  relied  on  the  grounds  and
    invited us to find that the judge had dealt  with  general  credibility
    first before considering the  documents  that  had  been  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant.  He based this on the fact that in giving  his
    reasons for finding against the appellant on credibility  in  paragraph
    35 of the determination, the  final  sub-paragraph  referred,  for  the
    first time in his reasons, to the documents.  We  do  not  accept  that
    this was an error of law.  The judge had outlined fairly the  whole  of
    the appellant's case and referred to the  entire  bundle  of  documents
    submitted by the appellant.  There is no reason to believe that, simply
    because the judge referred to the documents later in his  determination
    rather than earlier, he did not consider all the evidence in the round.

4.   It was also urged upon us that at the date of  the  First-tier  hearing
    the appellant was one week short of his 18th birthday and was  still  a
    child in law.  Again, we are  satisfied  that  the  judge  took  proper
    account of this and that is undoubtedly clear from paragraph 34 of  the
    determination where specific reference is made to the appellant's  age.
    Indeed, the judge went on to say that the appellant "did not appear  to
    have any difficulties in answering the questions which were put to  him
    at the hearing and there was no indication either that he was  unwell".
    The judge went on at paragraph 35 to emphasise that he "had made  every
    allowance for the appellant".

5.    Mr  Bonavero  finally  expressed  concern  the  judge  had  not  dealt
    specifically with the documentary evidence that the appellant's  father
    had been convicted of murder in 1987 and that that  gave  rise  to  the
    blood feud.

6.   Mr Saunders addressed us  in  reply.   In  relation  to  the  documents
    submitted by the appellant he  relied  on  the  recent  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in MJ (Singh v Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed unaffected)  Afghanistan
    [2013] UKUT 00253 (IAC):  it  remains  for  the  person  relying  on  a
    document to satisfy the Tribunal as to its authenticity.  He  submitted
    that the judge was entitled to reach the decision that he did based  on
    the evidence before him.

7.   In our view, it is clear that the judge took  the  father's  conviction
    into account.  Reference was made to the incident at  paragraph  20  of
    the determination and paragraph  35(i)  in  particular  summarises  the
    judge's reasons for finding that,  even  if  there  was  truth  in  the
    original incident, there was no reason to believe that there  had  been
    any intervening incidents since 1987  connected  to  it  nor  that  the
    appellant would  be  at  risk  on  return.   All  these  findings  were
    reasonably open to the  judge  on  the  evidence  before  him  and,  in
    particular, after he had heard oral evidence from the appellant.

8.   An appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  can  succeed  only  where  it  can
    reasonably be shown that the First-tier Tribunal has made such an error
    of law that its decision cannot be allowed to stand.  In this case, for
    the reasons given above, we are satisfied that there was no such error.

Decision

There was no error in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  and  its
decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction was requested and none is made.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
3 September 2013
