
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02704/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 December 2017                         |On 14 December 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                              THE HON. LADY RAE
                 (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                    [I B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Fitzsimons, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

      1. Mr Kotas on behalf of the Secretary of State has conceded before us
         that the determination reveals a material error on a point  of  law
         in that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to have regard to  the
         evidence of the appellant's witnesses and to the expert  report  of
         Mr Chacko.

      2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit  the
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to be re-made.

We direct

      i) The Secretary of State is to set out what parts of the  appellant's
         account are conceded to be true or are the subject  of  sustainable
         findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  she
         does not challenge in the re-making of the decision.

     ii) If the concessions  made  in  (i)  above,  arise  from  information
         provided to the Secretary of State, she is to provide a copy of the
         document containing the information or a redacted version of it  or
         an extract of the relevant parts.

    iii) The requirement in (ii) above arises from the respondent's duty  of
         disclosure and fairness, subject to all just reservations.

DECISION

    The Judge made an error on a point of law and we set the  determination
    aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made subject
    to the parties' agreement as to those matters which are not disputed.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             7 December 2017

