
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02810/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Stoke                     |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 6 July 2015                           |On 13 July 2015                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                sultan e rome
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 2 January 1981.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 20 May 2011, with a student  visa  valid  until  15
October 2012. His visa was subsequently curtailed on  17  May  2012.  On  26
October 2012 he requested an appointment at the Asylum  Screening  Unit  and
on 19 November 2012 he attended a screening interview  and  claimed  asylum.
He was interviewed about his claim on 14 March 2013. His claim  was  refused
on 4 April 2014. On 11 April 2014 a decision was made  to  remove  him  from
the United Kingdom.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard
before the First-tier Tribunal on 29 July 2014 and dismissed. Permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal was initially refused  but  was  granted  on  a
renewed application to the Upper Tribunal on 5 December 2014.

The Appellant's Case

The basis of the appellant's claim is that his life is at risk in  Pakistan.
He is from the Mardan district in  northern  Pakistan.  His  father  was  an
undercover Deputy Superintendent of police who retired in 1998 and  died  in
2002 of a brain haemorrhage. There were people in his village who hated  his
father because he was a police officer.  One  of  those  people  was  a  man
called Ikram, known as Chutakhan, who was a powerful  criminal  gang  leader
who kidnapped and  killed  people  for  money,  who  supported  the  Taliban
financially in the Swat region and who had men from  Afghanistan  under  his
command. The police would accept bribes from  Chutakhan  because  they  were
scared not to. The appellant started working for an NGO in 2009.  He  worked
in Besham which was not a safe place as it was close to the Malakand  agency
and to the Swat district. In early 2010 he began having problem  because  of
his father's profession and received telephone threats. On  5  January  2010
he was kidnapped by armed men when driving to work and  money  was  demanded
from his family as ransom. His cousin Asif went to report his kidnap to  the
police and the police contacted his kidnappers  who  then  called  Asif  and
told him to stop making the report or he would  be  killed.  The  kidnappers
talked about how his father had arrested members  of  their  gang  and  they
were angry. Asif paid the ransom and eventually he was  released,  after  25
to 26 days of detention, together with his driver.

The appellant did not report the kidnapping to the police. However  after  a
few  months  he  heard  rumours  from  local  people  that   Chutakhan   was
responsible for his kidnapping and he then told an undercover  policeman,  a
Deputy Superintendent, who had been a friend of his  father.  Chutakhan  was
then arrested in August 2010,  three  months  after  his  release,  and  was
killed when trying to escape. Threatening telephone calls were made  to  the
appellant's home as he  was  suspected  of  being  involved  in  Chutakhan's
capture and he believed that Chutakhan's family wanted revenge. He moved  to
Lahore but did not feel safe there as there was fighting in the  street  and
a suicide bomb. He then moved to Islamabad but did not feel safe as his  car
was stolen. He believed that that  was  by  criminals  who  knew  about  his
kidnapping. He returned to Mardan and  remained  there  until  he  left  the
country. He managed to organise a student visa for the  United  Kingdom  and
borrowed money from a loan-shark in  Pakistan.  After  his  arrival  in  the
United Kingdom, in June 2013, his mother and  wife's  home  was  invaded  by
farmers who broke in  demanding  to  see  him  and  claimed  that  they  had
previously kidnapped him. His wife  filed  an  FIR  report  and  his  mother
requested police protection as a result.

The respondent considered the appellant's account of his  father's  role  in
the police to be vague. His account of being  kidnapped  was  not  accepted,
owing to discrepancies  in  his  evidence.  No  weight  was  placed  upon  a
newspaper report of the kidnapping since it was dated  two  days  after  the
event and it was not considered credible that the newspaper would  be  aware
of the details in such a short space  of  time.  His  account  of  reporting
Chutakhan to  the  police  was  not  accepted  as  it  was  discrepant  and,
likewise, it was considered that there were inconsistencies in his  evidence
in relation to Chutakhan's arrest. His account of his wife and mother  being
threatened two years after he came to the United Kingdom was  not  accepted.
The  appellant's  delay  in  claiming  asylum  was  considered  to   further
undermine his credibility. The respondent did  not  accept  the  appellant's
account and considered  that  in  any  event  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
protection available to him and  that  he  could  also  safely  relocate  to
another part of Pakistan.

The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  his
appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on  29  July  2014.
Judge Colyer accepted that the appellant's father was a police  officer  but
considered the evidence as to his exact role to be limited. He did not  find
it credible that persons wished to persecute the appellant  and  his  family
because of his father's actions,  given  the  lack  of  activity  since  his
father's retirement in 1998 and death in 2002  and  until  2010.  The  judge
accepted that the appellant worked for an NGO as a civil engineer  from  the
end of 2009. He considered that the appellant's account  of  the  kidnapping
was consistent with the  background  information  and  consistent  with  the
actions of a criminal gang wishing  to  extort  money  from  his  family  or
employers. He accepted that a ransom had been paid for his release.  He  did
not accept that he would be blamed for Chutakhan's arrest or that  he  would
be sought out by the criminal gang, given that there was  no  indication  to
the kidnappers that he had identified  them  to  the  police.   He  did  not
accept that he had received threatening telephone calls  but  found  in  any
event that there would be a sufficiency of protection available to him  from
the police and that he could also relocate to another part of  Pakistan.  He
did not accept that, even if his account were true, the gang  members  would
want to seek him out in other parts of Pakistan and did not accept  that  it
would be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate, as he had done  previously.
He found that the appellant's removal would  not  breach  his  human  rights
under Article 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant  on  several  grounds:  (1)
that the judge had erred in finding that there  was  only  limited  evidence
about the appellant's father's role in the police and that his rejection  of
the appellant's assertion that his father's position was  a  factor  in  his
kidnapping failed to take account of  the  expert  evidence;  (2)  that  the
judge's finding that it was not plausible  that  the  appellant  would  have
reported Chutakhan's involvement in his kidnapping on no more than a  rumour
was inconsistent with the expert report; (3) that the judge failed  to  take
past persecution into account in considering risk on return,  in  breach  of
Article 4(4) of the Qualification Directive; (4) that the  judge  failed  to
engage with the expert report in relation to sufficiency of  protection  and
erred by rejecting the evidence of reports made by his wife  and  mother  to
the police in relation to threats received; (5) that the judge erred in  his
approach to internal  relocation  and  failed  to  engage  with  the  expert
evidence in that regard; and (6) that the judge erred in his  assessment  of
the medical evidence and by failing to consider the risk of suicide.

Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently granted  by
Upper Tribunal  Judge  Freeman,  essentially  on  the  grounds  relating  to
internal relocation.

Hearing and submissions

I heard submissions on the error of law.

Mr Draycott's submissions were  extremely  lengthy  and  expanded  upon  the
grounds of appeal. In summary they are as follows.  He  submitted  that  the
judge had failed to have regard to the expert report in making  findings  on
the plausibility of the kidnapping being related to  his  father's  role  in
the police. The risk to the appellant escalated after Chutakhan was  killed.
The judge erred in rejecting the appellant's  claim  to  have  reported  the
kidnapping to his father's colleague in the police and  in  requiring  there
to be corroboration. With regard to future risk,  the  judge  was  wrong  to
have considered that the kidnappers would have no further  interest  in  the
appellant on the basis that the family's money had  already  been  spent  on
the first ransom, when  the  family  retained  significant  assets  and  the
appellant therefore remained a target. The judge failed to engage  with  the
appellant's ill-treatment during his captivity and failed  to  consider  the
relevance of past persecution on future  risk,  contrary  to  the  terms  of
Article 4(4) of the Directive. With regard  to  sufficiency  of  protection,
the judge had erred by considering the matter only in general terms  without
a consideration of the individual circumstances and individual risk and  had
failed to consider the findings of the expert in her report. The  judge  had
erred by rejecting the documentary  evidence  of  the  appellant's  mother's
application for protection. As regards internal relocation,  the  judge,  in
relying upon previous periods of time spent in other parts of Pakistan  with
no problems, had  failed  to  recognise  that  the  risk  crystallised  when
Chutakhan was arrested and killed and to consider that there  had  therefore
only been a short period of time  before  his  departure  the  country.  The
judge had failed  to  engage  with  the  expert  report  in  regard  to  the
difficulties faced in seeking to relocate and had  failed  to  consider  the
appellant's psychiatric state, both in relation to the risk of  suicide  and
Article 3, and with regard to the reasonableness of relocation.

Mr McVeety submitted that the grounds were simply a  disagreement  with  the
judge's findings. Whilst the grounds complained about  the  judge's  failure
to engage with the expert report, it was significant that the expert  report
was completely silent on the question of the  length  of  time  between  the
appellant's father's death and  the  kidnapping.  The  judge  was  therefore
entitled to conclude that the kidnapping was not connected to  his  father's
role but was linked instead to money and to his job with the NGO. The  judge
was entitled to find it lacking in  credibility  that  the  appellant  would
have approached the police on no more  than  a  rumour  that  Chutakhan  was
involved in his kidnapping. He was entitled to place the weight that he  did
about the  documents  relating  to  his  mother's  request  for  protection.
Article 4(4) was not relevant to the appellant's  case  since  the  previous
incident was a criminal act and was not an indicator  of  future  risk.  The
judge was entitled to find that protection was available from the police  on
the basis of the claim that they had previously  arrested  Chutakhan  on  no
more than a rumour and was entitled to find that there  was  no  reason  for
the appellant to be suspected as having been behind his  arrest.  The  judge
did engage with the expert report on internal relocation  and  was  entitled
to conclude as he did. The medical evidence did not  support  a  claim  that
the appellant was a suicide risk.

In response Mr Draycott reiterated his previous submissions.

Consideration and findings.

I find myself in agreement with Mr McVeety, that  the  appellant's  grounds,
whilst extremely lengthy, are in effect no more  than  a  disagreement  with
the judge's conclusions and an attempt to re-argue  the  case.  Contrary  to
the assertions in the grounds, the judge plainly  engaged  with  the  expert
report in all respects and provided cogent reasons  for  departing  from  Dr
Holden's conclusions when he did. Indeed it is plain that  he  was  in  fact
assisted  by  the  report  in  accepting  the  appellant's  account  of  the
kidnapping,  on  the  basis  that  it  was  consistent  with   the   country
information relevant to that area of Pakistan.

The first ground asserts that the judge failed to engage with  paragraph  18
of Dr Holden's report where  she  accepted  that  the  appellant's  father's
former status as a  police  officer  would  be  a  relevant  factor  in  the
appellant being a target of  the  criminal  gang.  However,  as  Mr  McVeety
submitted, the point being made  by  the  judge  was  that  the  substantial
passage  of  time  since  the  appellant's  father's  retirement  and  death
undermined the credibility of his claim that his  father's  position  was  a
reason for him being targeted, and the expert report was notably  silent  on
that point. Accordingly the judge was perfectly entitled  to  conclude  that
the kidnapping was a criminal act carried out for financial gain  and  there
was no reason for  the  judge  to  consider  that  that  gave  rise  to  any
presumption of future risk pursuant to Article 4(4) of the Directive.

The judge was, however, entitled  to  conclude,  for  the  reasons  properly
given, that there was no evidence that Chutakhan  was  responsible  for  the
kidnapping or that even  if  he  was,  that  the  appellant  would  be  held
responsible in any way for Chutakhan's arrest and death. He was entitled  to
reject the appellant's claim that Chutakhan's arrest  was  instigated  by  a
complaint made by himself to the police and he gave several reasons  for  so
doing. At paragraph 58 he did  not  accept  that  the  police  would  arrest
Chutakhan merely on the basis of rumours he  had  heard  from  local  people
that he was responsible  for  his  kidnapping.  The  grounds  challenge  his
findings in that respect and assert that  they  are  inconsistent  with  the
expert's observations at paragraph 21 of her report. I  do  not  agree  that
any such inconsistency arises, but in any event note that  further,  cogent,
reasons were given by the judge for rejecting the appellant's claim to  have
reported Chutrakhan's involvement to his father's colleague in  the  police,
where he noted and endorsed, at paragraph 64, the respondent's rejection  of
the account of Chutrakhan's arrest at paragraphs 34 to  37  of  the  refusal
letter on the basis of inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  in  that
regard.

Further, at paragraphs 64, 66 and  77,  the  judge  noted  that  there  were
numerous victims of Chutakhan's crimes, which included burglary, murder  and
kidnapping, and considered that there was no evidence to link the  appellant
to Chutakhan's arrest or to consider that he was any more  responsible  than
the families of the many other victims, given in particular that he had  not
made any formal complaint  to  the  police  and  he  had  not  provided  any
evidence  against  him.  There  was  nothing  in  those  findings  that  was
contradicted by the expert's  report  and  indeed  that  was  not  a  matter
specifically addressed by Dr Holden.

It was the  appellant's  claim  that  the  continuing  interest  in  him  by
Chutrakha's family and associates was  evidenced  by  threatening  telephone
calls made to his home and by the attack on his home in April 2013  and  the
consequential application by his wife  and  mother  for  police  protection.
However  the  judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for  rejecting  that  claim.  He
addressed the threatening telephone calls at paragraph 67 of  his  decision,
providing detailed reasons for concluding  that  the  appellant  had  simply
invented that account.  Although he did not specifically refer  to  the  FIR
relating to the attack on his home, he rejected the account of his wife  and
mother  approaching  the  police  for  protection,   concluding   that   the
documentary evidence in that regard was self-serving. The grounds  challenge
the judge's rejection of the evidence on that basis, but it  is  plain  that
he considered the evidence in the  round,  and  having  given  other  cogent
reasons for concluding that there was no credible reason  why  the  criminal
gang would have reason to seek the appellant out, was entitled to accord  to
it the weight that he did.

The grounds go on to criticise the judge for finding that there would  be  a
sufficiency of protection available to the  appellant  and  assert  that  he
failed to engage with the expert report in that regard.  Reference  is  made
in the grounds in particular to the expert's view at  paragraph  26  of  her
report, whereby Dr Holden opines that  there  would  be  no  sufficiency  of
protection available to the appellant. However it  seems  to  me  that  that
paragraph was premised upon an understanding that  the  appellant  would  be
sought out by the  criminal  gang  and  others  associated  with  Chutakhan,
whereas the judge disbelieved his account of being  pursued  by  Chutakhan's
family  and  associates.  Indeed  that  was  his  response  to  Dr  Holden's
conclusions on internal relocation, at paragraph 93 of his decision.

Turning in more detail to the judge's findings on  internal  relocation,  it
is of note that permission was granted in  the  appellant's  application  to
the Upper Tribunal on this particular matter. The grant  was  on  the  basis
that the judge had arguably failed to deal  with  Dr  Holden's  report,  but
that is manifestly not the case. On the contrary, the  judge  gave  detailed
consideration to her report in that regard, at paragraphs 92  to  95.  Aside
from the point mentioned above, that the  expert's  conclusions  were  based
upon an acceptance of the appellant being targeted  by  the  criminal  gang,
the judge also observed that her report did not address  the  fact  that  he
had managed previously to relocate within Pakistan without any problems.  It
was  Mr  Draycott's  submission  that  the  previous  period   of   internal
relocation was distinguishable on two bases. Firstly, that the risk  to  the
appellant crystallised only after the death of Chutrakhan which  meant  that
the relevant period prior to his departure from Pakistan  was  much  shorter
than  that  considered  by  the  judge.  Secondly  that  a  more   permanent
relocation would entail the need for  a  National  Identity  Card  (NIC)  in
order to access employment  and  health  and  other  services  and  that  an
application for such a document  would  alert  the  criminal  gangs  to  his
presence and thus put him in danger.  However  both  of  those  factors  are
properly addressed by the judge's conclusion that  the  appellant's  account
of being sought out by the criminal gang was not a credible one.

Dr Holden's conclusions on the  difficulties  of  internal  relocation  were
that criminal  gangs,  having  extensive  networks  and  access  to  records
through corrupt police officials,  would  be  able  to  find  the  appellant
throughout Pakistan. However her views address only ability and  not  intent
and there is nothing in her report to contradict or  undermine  the  judge's
conclusion that the appellant was not  being  sought  out  by  the  criminal
gang. Neither is there anything in  her  report  to  undermine  the  judge's
finding, at paragraph 97, that even if  the  appellant's  claim  were  true,
there was no evidence that the people he feared had any power  influence  or
intelligence outside of the local district. Dr Holden's report  referred  to
criminal gangs in general but made no mention of the specific source of  the
appellant's fear, namely Chutrakhan's family and  criminal  associates,  and
provided no support for a claim that they were a  powerful  and  resourceful
network that would be able to access information and reach out to all  areas
of Pakistan. Accordingly  the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
appellant would be able to relocate to another part of  Pakistan,  in  terms
of risk.

Turning next to  the  question  of  the  reasonableness  of  relocation,  Mr
Draycott submitted that the judge failed to take into  account  the  medical
evidence which indicated that the appellant's removal would be in breach  of
Article 3 and would also render relocation unduly harsh. However  the  judge
gave detailed consideration to the medical evidence and found,  for  reasons
cogently given, that there was no  reason  why  appropriate  medication  and
treatment could not be  obtained  by  the  appellant  in  Pakistan.  I  have
already dealt with the submission that  an  application  for  an  NIC  card,
which was a necessary prerequisite for accessing  medical  treatment,  would
put the appellant at risk. Absent the risk, there is no suggestion that  the
appellant could not obtain a NIC and  thus  access  relevant  services.  The
judge is criticised for having failed to consider the  question  of  suicide
risk and the guidance in J v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2005] EWCA Civ 629. However, as Mr McVeety submitted, the  evidence  before
the judge did not support a claim that the appellant was a suicide risk.

The judge considered, at  paragraph  110,  the  report  from  Dr  Thakur  at
Medicare, together with the appellant's medication and a letter  from  Dr  S
Jaffer dated 27 March 2014 giving details of his mental condition. He  noted
the psychiatric history given in that letter and the reference  to  previous
incidents of self-harm and an overdose. The doctor concluded that there  was
no current suicide intent and  that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from  a
moderate depressive episode, which his report indicated was due  largely  to
his circumstances in the United Kingdom and separation from his family.  The
judge is said to have erred by finding that there was no up-to-date  medical
report, when in fact he had before him a very recent letter  dated  26  July
2014. However that letter does no more than confirm, in  very  brief  terms,
the conclusions in the previous letter and it is clear that what  the  judge
meant, and in fact said, was that there  was  no  recent  report  indicating
that he was suffering from a condition that would require him to  remain  in
the United Kingdom.

Accordingly the judge gave full and  proper  consideration  to  the  medical
evidence and the issues arising in relation to the  appellant's  health  and
there  was  nothing  in  that  evidence  that  undermined  in  any  way  his
conclusions on internal relocation or Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

For all of those reasons I find that the judge made no errors of law in  his
decision. He gave full and careful consideration to  all  the  evidence  and
provided cogent reasons  for  making  the  findings  that  he  did.  He  was
entitled, on the evidence before  him,  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
removal would not put him at risk on return and would not  give  rise  to  a
breach of his human rights.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.



Signed                                                         Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
