
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02156/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 9th September 2016    On the 22nd September 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                 MIRIAM [T]
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dhanji (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Borsada promulgated on the 4th September 2015, in which
      he refused the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to
      refuse his asylum and Human Rights claims.

   2. The full reasons for the Judge's  decision  are  set  out  within  his
      judgement, and are a matter of record and are therefore  not  repeated
      in full here. However, in summary,  the  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
      Uganda who was born on the 8th January 1956.  The Appellant claims  to
      have left Uganda in 1998 and claims that she went  to  Italy  at  that
      time with her then husband Mr [MC], as a result  of  people  from  the
      Lord's Resistance Army targeting her and her husband and having beaten
      them and threats being made to kill them, as a result of his political
      opinion, such that it was the Appellant's original case that  she  and
      her husband had to flee the country.  It was the Appellant's case that
      she had successfully claimed asylum with her husband in Italy, but she
      had then travelled to the UK in 2001 and that she was no longer  in  a
      relationship with [MC].  The Appellant's case is that she had lived in
      the UK for over a decade and that  she  has  no  family  remaining  in
      Uganda. She claims to be fearful of returning because she would  be  a
      lone woman without any support such that she feared  destitution.   It
      was also her  case  that  she  is  HIV  positive,  has  mental  health
      problems, suffers from forgetfulness, high blood  pressure,  arthritis
      and has difficulty standing and walking for long periods.  It was said
      that she was particularly concerned about the lack  of  treatment  she
      might receive for her HIV in Uganda.

   3.  Judge Borsada bore in mind that the Appellant had previously  applied
      for leave to remain  in  the  UK  on  the  4th  December  2009,  which
      application had been refused on the 22nd  May  2013,  and  the  appeal
      against that refusal was heard and dismissed  by  Designed  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Garratt  on  the  1st  August  2013  and  that  it  was
      thereafter on the 26th  September  2014  that  the  Appellant  claimed
      asylum.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Borsada,  in  respect  of   the
      Appellant's credibility, found at [9] that even making some  allowance
      for the Appellant's inability to answer questions in  a  precise  way,
      giving her some degree of latitude he  was  still  not  satisfied  the
      Appellant could be regarded as a witness of truth or that the core  of
      her claim could be said to have remained intact "Such  was  the  range
      and breadth of the areas of her evidence as outlined by the Respondent
      and  set  out  at  paragraph  6  above  which  indicted  a   lack   of
      truthfulness."

   4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada at [10] went on to  find  that  he
      did  not  accept  the  claims  regarding  the  Appellant's  fears   of
      persecution in Uganda or that she had satisfied him that she was  ever
      in a relationship with Mr [C] and had managed  to  successfully  claim
      asylum in Italy with him.  He went on to find that  he  was  certainly
      not satisfied that she came to the UK either in the way claimed or  on
      the date claimed and that Immigration Judge Garratt had  already  made
      findings at paragraph 33 of this decision in  the  way  in  which  the
      Italian documentary  evidence  now  included  within  the  Appellant's
      bundle was rejected, as good evidence that the Appellant came  to  the
      UK in 2001. He found that he concurred  with  that  finding  and  that
      whilst Mr [C] had provided a witness statement he had not been present
      at the hearing to give evidence and therefore he gave  that  statement
      little weight.

   5. The Judge went  on  at  [11]  to  state  that  as  far  as  the  death
      certificates relating to the Appellant's siblings  were  concerned  he
      agreed with the Respondent that this was vague  and  unclear  evidence
      provided by the Appellant and did not satisfy him that  the  Appellant
      no longer had any family remaining in Uganda and therefore he was  not
      satisfied that she would be a lone female in Uganda upon  her  return.
      He said that he further agreed with the Respondent that the background
      evidence showed that lone females might be at risk of  discrimination,
      but not persecution.  He referred to the fact of there being  a  draft
      piece of legislation which would  make  it  harder  for  HIV  positive
      individuals to live within the community  in  Uganda  but  found  that
      there was no evidence that such piece of legislation  had  become  law
      and he was  not  satisfied  that  being  HIV  positive,  per  se,  was
      sufficient to enable him to find the Appellant belongs  to  a  Refugee
      Convention category group for this reason alone.

   6.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada found that there was no  reason  to
      depart from the findings of Judge Garratt  regarding  the  Appellant's
      Article 3 or Article 8 claim relating to her medical  condition.   The
      Judge further went on to find at [12] that she would not  be  at  risk
      for a political reason upon return and would not be at risk as a  lone
      vulnerable  female.   He  went  on  to  find  that  the   humanitarian
      protection claims under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR also had not been
      established and that her Article 3 and 8 claims on medical grounds had
      previously been determined and he was not satisfied the Appellant  had
      established that she had a family or private life in the  UK  for  the
      purposes of Article 8.  He therefore dismissed the Appellant's appeal.
       The Judge went on at the end  of  paragraph  12  to  state  that  "In
      conclusion for the sake of clarity, I also confirm that I  agree  with
      all the submissions and points made by the Respondent as  they  appear
      in this decision and adopt them as my own.  I  therefore  dismiss  the
      appeal on all grounds.".

   7. Within  the  original  Grounds  of  Appeal  it  was  argued  that  the
      Immigration Judge had failed to address the evidence  of  women  as  a
      particular social group and that the Judge had not made an findings as
      to the issues recorded at paragraph 7 of his  determination  and  that
      his findings regarding whether or  not  the  Appellant  had  surviving
      relatives in Uganda was not exhaustive of the  analysis  of  risk  and
      this would include access to HIV medicines and exposure to persecution
      because of HIV.  It was argued further that the Judge was a witness to
      the Appellant's cognitive impairment  or  dysfunction  and  that  this
      would need to be factored  in,  alongside  her  assess  of  risk  upon
      return, given the fact that  she  is  HIV  and  would  be  subject  to
      stigmatisation.

   8. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Caruthers who found that the Grounds of Appeal  amounted  to  no
      more than disagreeing  with  the  Judge's  conclusions  regarding  the
      asylum and humanitarian rights claims and that on the evidence it  was
      difficult to think that  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  would  have
      concluded that the appeal should have succeeded on any basis.

   9. Within the renewed  Grounds  of  Appeal,  it  was  argued  that  Judge
      Caruthers had failed to indicate why  the  complaints  raised  in  the
      grounds were invalid and that Judge Borsada had to considered women as
      a social group  in  Uganda  and  consider  the  new  evidence  in  the
      framework of Deevaseelan, but did not do so adequately.  It was argued
      that the Home Office is proposing to return a 60-year-old woman on her
      own to Uganda a country where it is recognised that women constitute a
      particular social group and that the female Appellant is very  clearly
      suffering  from  serious  cognitive  impairment  and  has   difficulty
      nevertheless to organise her life in Uganda when at the same time  she
      has the difficult task of accessing HIV medication in that country and
      that whereas each problem separately may be insufficient in  terms  of
      her solitude, cognitive impairment and HIV, the cumulative effect  had
      to be considered and that even discounting solitude as unproven, there
      would still remain the combined effect of evident cognitive impairment
      and difficulty accessing adequate medication for HIV in what was  said
      to be the context of disempowerment of women  as  a  social  group  in
      Uganda.

  10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  on
      the 4th December 2015, in which she found that it  was  arguable  that
      the guidance in Deevaseelan is limited in its  applicability  in  this
      appeal because the Appellant's previous  appeal  concerned  Article  8
      only.  Her appeal before Judge Borsada was her  first  asylum  appeal.
      She found that although the Judge was entitled to consider and  attach
      weight to a failure to raise the same grounds at the first appeal,  it
      was arguable that the Judge's decision in respect  of  Deevaseelan  in
      the context of the asylum claim was inadequately reasoned.

  11. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 Reply it  is  argued  that  the  Judge
      directed himself appropriately and that the Judge had set down all  of
      the submissions made by the  parties  and  went  on  to  set  out  his
      findings at paragraphs 9 and 10 of the determination.  It is said that
      the Judge found that he could  make  allowances  for  the  Appellant's
      inability to focus on questions,  but  rejected  the  claim  that  the
      Appellant had arrived in 2001 and the evidence  previously  considered
      by the Tribunal in  2013  regarding  the  Appellant's  Italian  status
      documents and that the Judge had accepted the submissions made by  the
      Respondent on  many  issues  on  the  core  of  the  claim  raised  in
      submissions.  It  was  said  that  the  Judge  rejected  the  fear  of
      persecution claim in that he was not satisfied that the Appellant  was
      ever in a relationship with [MC] or that the Appellant had  previously
      successfully claimed asylum in Italy and the Judge had found that  the
      death certificates provided were vague and unclear and found  that  he
      did not accept that the Appellant no longer had family in Uganda.   It
      was argued that the determination was well reasoned and addressed  the
      issues raised and that the Appellant was found not to be credible.  It
      was argued that the grounds revealed no material error of law.

  12. In his oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal,  Mr  Dhanji  relied
      upon the Grounds of Appeal.  He did seek to argue that  Judge  Borsada
      had not actually made findings in respect of whether or not there were
      findings from Judge Garratt's decision  which  were  relevant  to  the
      asylum claim. He further sought to argue  that  the  findings  of  the
      Judge regarding her credibility at paragraphs 9 and  his  findings  at
      paragraph 10 were inadequately reasoned.  He argued that the Appellant
      would be at a real risk of persecution on the grounds that she was HIV
      positive, a lone female and forgetful and the Judge should have  taken
      account of all of those factors.

  13. In her oral submissions Ms Fijiwala relied upon the Respondent's  Rule
      24 Reply.  She argued  that  the  only  aspect  of  Immigration  Judge
      Garratt's decision that had any  impact  upon  the  asylum  claims  at
      paragraph 10 of the decision of Judge Borsada, was the fact that Judge
      Garratt had rejected the Italian documentary  evidence  regarding  the
      Appellant's status in Italy, which Judge  Borsada  agreed  with.   She
      argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  properly  assessed  the
      Appellant's credibility at paragraph 9 of the decision  and  that  the
      Judge had assessed the death certificates which were not before  Judge
      Garratt and had adopted the Respondent's submissions in respect of the
      death certificates.  She said  that  the  Judge  had  found  that  the
      Appellant would not be returning as a lone female and the evidence  of
      the death certificate was not challenged as a ground of  appeal.   She
      argued that the Judge was entitled to rely upon the previous  findings
      of Judge Garratt in respect of Article 3 and Article 8 on the  medical
      issues and there was no documentation to  show  that  the  Appellant's
      health had deteriorated since 2013.  She argued  that  there  were  no
      material errors in the determination of Judge Borsada.

  14. Both legal representatives have agreed that if there  was  a  material
      error, the case should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for
      a rehearing before a different First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I  reserved
      my decision.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  15. Although when considering the Appellant's credibility at  [9]  of  the
      decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada said  that  he  had  taken
      into account  the  Appellant's  obvious  inability  to  focus  on  the
      questions that had been asked of her and her  hesitancy  in  answering
      those questions, and he correctly said that limited  weight  could  be
      given to  the  information  from  the  local  HIV  charity  about  her
      forgetfulness when there was no live witness and the  letter  was  not
      signed.

  16.  However, the Judge went on to state that "I have made some  allowance
      for the Appellant's inability to answer questions in  a  precise  way,
      but even in giving some degree of latitude, I was still not  satisfied
      that the Appellant could be regarded as a witness of truth or that the
      core credibility of her claim could be said to  have  remained  intact
      such was the range and  breadth  of  the  areas  of  her  evidence  as
      outlined by the Respondent and set out  at  paragraph  6  above  which
      indicated a lack of truthfulness.".  At paragraph 6 of  the  decision,
      which was sub-divided into 7 further sub-paragraphs, the Judge set out
      the submissions of the Respondent  in  respect  of  the  appeal.   The
      finding of the Judge that "such was the range and breadth of the areas
      of her evidence as outlined by the Respondent and set out at paragraph
      6 above which indicated a lack of truthfulness"  in  my  judgement  is
      wholly unclear as to what the Judge actually has found regarding which
      aspects of the Appellant's account he considered to be untruthful  and
      lacks any adequate reasoning in respect thereof It is  unclear  as  to
      why the fact she had a range and breadth  of  areas  in  her  evidence
      indicated a lack of  truthfulness.   The  Judge's  reasoning  in  this
      regard is lacking in clarity, and the reasons given for rejecting  the
      Appellant's account as indicating a  lack  of  truthfulness,  are  not
      adequately  or  sufficiently  reasoned,  to  make  it  clear  to   the
      Appellant, why she has lost.  Further, I find that this is a  material
      error in terms of a failure to properly,  adequately  or  sufficiently
      explain his reasoning in this regard.

  17. Further, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Borsada  did  not  adequately  or
      sufficiently explain why in paragraph 10 he did not accept  the  claim
      regarding the Appellant's fears of persecution in Uganda  or  why  she
      had not satisfied him that she was ever in a relationship with Mr [C],
      nor why she had not satisfied him that she came to the  UK  either  in
      the way claimed or on  the  date  claimed.   Although  he  noted  that
      Immigration Judge Garratt had already made findings at paragraph 33 of
      his  decision  in  which  the  Appellant's  documentary  evidence  was
      rejected as good evidence the Appellant came to the UK in 2001, and he
      concurred with this, the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not  considered
      or adequately explained the extent to which the findings of Designated
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt were  relevant  to  the  Appellant's
      asylum claim in this regard, given that the decision of Judge  Garratt
      was simply in respect of her Article 3 and Article 8  claim,  and  was
      not an asylum claim.  But in  any  event,  the  Judge  had  failed  to
      explain why he rejected her claim of persecution in Uganda and why  he
      rejected her claim to have been involved in a relationship with Mr [C]
      and why he rejected her claim regarding the way she came into the  UK.
      These in my judgement are material errors of  law.   I  am  not  in  a
      position to say that the decision reached would have  been  the  same,
      irrespective of the errors made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

  18. In my judgement, the failure of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Borsada  to
      sufficiently and adequately explain his reasoning  for  rejecting  the
      Appellant's asylum claim, and also his failure  to  properly  consider
      the case of Deevaseelan and that the extent to which the  findings  of
      Judge Garratt were relevant or not to the asylum claim,  are  material
      errors of law, such  as  to  mean  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Borsada should be set aside in  its  entirety  and  the
      matter remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration by
      any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Borsada.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Borsada  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing,  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada.

Signed

RF McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 17th September 2016
