
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02805/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25th February 2015                    |    On 11th March 2015            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Halim, Counsel (instructed by Wilsons Solicitors
LLP)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal.  Neither party  invited  me  to  rescind  the  order  and  I
      continue it pursuant to Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008.

   2. I will refer to the parties in the style by which they  were  referred
      to before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   3. The appellant is a male citizen of the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
      (DRC), born 26 May 1986.

   4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in August 2008.  He was in
      possession of entry clearance.  The respondent had contended that this
      had been obtained by deception.  On his day of entry he claimed asylum
      based upon fear of mistreatment in the DRC due  to,  inter  alia,  his
      race and his political opinion.  His claim was rejected.

   5. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  came
      before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Walker sitting at  Newport  on
      15 September 2014.  In  a  determination  dated  23  September,  Judge
      Walker noted that it had been accepted that  the  appellant  had  been
      granted asylum in Burundi.  The  appellant  was  in  possession  of  a
      Burundian Passport, which he  said  was  a  forgery.   The  respondent
      contended that the Burundian Passport was  genuine,  but  that  stamps
      contained within that passport were forged.

   6. Judge Walker concluded that the appellant would be at serious risk  if
      returned to Burundi and at paragraph 86 of  the  determination,  found
      that the appellant's claim for asylum "succeeds"  and  she  then  went
      onto allow the appeal at paragraph 88.

   7. The respondent then sought leave to appeal based  upon  an  allegation
      that the judge had made a material misdirection of law in reaching her
      conclusions.  The grounds, in summary, contended that the findings  of
      Judge Walker at paragraphs 83 to 85 (which were not challenged) should
      have resulted in the appellant succeeding under Article 3 ECHR, rather
      than being granted asylum.  In short the appellant's fears in  respect
      of a return to Burundi were based on non-asylum convention reasons.

   8. On 6 November 2014, Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  Parkes  granted
      permission to appeal, merely finding that the grounds were "arguable".



   9. Thus the matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.

  10. It is a very brief submission Mr Richards confirmed  my  understanding
      of the issue.  The appeal should have been allowed, but under  Article
      3 and not in respect of asylum.

  11. Mr Halim in his equally brief submission indicated that Judge Walker's
      eventual  conclusion  was  correct.   Reference  was   made   to   the
      Qualification Directive.  The appellant was  outside  his  country  of
      origin.  That country is the DRC.  It has been accepted that he was  a
      refugee from that  country;  hence  he  cannot  return  there  and  is
      entitled to refugee status.

  12. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which  I
      now give with reasons.

  13. This is a very unusual and complicated situation, although the  issues
      before me are fairly straightforward and discreet.

  14. The appellant's claim (as set out in paragraph  3  of  Judge  Walkers'
      determination) is based upon a fear of mistreatment in the DRC  for  a
      convention reason.  Paragraph 47 begins "at the outset of the  hearing
      it was confirmed by the respondent that the  respondent  accepts  that
      the appellant is from the  DRC".   The  respondent's  position  before
      Judge Walker was that because of dual nationality the appellant  could
      safely go back to Burundi.

  15. The evidence before Judge Walker from the appellant was that he  could
      not return to Burundi.  He was in possession of  false  documentation.
      Judge  Walker  drew  upon  the  contents  of  expert  reports  on  the
      documentation and concluded  at  paragraph  85  that  the  appellant's
      documentation "does not entitle him to citizenship in Burundi  and  he
      could not be returned there because he would face prosecution, and  as
      a result it would be likely that he will be at real risk of  suffering
      serious harm".

  16. To summarise  the  findings  of  Judge  Walker,  the  appellant  faced
      persecution for a convention reason in DRC.  He could not be  returned
      to Burundi because he faced a real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm
      (i.e. Article 3 -  Protection).   The  appellant  had  discharged  the
      burden imposed upon him.

  17. Paragraphs 85 and 86 of the determination explained  the  decision  of
      Judge Walker.

  18. Clearly  the  appellant's  country  of  origin  (as  accepted  by  the
      respondent) is the DRC.  He cannot return for a convention reason  and
      he is entitled to asylum status.  Whilst Judge Walker's  determination
      is silent with  regard  to  the  Qualification  Directive,  the  judge
      reached a conclusion based upon the evidence  and  her  findings  from
      that evidence  whilst  the  appellant's  fear  is  not  based  upon  a
      convention reason in respect of Burundi; it is based upon his fear  as
      a recognised refugee from DRC.

  19. Judge Walker's determination contained no material error  of  law  and
      her decision must stand.

  20. The respondent's appeal dismissed.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

