
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02993/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Issued          |
|On 16th May 2016                              |On 19th May 2016              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     S U
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, aged  41.   He  says  that  he
    arrived clandestinely in the UK on  15th  September  2005.   He  sought
    asylum in May  2008.   The  respondent  refused  that  application  for
    reasons explained in a decision dated 13th  May  2012.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge  Mozolowski  dismissed  his
    appeal by determination promulgated on 3rd May 2012.

 2. Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    initially also by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  but  the  latter  refusal  of
    permission was reduced on petition to  the  Court  -  [2013]  CSOH  43,
    opinion of Lord Glennie dated 8th March 2013.

 3. The outcome of the proceedings in the Court was not communicated to the
    Upper Tribunal until October 2015.

 4. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 6th November 2015.

The case for the appellant.

 5. In his grounds and submissions the appellant made four points:

      1) The judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  are  based  wholly  on
         speculation as to how an ordinary civilian might respond  to  death
         threats from the Tamil Tigers, a dangerous group  designated  as  a
         terrorist organisation in the UK and in the EU.

      2) The judge erred in founding against the  appellant  partly  on  the
         basis of delay in claiming asylum, which left out of  account  that
         the period of delay was also the period of a cease-fire.

      3) The judge founded on a  discrepancy  between  the  date  which  the
         appellant gave at screening interview for his arrest and  detention
         (February  2004)  and  in  his  account  at  substantive  interview
         (December 2004).  The interview had  not  been  tape  recorded,  no
         representative was in attendance, and it was an  error  of  law  to
         found upon any such perceived discrepancy.

      4) The appellant had spent several years in the UK,  had  developed  a
         creditable  private  life,  and  there  had  been  delay   by   the
         respondent.  It should have  found  disproportionate  in  terms  of
         Article 8 of the ECHR to remove him.

Submissions for respondent.

 6. Mr Matthews submitted firstly that there was no error  in  relation  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR, and any case on that basis was hopeless.

 7. The next submission was that the situation in Sri Lanka has now changed
    significantly and  is  governed  by  GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319.   Even  if  favourable
    credibility findings had been  reached,  the  appellant  did  not  fall
    within any category qualifying  for  protection.   There  had  been  no
    application to lead further evidence  which  might  take  the  Tribunal
    beyond country  guidance  in  remaking  the  decision.   The  case  was
    therefore bound to fail.

 8. As to ground 1, reading the determination sensibly and as a  whole,  it
    was based  on  clear  reasons.   The  first  point  criticised  by  the
    appellant, whether he might elect to drive alone  on  unfamiliar  roads
    unnecessarily through LTTE territory, was explicitly taken as a  "small
    point".  There were  then  added  numerous  other  points,  of  varying
    importance.  It was reasonable to think that the appellant  would  have
    chosen to communicate with his friend who was an  army  captain  rather
    than to keep quiet about threats from the LTTE.  The point at paragraph
    61 that it would be  surprising  for  the  LTTE  to  coerce  an  ethnic
    Sinhalese as  he  claimed  was  sensible.   It  was  derived  from  the
    appellant's expert report.  Further points based on the expert evidence
    emerged at paragraphs 62, 63 and 64.  The analysis through to paragraph
    74 was far from speculative.

 9. As to delay, the judge did not fall into an error of failing to  notice
    that there was a cease-fire in Sri Lanka.  She noted  at  paragraph  74
    that the appellant accepted that he had advice to  claim  asylum  early
    on.  By his own account he was fleeing from torture and had been unable
    to live in his own home.  Circumstances  did  not  alter  overnight  or
    during the time he was travelling to the UK.  There was  no  rule  that
    failure to claim during the period  of  the  cease-fire  could  not  be
    considered adverse.   Each  case  had  to  be  considered  on  its  own
    circumstances.

10. It was accepted that discrepancies between  screening  and  substantive
    interviews were to be approached  cautiously.   However,  a  judge  was
    entitled to give them such weight as they  deserved.   It  was  notable
    that the appellant had sought to correct matters  after  the  screening
    interview, but had not mentioned the date of his  detention.   He  made
    some complaint about being interviewed in English but  his  educational
    background was such that he must have had a good level  of  proficiency
    in English.  Paragraphs 66 and 67 of  the  decision  were  an  accurate
    analysis on this issue, and had not been disputed.  The discrepancy was
    only of many matters weighed in the credibility assessment.

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be  dismissed.   Alternatively,
    if error were to be found, the application of country guidance  led  to
    the same result.

Response for appellant.

12. Speculation ran through the decision, and it had no other  basis.   The
    judge went wrong in law by holding any period of delaying  against  the
    appellant while there had been a cease-fire.  The appellant sought a de
    novo hearing at which he would tender further background evidence  with
    a view to showing that country guidance has been  superseded  and  that
    his circumstances, if accepted, do fall within a protection category.

Discussion and conclusions.

13. The characterisation of the determination as  speculative  is  no  more
    than a way of  expressing  disagreement,  and  is  simply  not  a  fair
    reading.  The determination, from paragraph 58  to  76  in  particular,
    speaks for itself.  The  numerous  reasons  given,  to  each  of  which
    varying weight is appropriately attached,  amount  to  a  comprehensive
    explanation to the appellant of why his  account  has  not  been  found
    probative, even to the lower standard.

14. The discrepancy over the month of detention is given such weight as  it
    deserves, and no more.  The judge was entitled to conclude at paragraph
    68 that if there had been a mistake it would have been complained about
    in the correspondence following the screening interview.

15. The judge was entitled to find the delay in claiming  from  2005  until
    2008 adverse to the claim, that the cease-fire is  not  a  good  enough
    explanation for lying low in the UK throughout those years, and that if
    the appellant arrived here due to acute and immediate  fear,  he  would
    have been anxious to vindicate his position without delay.

16. As I indicated at the hearing, I saw no force in  the  point  based  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  There was some delay  by  the  respondent,  but
    nothing which ought to have led the appellant to believe it gave him  a
    right to remain, and there was delay also on his part.  The  judge  was
    plainly entitled to dismiss the case  based  on  Article  8,  when  the
    appellant had only private life in the UK and  has  a  wife  and  other
    family in Sri Lanka.

17. If an appellant proposes to  rely  on  further  evidence,  there  is  a
    general obligation to comply with Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and with  Practice  Directions.   Any  such
    application should be made as early in proceedings as  possible.   This
    requirement was reinforced by standard directions issued along with the
    grant of permission dated 6th November 2015.  If legal error  had  been
    found, the case would still have  failed.   On  a  favourable  view  of
    credibility it could not succeed, in  light  of  country  guidance.   A
    vague assertion that some more  recent  background  evidence  might  be
    produced to the contrary is no basis to conclude otherwise.

18. The appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. An anonymity direction was made in the FtT.    There appears to  be  no
    particular need for anonymity, but the matter was not addressed in  the
    UT.  In those circumstances, the order  made  by  the  FtT  remains  in
    force, and the appellant is referred to herein by initials only.

                           [pic]


                           18 May 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
