
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02478/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th January 2016                          |On 8th March 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   miss vf
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge CA Parker, who dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to remove her  from  the  United  Kingdom
    following a refusal to grant her asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    protection under the European Convention. The appellant is an  Albanian
    national born on 5th February 1996.   Her account was that  she  was  a
    lone female child who was a victim of trafficking.   The  appellant  is
    now over 18 but claims she arrived in the UK on 27th January  2013  and
    subsequently claimed asylum on 29th January 2013.

 2. The substantive asylum interview was conducted on 15th March  2013  and
    her claim was refused by the Secretary of State in a letter dated  18th
    April 2013.

 3. The appeal was previously heard by an Immigration Judge at Hatton Cross
    on 15th October 2014 and the appeal was dismissed but an error of  law
    was found, such that the matter was reheard and a  fresh  hearing  took
    place on 28th July 2015 at  Taylor  House  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge C A Parker. At that point the appellant was  19  years  old.  The
    decision was promulgated on 8th September 2015 dismissing the appeal.

 4. The appellant's account was that she would be at risk of return to  her
    country as she had feared her former traffickers and she  was  also  at
    risk from her father and her brothers as a result of her  running  away
    from home and working as a  prostitute  and  being  in  a  relationship
    outside her marriage.

 5. The grounds for permission of appeal asserted  that  the  judge  should
    have, despite the inconsistencies, given more credence to  the  central
    claim, and not enough weight had  been  given  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was a minor and the judge failed to look at the  evidence  in
    the round and incorrectly rejected the expert evidence.

 6. The grounds stated that there was an arguable error of law on the basis
    that the judge found the appellant's account  was  broadly  consistent,
    yet there were significant inconsistencies leading to the finding  that
    the appellant was not credible  and  the  two  findings  were  arguably
    difficult to reconcile.  In the appeal before me Ms Asanovic  attempted
    to re-characterise this as a failure by judge to deal with a minor  and
    give her the benefit of the doubt.

 7. There are a number of problems with this  challenge,  the  first  being
    that the judge very clearly set out at paragraph 39 that she had "taken
    all this into account when considering the appellant's  credibility  as
    well  as  the  submissions  of  the  representatives  and  the  UNHCR's
    guidelines concerning the treatment of the evidence of minors".  It  is
    clear at the outset of her decision  that  the  judge  has  taken  into
    account the fact that the appellant had in the previous stages  of  her
    appeal been a minor and the judge went on to note that

         "Whilst the appellant is now  an  adult,  these  guidelines  remain
         relevant as she was a minor when some of her statements were  given
         and the interviews took place.  Further, she was a minor  when  the
         events which form the basis of her asylum claim occurred".

 8.  Although  the  judge  did  not  specifically  refer  to  the  judicial
    guidelines on the protection of vulnerable witnesses, there is a  clear
    direction to herself to bear in mind the statements and  evidence  some
    of which were given when she was a minor and  that  they  continued  to
    apply.  The judge made a series of credibility findings in relation  to
    the core of the appellant's claim from paragraph 40 to paragraph 64 and
    ranging over 24 paragraphs.

 9. I also note that at paragraph 47 the judge states  when  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility

         "The appellant appeared to be making her evidence up  as  she  went
         along, being unable to remember what she had  said  previously  and
         then giving a different account in  order  to  address  credibility
         issues thrown up by the new version of events".

10. At this point the appellant was an adult and yet on the evidence  given
    before the Tribunal itself when she was nineteen years  old  the  Judge
    found that she was 'making it  up'.   That  in  itself  undermines  the
    credibility of the appellant.

11. It was asserted that  the  judge  found  the  appellant's  account  was
    "broadly  consistent"  yet  there  are  "significant   inconsistencies"
    leading to his finding that the appellant is not  credible,  [51],  and
    that the two findings were arguably difficult to  reconcile.   In  fact
    the judge stated the following at paragraph 40

         'At all stages, the Appellant's account includes the claim that she
         met Ardit Hoxha in Albania; secretly began a relationship with  him
         which was then discovered by her  parents  and  escaped  while  her
         family members  were  at  a  funeral.   They  travelled  to  Italy;
         unsuccessfully attempted to travel to the United Kingdom;  returned
         to Tirana and then went, again, to Italy where  the  Appellant  was
         raped and  forced  to  work  as  a  prostitute.   From  there,  the
         Appellant was taken to France  and  then  travelled  alone  to  the
         United Kingdom, where she claimed  asylum.   To  this  extent,  her
         account has been broadly consistent,  but  there  were  significant
         inconsistencies  concerning  central  events  and  aspects  of  her
         account, which lead me to find her account is not credible, even to
         the lower standard'.

12. There is no doubt that the appellant has stated as Mr  Avery  submitted
    that the judge's acceptance of the account was qualified and  that  she
    set out the qualification clearly.  The judge used the words  "to  this
    extent, her  account  has  been  broadly  consistent,  but  there  were
    significant inconsistencies concerning central events  and  aspects  of
    her account, which lead me to find her account is not credible even  to
    the lower standard".   This shows that the judge did not accept all  of
    the appellant's evidence or her  credibility  but  that  she  carefully
    analysed the account.

13. The judge  details  various  inconsistencies  in  the  account  of  the
    appellant  and  although  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    asserted  that  it  was  arguable,  that   the  judge  failed  in   the
    determination that a minor had given an interview and there were  bound
    to be some inconsistencies  and  those  should  have  been  given  more
    emphasis on the central claim, the  judge  carefully  and  forensically
    went through the inconsistencies.  The application  for  permission  to
    appeal at paragraph 7 merely disagrees with the findings of  the  judge
    and indeed attempts to compare an undated statement with  an  interview
    of a later date which in fact does not assist the appellant because the
    judge is clear on a number of central issues  that  the  appellant  was
    neither consistent nor credible, particularly  in  her  description  of
    being assaulted.

14. I turn to the issue being the weight placed on the expert's  views  and
    the fact that the judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    evidence of Dr Sonya Landesmann in respect of the  appellant.   It  was
    clear from the decision that the judge  was  aware  the  expert  was  a
    country expert not a psychiatric expert and that  the  expert  had  the
    evidence before her when completing the  report  because  at  [61]  the
    judge notes that the expert had compiled numerous reports  on  Albania.
    It was submitted that the judge had  refused  to  consider  the  report
    owing to the  fact  the  judge  had  not  found  the  appellant  to  be
    incredible. That is not  manifest  in  the  decision  when  reading  it
    carefully and as a whole.

15. It was subsequently submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  follow
    Mibanga and the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367.  It is very clear that the judge did take into  account  prior
    to the analysis of credibility the  reports  of  Sonya  Landesmann  and
    indeed the judge has referred to those reports at  paragraph  39.   The
    judge specifically states

         "I have carefully considered the appellant's account as provided in
         her two interviews (screening  and  asylum  interview):  her  three
         statements;  the  UKBA  minute  sheet  (29th January  2013);  the
         appellant's oral evidence and the evidence contained in the reports
         and letters from Croydon Council (letter from  Hannah  Gyebi-Ababio
         dated 17th July 2015: the young persons looked after review, dated
         21st February 2013); reports of Sonya Landesmann (dated 16th  April
         2014, 19th May 2014 and 18th July 2014) and the NSPCC Report (dated
         16th May 2014).  I have also had regard to  the  National  Referral
         Mechanism decision of 22nd May 2014 in which it was found that  the
         appellant was not trafficked.  However I am aware that there was an
         earlier positive finding regarding trafficking  from  the  National
         Referral  Mechanism  which  has  never  been   disclosed   by   the
         respondent.  I have taken all this into  account  when  considering
         the appellant's credibility as  well  as  the  submissions  of  the
         representatives and the UNHCR's guidelines concerning the treatment
         of evidence of minors."

16. It is clear that the judge did refer to those reports, and that she has
    not specifically addressed the report first would is logical because of
    the nature of the report produced by Sonya Landesmann and the character
    of her report which was based on the credibility of the appellant.

17. As Judge Parker states at paragraph 61 "in reaching  my  conclusions  I
    have taken into account the reports from Sonya  Landesmann  dated  19th
    May 2014 and 18th July 2014".

18. That indicates a concomitant consideration of the  credibility  of  the
    appellant herself and the report of the expert.   The  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 61 that the expert had not met the appellant and further that
    Ms Landesmann had never even visited  Albania.   This  was  clearly  an
    issue for the judge in respect of how much weight she attached  to  the
    report but she added finally

    "my main issue with her reports, however, is that she has assessed risk
    on return to the appellant on the premise that her account is  credible
    but does not provide good reason for accepting it as so".

    And that the expert made  a number of statements about the  appellant's
    account, such as that "her account of her treatment by  her  father  on
    disclosing the relationship with  Ardit  is,  in  my  experience,  also
    plausible and I have no doubt to the potential validity of her claims".
     The judge notes that Ms Landesmann does not understand the appellant's
    father's treatment of her and show no awareness of the appellant having
    given several accounts of her father's response to  finding  out  about
    the relationship.

19. The judge further avers to the fact that the  expert  made  generalised
    statements about girls and women being lured into prostitution and  did
    not accept that although that may be the case  what  happened  to  this
    appellant did not render her account credible.

20. Indeed the judge noted

         "There is no explanation as to how the significant  inconsistencies
         in her account have been resolved  or  why  the  expert  finds  the
         account to be credible save for the  generalised  statements  about
         the circumstances in which girls and women may be trafficked."

21. I cannot agree that the appellant has been the victim of a flawed fact-
    finding exercise on the part of the judge or  that  the  Tribunal  fell
    into legal error.  It is not the case that  the  judge  factored  in  a
    report into her assessment only at a point after she  had  reached  her
    conclusion or that she did not focus on the report.  It is not the case
    that the judge reached her conclusion before surveying all the evidence
    or that she made the cake with only one ingredient.  It is quite  clear
    from  an  overall  reading  of  the  determination  that  Judge  Parker
    considered a combination of a number of pieces of evidence  and  it  is
    trite law to the effect that experts  cannot  usurp  the  fact-finder's
    function in assessing credibility.

22. Albeit an expert can offer  a  factual  context  in  which  it  may  be
    necessary for the fact-finder to survey the allegations  placed  before
    them and this is an important aid to the decision as to whether or  not
    to accept the truth, but it is not the case that the judge did not take
    into  account  the  overall  background  and  indeed  acknowledged   at
    paragraph 62 that with regard to the expert evidence  "whilst  this  is
    the way in which many girls and women are trafficked it does  not  mean
    that this is what happened to the appellant  nor  does  it  render  her
    account credible".  After considering the  expert's  report  the  judge
    went on again  to  state  "there  is  no  explanation  as  to  how  the
    significant inconsistencies in her account have been  resolved  or  why
    the expert finds the  account  to  be  credible  save  for  generalised
    statements about the circumstances in which  girls  and  women  may  be
    trafficked".

23. It is clear that the judge dealt with the report as an integral part of
    her findings on credibility, rather than just an add on.

24. I make further reference to HH (medical  evidence  effect  of  Mibanga)
    Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164 and which I raised with the parties as P  R
    Lane as he then was recorded at paragraph 19

    19.  "Finally, the grounds assert that the Immigration Judge  erred  in
         law in failing to treat the medical report as part of  the  overall
         evidence in this case, to  be  considered  "in  the  round"  before
         coming  to  any  conclusion  as  to  the  appellant's  credibility.
         Reference is made to the  Court  of  Appeal  judgments  in  Mibanga
         [2005] EWCA Civ 367, in particular paragraph 24 of the judgment  of
         Wilson J:

             "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a  fact-finder  must  not
             reach his or her conclusion before surveying all the  evidence
             relevant  thereto.  Just  as,  if  I  may  take  a  banal   if
             alliterative example, one cannot make a  cake  with  only  one
             ingredient, so also frequently one cannot make a case, in  the
             sense of establishing its truth, otherwise than by combination
             of a number of pieces of evidence".

    20.  In the present case, it is manifest that the Immigration Judge has
         arrived at his conclusions as to  credibility  by  looking  at  the
         evidence in the round. At paragraph 16  of  the  determination,  he
         reminded himself that "I must look at the  case  in  the  round  in
         light of all the relevant  circumstances".  At  paragraph  20,  the
         Immigration Judge confirmed that he had "considered the appellant's
         evidence in the round together with the background evidence and her
         interview record". Plainly, the medical  report  was  part  of  the
         appellant's evidence.

25. Accordingly I am not persuaded that there is an error of  law  in  this
    determination and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 29th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

