
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02460/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers  at Field House      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2013                           |On 14 May 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

                           MIAn abdul hamid javaid

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant was born on 12 March 1945 and is a citizen  of  Pakistan.
    He submits claim for asylum on the basis that he is  an  Ahmadi  Muslim
    and will be the subject of risk on return.

2.   The application was refused by the respondent, giving  rise  an  appeal
    being heard  on  the  matter  before  Immigration  Judge  Smith  on  14
    September 2012.

3.   It was put forward to the  judge at the time of the  hearing  that  the
    appellant was suffering from Alzheimer's disease and/or had such mental
    illness as to have significant memory loss.  Accordingly  he  would  be
    unable to give meaningful evidence.  There was  no  upto  date  medical
    report and a request for an adjournment to obtain one to deal with this
    issue was refused.  The judge did not find there  to  be  a  sufficient
    basis upon which to make that adjournment.

4.   The appellant gave evidence and was cross-examined.  His son  Mr  Nasir
    Ahmed also gave evidence.  The judge in the  findings  did  not  accept
    that  there  was  significant  mental  illness  and  found  there  were
    fundamental discrepancies in the various accounts  which the  appellant
    had given thus his account was rejected.

5.    In  any  event,  relocation  was  considered.   Thus  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

6.    The  grounds  contend  that  it  was  fundamentally  unfair   in   the
    circumstances not to grant an adjournment and that  in  any  event  the
    assessment of credibility was  flawed  by  reason  of  the  appellant's
    mental condition.

7.   Leave to appeal was granted on that basis.

8.   I issued directions and a preliminary decision on 21 December  2012.  I
    indicated that it was my preliminary decision that  the  appellant  may
    indeed be the victim of a procedural unfairness  and  that  the  matter
    should be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement on remittals paragraph 7.2(a) and (b ).

9.   I indicated that that would be the course  of action that I would  take
    subject to any representations that being received in pursuance  of  my
    directions.  Those directions were in fact issued on  15  January  2013
    but no response has been made to date.

10.  I therefore assume that all parties are in agreement  with  the  course
    of action which I propose.

11.  Accordingly the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  is  set
    aide.  There will be a rehearing on all issues.

12.   It  is  important,  however,  that  up-to-date  medical  evidence   is
    presented no later than 7 days prior to the hearing.

13.  Any further evidence that is required or submissions to be made  should
    also be filed within that period.

14.  The file is silent as to the requirement for  an  interpreter.   If  an
    interpreter is required those representing the appellant should  notify
    the Tribunal within 14 days of receipt of this decision and directions.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
