

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Aa/02257/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 2 February 2016                            |On 12 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Abu Reza, Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wild, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. On 30 June 2014  he  made  an
   application for further leave to remain on the basis that  he  should  be
   granted asylum in the UK and recognised  as  a  refugee  under  the  1951
   Convention  (The  Geneva  Convention).   The   Respondent   refused   his
   application on 26 January 2015 and gave directions for his removal  under
   s47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


2.  The Appellant appealed against that decision and the appeal came  before
   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lodge  who  dismissed  it  in   a   decision
   promulgated on 27 April 2015. The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
   Appellant was not refugee and that he  did  not  meet  the  private  life
   requirements under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  and  under
   Article 8 ECHR.


3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision  and  permission
   was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  on  25  June  2015.
   Permission was granted on all grounds but in particular, in  relation  to
   the ground that the Judge had applied the wrong standard of proof.


The Grounds

4. The grounds assert that the First-tier  Tribunal  mistook  the  Appellant
   for a Pakistani national. The  grounds  further  assert  that  the  Judge
   applied the wrong standard proof. It is also contended that the Judge did
   not set out the Appellant's protection claim so that it was not  possible
   to understand if his whole account was disbelieved. In particular it  was
   not possible to know from the determination at  paragraph  30  where  the
   Appellant claimed to  have  resided  in  Afghanistan  after  fleeing  his
   father.


5. It is also asserted that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its  approach
   to paragraph 339K of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  error  was
   material because the Judge found that after a lapse of 5 years  he  would
   not be in danger from his father. The error is said to be  compounded  by
   the  fact  that  the  Judge  sought  independent  confirmation   of   the
   Appellant's fear of his father at paragraph 29 of the decision. The First-
   tier Tribunal is said to have failed to assess the Appellant's account of
   his fear of forcible recruitment by the Taliban in  accordance  with  the
   UNHCR eligibility guidelines for 2009 or 2010 by reference to the  degree
   of insurgent activity in the Afghan province in which he resided and  the
   case of (HK (Minors - indiscriminate violence  -  forced  recruitment  by
   Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378  is
   relied on. The grounds also criticise the First-tier Tribunal for failing
   to have regard to the report by Dr Lisa Schuster of the  statements  made
   by the Afghan Minister for Refugees dated 4 March 2014. It is  said  that
   this was material because unless the Appellant could  be  returned  to  a
   safe province he could not reasonably relocate to Kabul given his fear of
   his father there.  It is also asserted that  the  Judge  failed  to  have
   regard to the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines 2013 which reported  that  men
   and boys of fighting age were an at risk group.


6. The grounds further argue that the  Judge  erred  in  the  assessment  of
   whether removal was a proportionate  interference  with  the  Appellant's
   private/family life in that he failed to take  account  of  the  historic
   failure  to  discharge  the  tracing  duty  and  wrongly  held  that  the
   Appellant's private life was precarious notwithstanding  the  Appellant's
   four years lawful residence in the UK.


The Rule 24 Response


7. The Respondent submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  itself
   appropriately and made reasonable, sustainable findings properly open  to
   it on the evidence. Contrary  to  the  grounds  advanced  the  Respondent
   submitted that the First-tier Tribunal considered all material aspects of
   the Appellant's claim and that the Appellant's claim that the  First-tier
   Tribunal had applied the wrong standard of proof was not made  out  since
   the  phrase  "substantial  grounds  for  believing"  derived   from   the
   reasonable degree of likelihood test and was properly open to it  on  the
   circumstances of the case. The Appellant  had  failed  to  discharge  the
   burden of proof to the requisite standard. The Appellant was now an adult
   and his grounds were in mere disagreement with the  negative  outcome  of
   the appeal and  disclosed  no  material  errors  of  law  that  would  be
   considered capable of having a material impact upon the  outcome  of  the
   appeal.


   The Hearing


8. Mr Reza relied on his skeleton argument. He said that  the  reference  in
   the First-tier Tribunal's decision to Pakistan may be a typing error. The
   First-tier employed a higher standard of proof to the Appellant's  asylum
   claim than  permitted.  He  misdirected  himself  that  there  should  be
   "substantial grounds for believing" that he had a  well-founded  fear  of
   persecution. The standard was at the lower end of balance of probability.
    Having started with the wrong standard he viewed the  case  differently.
   Had he started with a lower standard he would have come  to  a  different
   conclusion. At paragraph 30 he concluded that just  because  he  was  not
   with his father for 5 years the risk had faded away. Past persecution was
   probative of future risk. It could be a starting point. Going to the core
   claim, the Appellant's main fear  was  that  he  would  be  targeted  for
   recruitment. The case of HK was not considered by the Judge.  There  were
   various reports in the Appellant's bundle showing the Taliban activities.
   In paragraph  37  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  UNHCR  guidance.  The
   authorities were obliged to take information from various  sources.  This
   was available for the Judge to consider. His failure to  have  regard  to
   the guidance was a material error. According to UNHCR guidance, boys were
   forced to work for a group. At paragraphs 36 to 38 the  Judge  failed  to
   consider the relevant reports about Afghanistan. There was no mention  of
   the report of Lisa Schuster and no mention of the fact that  80%  of  the
   country was not secure. The Judge had been given an option to  depart  if
   the circumstances merited  such  a  departure.  The  Respondent  had  not
   provided any report to show that  Afghanistan  was  safe.  The  objective
   evidence as submitted by the Appellant referred to  serious  problems  in
   integration. He came here as a minor and would go back as an  adult  with
   no experience of living alone.  Kabul was  not  safe  and  lacking  basic
   amenities. He invited me to set aside the decision and remit it  for  re-
   hearing.


9. Mr Wild submitted that the issue that Judge Shimmen considered to be  the
   best point was standard of proof. It was the very  point  dealt  with  in
   Kacaj. The term "substantial grounds for believing"  was  considered  and
   was the exact question that arose here.  There  were  different  ways  of
   stating  the  standard  of  proof  but  all   meant   the   same   thing.
   Interestingly, the view of the then President was it should be adopted in
   preference to any other. It was a starred  case  and  remained  guidance.
   Substantial grounds for believing was the best standard to  use.  Clearly
   there was no error. The question of past persecution that had to be  seen
   in context and if it was in the home of a violent father and he would  no
   longer be living there. He was not returning to the  same  circumstances.
   It was a red-herring. With regard to the risk of forced  recruitment,  HK
   was about the risk of false recruitment in the context of minors and  the
   section expressly said that evidence was required to show that it  was  a
   real risk for the particular child. The Appellant  was  over  20  by  the
   First-tier hearing. There had to be something more to show that there was
   a risk of being  targeted.  The  country  guidance  cases  supported  his
   finding that the Appellant was not at  risk.  The  UNHCR  guidelines  and
   country guidance decisions had been considered in various  cases  and  it
   had been expressly found that the UNHCR guidelines are in no way  binding
   on the Tribunal and the fact that they say a risk  category  exists  does
   not mean that it is determinative. The  country  guidance  case  law  was
   binding and in relation to  this  issue  of  forced  recruitment  we  had
   guidance that it was not a real risk. The fact that the UNHCR  guidelines
   said otherwise was not relevant. Article 8 of  the  Procedures  Directive
   stated that up to date information should be provided to decision  makers
   but it did not say that UNHCR guidelines  should  be  followed.  In  this
   country  we  had  a  country  guidance  system  where  all  evidence  was
   considered that other  judges  should  follow.  This  directive  did  not
   demonstrate that this  First-tier  Judge  had  erred.  The  grounds  were
   drafted prior to the case of R (on the application of Naziri and  Others)
   v SSHD (JR - scope - evidence) IJR [2015] UKUT 00437  (IAC)  and  it  was
   reasonable that when grounds were lodged in May, returns were up  in  the
   air and Judge made no findings. In Naziri the  Upper  Tribunal  President
   found that returns should be continued. If there was need to look at this
   again then this could be done by way of a fresh claim. As to this  First-
   tier Tribunal decision the Judge did consider  these  arguments,  not  in
   great detail and said that he did not accept that there was  evidence  to
   go beyond the country guidance  cases.  That  conclusion  was  upheld  by
   Naziri shortly thereafter.


10. In reply Mr Reza said that even in the case of  Kacaj  at  paragraph  39
   the test was real risk. The Judge should be obliged  to  take  this  into
   consideration because it was an EU directive. It was on the core issue of
   forced  recruitment  and  the  Judge  was  obliged  to  take  this   into
   consideration.  If the matter to be reheard it should be remitted to  the
   First-tier.  Mr Wild submitted that if the error related to the  standard
   of proof start again but other points stay here.

Decision

11. I have considered each of the grounds of appeal  in  turn.  I  have  had
   regard to Mr Reza's skeleton argument. The first ground is that the Judge
   mistook the Appellant for a Pakistani national. It is  correct  that  the
   Appellant is described as citizen of  Pakistan  in  paragraph  1  of  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal. However, this is the only  reference
   to Pakistan and it is clear from the rest of the decision that the First-
   tier Tribunal was fully aware  that  the  Appellant  was  a  national  of
   Afghanistan and assessed the risk against his return to that country.


12. The second ground asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  applied  the
   wrong standard of  proof  to  the  Appellant's  international  protection
   claims thereby raising the bar to the Appellant's success on appeal.


13. At paragraph 6 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal  directed  itself
   as to the law on asylum stating that:

    "In essence, an Appellant will have to show that there are  substantial
    grounds for believing that he is outside his country of nationality or,
    if applicable, his country of habitual residence, by reason of a  well-
    founded fear of persecution for a  Refugee  Convention  reason  and  is
    unable or unwilling, owing to  such  fear,  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country.

14. At paragraph 7 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal  directed  itself
   as to the law on humanitarian protection stating that:


   "In essence, he will have to show that there are substantial grounds  for
   believing that, if returned, he would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
   serious harm and he is unable, or, owing  to  such  risks,  unwilling  to
   avail himself of the protection of the country of return."


15. In the starred decision of Kacaj v SSHD  APPEAL  No.  CC/23044/2000  the
   Immigration Appeal Tribunal, as it then was, considered the  standard  of
   proof in asylum and Article 3 claims and the expressions  that  could  be
   used to identify the correct standard at [12]:


   "Various expressions have been used to identify the correct  standard  of
   proof required for asylum claims. These stem from language used  by  Lord
   Diplock in R v Governor of Pentonville Prison ex p.  Fernandez  [1971]  2
   All ER 691 at p.697, cited by Lord Keith in Sivakumaran at [1988]  1  All
   E.R. 198. Lord Diplock said that the expressions 'a  reasonable  chance',
   'substantial grounds  for  thinking'  and  'a  serious  possibility'  all
   conveyed the same meaning. There must be a real or  substantial  risk  of
   persecution. The test formulated  by  the  European  Court  requires  the
   decision maker and appellate body to ask  themselves  whether  there  are
   substantial grounds for believing that the applicant faces a real risk of
   relevant ill-treatment. That is no different from the test applicable  to
   asylum claims. The decision maker and appellate body  will  consider  the
   material before them and will decide whether the existence of a real risk
   is made out. The words 'substantial grounds for believing' do not and are
   not intended to qualify the ultimate question which  is  whether  a  real
   risk of relevant ill-treatment has been established. They merely indicate
   the  standard  which  must  be  applied  to  answer  that  question   and
   demonstrate that it is not that of proof  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  The
   adjudicator in the instant  case  used  the  expressions  "'a  reasonable
   chance' or 'a serious possibility'" when considering  the  asylum  claim,
   both of which are used by  Lord  Diplock.  In  our  view,  now  that  the
   European Court has fixed on a particular expression and it is  one  which
   is entirely appropriate for both  asylum  and  human  rights  claims,  it
   should be adopted in preference  to  any  other,  albeit  others  may  be
   intended  to  convey  the  same  meaning.  This  will  lead  to  complete
   consistency of approach and avoid arguments such as were  raised  by  Mr.
   Tam that the adjudicator in using the expression 'reasonable  likelihood'
   in relation to Article 3 was applying too low a  test.  The  use  of  the
   words 'real risk' also has the advantage of making clear that there  must
   be more than a mere possibility. The adjective 'real' must be  given  its
   proper weight. Anxious though the scrutiny must be and serious though the
   effect of a wrongful return may be, the applicant must establish that the
   risk of persecution or other violation of his human rights is  real.  The
   standard may be a relatively low one, but it  is  for  the  applicant  to
   establish his claim to that standard."


16. It is clear from this passage that "substantial grounds  for  believing"
   was considered to be the correct test in relation  to  both  Conventions.
   This ground of appeal therefore fails.


17. The third ground is that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  set  out  the
   Appellant's international protection claim and that consequently that  it
   was not possible to understand the whole of the Appellant's account  that
   was disbelieved. It is said that in particular it is not possible to know
   from the determination at paragraph 30 where  the  Appellant  claimed  to
   have resided in Afghanistan after fleeing his father.


18. I do not consider that there is any merit in this ground of  appeal.  It
   is  clear  from  reading  the  decision  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal
   understood the basis of the  Appellant's  claim  that  the  Taliban  were
   attempting to recruit him and that he feared persecution as a  result  of
   ill-treatment  by  his  father  (paragraph  27).  He  makes   clear   and
   sustainable adverse credibility findings in relation  to  each  of  these
   claims at paragraphs 29 to 35 of the decision. The grounds do not in  any
   event, set out what evidence it is  said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   should have and did not have regard to. His finding at  paragraph  30  is
   clear. He found there was a discrepancy in the  Appellant's  evidence  in
   relation to where he and his brother lived as the Appellant had said,  as
   recorded in paragraph 29 of  the  decision,  that  he  had  lived  twenty
   minutes from his father and, as recorded in paragraph 30, that he and his
   brother had lived in a different province far away.


19. The fourth ground is that the First-tier Tribunal disregarded  paragraph
   339K of the Immigration Rules which implemented  Article  4  (4)  of  the
   Qualification  Directive  2004/83.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  at
   paragraph 31 that the Appellant's father would not pose any danger to him
   after five years. He found that the Appellant left  Afghanistan  when  he
   was 13 or 14 and was over 18 at the date of the hearing. In  relation  to
   the risk from the Appellant's father, the Tribunal found that there  were
   discrepancies in the evidence as to how far the Appellant lived from  his
   father and that after five years  his  father  would  not  pose  him  any
   danger. It was the Appellant's evidence that he had no contact  with  his
   father after he and his brother had stolen money from him. The First-tier
   Tribunal did not make a finding that the Appellant had  been  subject  to
   past persecution from his father. In the light of his findings, there was
   no error of law in failing to direct himself in accordance with paragraph
   339K of the  Immigration  Rules.  Further  there  is  no  basis  for  the
   assertion in the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal sought "independent
   confirmation" of the Appellant's fear.


20. Paragraphs 7 to 9 of the grounds can be dealt  with  together  as  those
   paragraphs essentially raise the same alleged error of law. The Appellant
   asserts that at paragraphs 32-33 and 35 the First-tier Tribunal failed to
   assess the Appellant's account of his fear of forcible recruitment by the
   Taliban in accordance with UNHCR eligibility guidelines for 2009 or  2010
   or by reference to  the  degree  of  insurgent  activity  in  the  Afghan
   province in which he resided. The grounds  also  assert  that  the  Judge
   failed to have regard to the  UNHCR  Eligibility  guidelines  2013  which
   reported that men and boys of fighting age were in an at risk  group.  At
   paragraph 8 the grounds allege that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
   have regard to a report by Dr Lisa Schuster  and  that  this  report  was
   material because unless  the  Appellant  could  be  returned  to  a  safe
   province he could not reasonably relocate to Kabul given his fear of  his
   father there.


21. The First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraph 35, that the  Appellant  was
   not targeted by the Taliban. He concluded that the Appellant would not be
   in any specific danger from the Taliban.  At  paragraphs  36  and  37  he
   rejected the submission that Afghanistan was so dangerous that no citizen
   of that country should be returned. He recorded that he was not  referred
   to any part or parts of the background evidence in the Appellant's bundle
   which applied directly to the Appellant. He concluded, on  the  basis  of
   the Country Information and Guidance from February 2015, that individuals
   with no political affiliations or connections to, for example,  military,
   the justice system etc. were in significant danger.  He  found  that  the
   Appellant fell into none of the categories there and was not at  risk  of
   serious harm. He concluded that the  Appellant  could  safely  return  to
   Kabul.


22.  In SG (Iraq) v SSHD; OR (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 the Court  of
   Appeal concluded  that  the  country  guidance  procedure  was  aimed  at
   arriving at a reliable and accurate determination and it  was  for  those
   reasons, as well as the desirability of consistency, that decision-makers
   and tribunal judges were required to take country guidance determinations
   into account, and to follow them unless very strong grounds supported  by
   cogent evidence, were adduced justifying not doing so (paras 43 - 50). In
   SA (Sri Lanka) v SSHD 2014 EWCA Civ 683 the Court  of  Appeal  held  that
   country guidance decisions are confirmation  and  statement  of  evidence
   relevant to the position of asylum seekers from the country in  question.
   They are a convenient guide to the likely treatment of asylum seekers  in
   that jurisdiction of the not intended to exclude other relevant  evidence
   adduced by the parties in particular cases. In TM, KM and  LZ  (Zimbabwe)
   (2010) EWCA Civ 916 the Court of Appeal said that the Tribunal must treat
   as binding any country guidance  authority  relevant  to  the  issues  in
   dispute unless there is good reason for  not  doing  so,  such  as  fresh
   evidence which casts doubt upon its conclusions, and a failure to  follow
   the country guidance without good reason is likely to involve an error of
   law.


23. The Appellant's skeleton argument  asserts  that  the  Appellant's  main
   fear is that if returned to Afghanistan,  he  will  be  targeted  by  the
   Taliban for recruitment and it is asserted that the  First-tier  Tribunal
   failed to consider the case of HK and  others  (minors  -  indiscriminate
   violence - forced recruitment by Taliban - contact with  family  members)
   Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC). In that case the the Tribunal  held
   that while forcible recruitment by the Taliban cannot be discounted as  a
   risk, particularly  in  areas  of  high  militant  activity  or  militant
   control, evidence is required to show that it is  a  real  risk  for  the
   particular child concerned and not a mere possibility.


24. The First-tier Tribunal made reasoned and sustainable findings that  the
   Appellant was not targeted by the Taliban in Afghanistan.  The  Appellant
   was an adult at the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  and  not  a
   child. On the basis of the First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact and the
   Appellant's age there was no error of law in failing to refer to the case
   of HK.


25. In AK(Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC) the  Tribunal
   held that return to Kabul was not  in  general  unsafe  or  unreasonable.
   Whilst the First-tier did not engage in great detail with the  background
   evidence, he followed the country guidance and the UNHCR  guidelines  are
   not binding on him.


26. In HF (Iraq) and others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2013] EWCA Civ 1276 the Claimant failed  asylum  seekers  unsuccessfully
   challenged the most recent country guidance decisions relating  to  Iraq.
   The  Court  rejected  an  argument  that  there  was  justification   for
   conferring a presumptively binding status on UNHCR reports merely because
   of their source. The Court had to assess all the evidence affording  such
   weight to different pieces of evidence as it saw fit. It  was  said  that
   UNHCR was responsible not merely for objectively assessing risk but  also
   for assisting returnees and the court was entitled to  be  alive  to  the
   possibility that the latter function might  colour  the  risk  assessment
   even if only subconsciously.


27.  He engaged with the country evidence and clearly  saw  no  good  reason
   for not following the country guidance.   There was no error  of  law  in
   his approach to the country evidence or in following the current  country
   guidance.


28. The last ground is that the First-tier Tribunal erred in the  assessment
   of whether removal was a proportionate interference with the  Appellant's
   private life. The First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraph  40,  that  the
   Appellant had established his private life  whilst  his  immigration  was
   precarious and in the circumstances little weight could  be  attached  to
   it. There was no error of law in this conclusion because the Tribunal was
   mandated by virtue of section 117  (5)  to  give  little  weight  to  the
   Appellant's private life. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)
   the Upper Tribunal  held  that  those  who  at  any  given  date  held  a
   precarious immigration status must have held at that  date  an  otherwise
   lawful grant of leave to enter  or  to  remain.  A  person's  immigration
   status is "precarious" if their continued presence  in  the  UK  will  be
   dependent upon their obtaining a further grant of leave. The  Appellant's
   presence in  the  UK  was  precarious  because  he  had  been  here  with
   discretionary leave to remain.

29. Whilst the grounds also assert that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
   take account of the "historic failure to discharge the tracing  duty"  in
   assessing  whether  the   Appellant's   removal   was   a   proportionate
   interference with his private life, no arguments  were  advanced  at  the
   hearing  or  in  the  skeleton  argument.   In  the  absence  of  further
   particularisation or argument, this ground cannot succeed in the light of
   the Court of Appeal decision in EU and others [2013] EWCA Civ 32.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  I  make  an  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008)
as the Appellant claims to be at risk of harm.

The Appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No report of these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.
This direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


