
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02565/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 27th February 2015               |On 28th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley, Broudie Jackson and Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran date of birth 12th July  1982.  She
    appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  A.K
    Simpson) dated 23rd May 2013 to dismiss her  asylum  and  human  rights
    appeal.

 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that she would face  persecution
    in Iran for reasons of her religious belief, and/or  imputed  political
    opinion and/or membership of a particular social  group  (women).   She
    claims that she had moved to America in  order  to  attend  university.
    Whilst in America she met a Cypriot Turk, H, with whom  she  started  a
    relationship. They were married. Unfortunately  the  marriage  did  not
    work out; her husband had become aggressive and  verbally  abusive  and
    she had discovered that he was taking  prescription  medications.   The
    Appellant went on a trip to Cyprus, to visit his family, and then  went
    on to Iran to see her own. After about 10 days  her  husband  contacted
    her to say that he had filed for divorce  and  instructed  her  not  to
    apply to renew her USA visa.   When she found her application at the US
    embassy  had  been  refused  the  Appellant  contacted  her   husband's
    employers in America, a University, and informed them about  his  drug-
    taking.  She told his friends about his behaviour. In  retaliation  her
    husband told the Iranian authorities about her having attended a church
    whilst in the US. He also told them that she had offered  to  work  for
    the FBI.  It was against this background that the Appellant  fled  Iran
    in December 2012 after  a  house  church  she  regularly  attended  was
    raided.

 3. The Respondent did not believe the Appellant's account  and  the  claim
    was rejected. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

    The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The Tribunal accepted that the Appellant had been through a "vitriolic"
    divorce. Facebook messages were exhibited which showed the  high  level
    of animosity between her  and  her  ex-husband.   It  was  not  however
    accepted that the raid on the house church in Iran had anything  to  do
    with this history: there was no evidence to suggest that  H  was  aware
    that the Appellant had been attending a house  church,  much  less  its
    location, and if the authorities were looking for her they  would  have
    come to her home.  It was accepted that the Appellant  had  offered  to
    work as a translator for the FBI but not that anything had come  of  it
    nor that the Iranian authorities would be interested if it had come  to
    their attention.   As to her "claimed conversion"  the  Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant had started  attending  the  Anglican  Cathedral  in
    Liverpool, and accepted  that  she  had  attended  church  in  America.
    However,  it  was  noted,  the  Appellant  had  not  actually  formally
    converted, not having been baptised. A  "self-serving  diatribe"  about
    Islam posted by her on Facebook was discounted as  not  presenting  any
    risk since it was highly unlikely to have come to the attention of  the
    Iranian authorities.  The appeal was dismissed.

    The Appeal

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and was
    twice refused.  Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell noted that
    the Judge had "examined the evidence with great care" and gave  "multi-
    faceted reasons" for rejecting it.  He refused permission on  the  13th
    June 2013. Then Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun upheld his decision  on  the
    22nd July 2013.  The Appellant sought judicial review of that  refusal.
    On the 2nd January 2014 HHJ Pelling QC quashed Judge  Eshun's  decision
    in the following terms:

         "I am giving permission with a degree of hesitation but in the  end
         consider I am bound to do so because the determination of  the  FTT
         Judge does not address a critical issue of fact.

         The  determination  records  at  paragraph  38  that  it  had  been
         submitted on behalf of the Claimant that she would be  interrogated
         at the airport and that she could not be expected  to  be  discreet
         about her claimed "conversion" to Christianity.  This mis-describes
         the position because  the  Claimant's  case  is  that  she  on  the
         spiritual path to conversion to Christianity but that is probably a
         matter of degree only in  the  context  of  a  single  woman  being
         returned against her will to  Iran.   The  IJ  concluded  that  the
         Claimant's  ex-husband  had  not  denounced  her  to  the   Iranian
         authorities. That was a conclusion that  the  IJ  was  entitled  to
         reach. However,   it  does  not  assist  on  the  point  I  am  now
         considering. The country  guidance  material  referred  to  by  the
         Claimant suggest that all failed asylum seekers  who  are  returned
         face interrogation. Thus it  was  necessary  for  the  IJ  to  make
         findings as to the degree to which if at all the Claimant had moved
         along the path to conversion and then  to  decide  whether  in  the
         circumstances as they were found to be whether  she  faced  a  well
         founded fear of persecution....

         ....the least that the person concerned is  entitled  to  from  the
         process are clear findings of fact as to whether his or her factual
         case as to his or  her  religious  beliefs  is  accepted  before  a
         conclusion is then reached as to whether on that basis  he  or  she
         has a well founded fear of persecution ..."

 6. On  the  24th  January  2013  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  granted
    permission on the basis of HHJ Pelling's judgement.

 7. At the 'error of law' hearing on the 2nd October  2014  Mr  Medley-Daly
    relied  heavily  on  HHJ  Pelling's   comments.   He   submitted   that
    determination's focus of enquiry was all  backwards  looking.  All  the
    findings were about her husband, the divorce and the raid on the  house
    church. Whilst the Tribunal had been obliged to make findings on  those
    matters, it had failed to go on to consider the future;   the  question
    was whether the Appellant would face questioning on return to Iran, and
    if so, whether she should be expected to  conceal  that  she  had  left
    Islam and was on her  way  to  becoming  a  Christian.   He  relied  in
    particular on the Respondent's Operational Guidance Note  which  states
    that anyone being returned without a passport would be so questioned.

 8. The Respondent was at  that  stage  represented  by  Senior  Presenting
    Officer Ms Johnstone. She pointed out that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    rejected the Appellant's claim to have left Iran illegally. It had been
    expressly found that she had lied about her  journey  to  the  UK,  and
    about having left Iran using a passport to which she was  not  entitled
    [paragraphs 45-46].  In those circumstances there can be  no  error  in
    the Tribunal having failed to consider the point being advanced by  the
    Appellant and taken up by HHJ Pelling QC.

    Error of Law

 9. This is a reasoned determination. The First-tier Judge was clearly  not
    impressed with the Appellant as a witness, and  although  many  of  the
    factual assertions underpinning the appeal are accepted, the Judge  has
    rejected the conclusions drawn by the Appellant as being unsupported by
    the evidence. It is for instance accepted that she attended  church  in
    America and the UK, offered  to  work  for  the  FBI,  went  through  a
    difficult divorce and denounced Islam on Facebook, but  the  Judge  has
    rejected the Appellant's analysis that any of  these  matters  will  be
    known to the Iranian authorities or thereby place her at risk.

10. I am nevertheless satisfied that  the  determination  does  contain  an
    error of law in that there  is  an  omission  as  identified  by  Judge
    Pelling.  Although the Appellant did not  leave  Iran  unlawfully,  the
    country background material before the Tribunal - primarily in the  OGN
    and the COIR - indicated that persons subject to questioning on arrival
    are in fact a wider group. For instance paragraph 3.15.5 of the October
    2012 OGN indicates that it is the circumstances on arrival that  should
    have been the focus of enquiry: "if an Iranian arrives in the  country,
    without a passport or any valid travel  documents,  the  official  will
    arrest them and take them to this court...this procedure  also  applies
    to people who are deported back to Iran not in possession of a passport
    containing  an  exit  visa...".  Since  no-one  (except  possibly   the
    Appellant) now knows where her Iranian passport might be,  it  must  be
    presumed that she would present  as  someone  travelling  on  emergency
    documents issued by the UK, or Iranian, governments.   There needed  to
    be some consideration of whether she would face  questioning  in  those
    circumstances, and whether at that  point  she  could  be  expected  to
    conceal the fact that she had left Islam and was on a spiritual path to
    conversion to Christianity.

11. The findings in the  determination  are  preserved  save  that  further
    findings must be made on a) whether the Appellant will be questioned on
    arrival b) whether it is reasonably likely that such questioning  would
    lead to detention (however short in duration) c) whether the  Appellant
    would be asked about her religious beliefs d) whether  she  would  hide
    them, and if she would, the reason for that.

    The Re-Made Decision

12. At the resumed hearing on the 27th February  2015  the  Appellant  gave
    further evidence going to those  matters  identified  at  paragraph  11
    above.   I also  heard  live  evidence  from  Canon  Richard  White  of
    Liverpool Cathedral following his adoption of his  detailed  letter  of
    the 5th February 2015. A full transcript  of  their  testimony  can  be
    found in the record  of  proceedings  but  for  the  purposes  of  this
    determination I summarise it below.

    The Appellant's Evidence

13. The Appellant stated, as she has done before, that whilst living in the
    United States of America she attended a Baptist church.    She  was  at
    that time nominally Muslim but was non-practising. Her family were  not
    particularly religious although her father was "a bit"  observant.   At
    the time of the appeal before Judge Simpson she had been  attending  at
    Liverpool Cathedral but had not then been baptised. She said  that  she
    had not felt herself ready to take this step, and in any case to her it
    was not so important - it was a formality, but to her it was  what  she
    felt inside that counted.  She confirmed that she  has  been  attending
    services at Liverpool Cathedral since she arrived in the city. She  was
    baptised there in August 2013.    The  Appellant  was  asked  what  she
    would say if she were asked on arrival in Tehran why she had left Iran.
    She said that she would not know what to say; she would be  frightened.
     She would feel she would need to admit to having  claimed  asylum  and
    having attended church.   If asked whether she was a  Muslim  she  said
    that she felt she would have to say "no".

    Canon White

14. Canon Richard White is one of the full time clergy based  at  Liverpool
    Anglican Cathedral. He has particular responsibility for  the  'outward
    looking mission' ie evangelism. He  has  a  lot  of  contact  with  the
    Iranians in the congregation and runs the Farsi language Alpha  Course.
    He was ordained in 2003 but had worked as a Christian missionary  since
    1988.

15. In his letter  Canon  White  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    attending the Cathedral for two years. She completed the  Alpha  Course
    in 2013. She was confirmed  on  the  11th  August  2013  in  a  service
    conducted by the Dean of Liverpool  and  the  former  Bishop  of  Iran,
    Bishop Iraj Motahedeh.  Canon  White  states  that  the  Appellant  has
    remained questioning of her new faith: "while many other asylum seekers
    seek only to give the 'right' answer or to agree enthusiastically  with
    whatever  is  taught,  her  approach  indicates  a  much  more   honest
    evaluation  of  the  Christian  faith".   He  lists   the   Appellant's
    activities with the Cathedral as follows:

          i) She acts as an interpreter for the  Alpha  Course  and  during
             services including the Lent lecture series. She  is  currently
             working  on  translating  service  materials  for  the  Sunday
             morning choral Eucharist.

         ii) Since completing the Alpha Course herself she  has  helped  to
             run a further five Farsi language courses.

        iii) She runs English language classes for other  Iranians  at  the
             university.

         iv) She  regularly  attends  all  services  including  additional,
             English language, programmes  including  "breakfast  with  the
             bible", a weekly lecture series delivered by the Dean.

          v) Since April 2013 she has volunteered on a weekly basis to help
             run the 'Hope+' food bank. She is now training new  volunteers
             and has recruited other Iranians to come and participate.

         vi) In December 2013 she was invited to take part in  a  year-long
             leadership course, within which she has been  an  enthusiastic
             participant.

16. Mr Harrison asked the Canon to explain how he satisfied himself that an
    individual, particularly someone who was formerly a Muslim, was a  true
    convert to Christianity. Canon White accepted that he does not have the
    power to look  into  someone's  deepest  thoughts:  he  could  not  for
    instance say with absolute certainty that the Archbishop of  Canterbury
    was a genuine Christian. He does however have  considerable  experience
    in talking to people about their experiences and beliefs; the Cathedral
    keeps a careful record of attendance  and  involvement  and  claims  of
    conversion by Muslims are subject to close  scrutiny  by  him  and  the
    other senior clergy at the Cathedral. This is for two reasons. First of
    all because of the serious consequences for Muslims who are  considered
    by their co-religionists to be apostates. Secondly because  the  clergy
    are aware that the process might  by  used  cynically  by  someone  who
    wishes to make a false claim for asylum. This is  something  that  they
    are very much alive to and they make it very clear to Iranians  wishing
    to join the  congregation  that  no-one  from  the  Cathedral  will  be
    attending court for them. They only do so in exceptional cases, such as
    this one. Canon White states that in the past 18  months  110  Iranians
    have been baptised at the Cathedral but he has only  agreed  to  attend
    court for 4 of them, including the Appellant.

17. Canon White was asked about the process by  which  the  clergy  at  the
    Cathedral can be satisfied that a person is ready for baptism. He  said
    that the rules of the Church of England are such that someone must have
    an adequate knowledge of the faith in order to be baptised.  Ordinarily
    someone would  be  expected  for  instance  to  attend  a  course,  and
    demonstrate their knowledge in conversation with the clergy. An English
    person would be subject to the same expectations - for instance if they
    wanted their child baptised at the Cathedral.

18. Applying these criteria to the Appellant Canon White was  able  to  say
    that he has had close involvement with her during her time as  part  of
    the congregation. He and other clergy identified  her  as  a  potential
    leader within the church and this was why she did the course -  it  was
    not something she could apply for, it was by invitation only.

    My Findings

19. The Appellant claims to have left Iran unlawfully, using a passport  to
    which she was not entitled. The First-tier Tribunal rejected  that.  It
    is however agreed to be  the  case  that  the  Appellant,  if  returned
    against her will to Iran, will have to travel on  an  emergency  travel
    document, whether  issued  by  the  UK  or  Iranian  authorities.   The
    Appellant's  representatives  have  in  their  bundle  reproduced   the
    application form that the Iranian consulate requires to have  completed
    before a travel document will be issued. This includes a question about
    the description of entry into this country, the length of stay and  the
    "type of residence".   Mr Medley-Daly points to this as  evidence  that
    the Iranian authorities will already be alerted to the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was seeking asylum in the UK prior to her arrival in Tehran.

20. The Appellant will therefore arrive at Mehrabad Airport with  a  travel
    document issued in the UK.   She will at that point have been in the UK
    since January 2013. I find that any competent  officer  will  in  those
    circumstances make some enquiry into what she has been doing in the UK:
    it is accepted country guidance that all returnees are screened[1].

21. It is at this point that the authorities of HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon)
    [2010] UKSC 31 and RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38  become  relevant.  The
    background material indicates  that  the  Appellant  is  likely  to  be
    questioned about what she has been doing in  the  UK.    The  Appellant
    cannot be expected to lie about her attendance at Liverpool  Cathedral.
    Having heard the detailed evidence of Canon White I accept,  as  indeed
    did Mr Harrison, that she has discharged the burden of proof and  shown
    herself to be a  genuine  convert  to  Christianity.   It  was  already
    accepted that she had attended a Baptist church in the USA and that she
    attended a Christian  university  there.   I  find  as  fact  that  the
    Appellant has been attending regular services, lectures and courses  at
    Liverpool Cathedral for well over two years and that she is playing  an
    active role in that community, to the extent that she has been  singled
    out and trained as a potential leader within the congregation. I accept
    that she was baptised in August 2013, a few  months  after  the  appeal
    before Judge Simpson.  She has taken a leading role in the life of  the
    Iranian  congregants  in  particular,  and  has  a  public  profile  in
    Liverpool, acting as an interpreter and  facilitator  for  any  Iranian
    attending  there.   I  accept  that  she  is  a  genuine   convert   to
    Christianity, and that she cannot be  expected  to  conceal  this  fact
    should she  be  returned  to  Iran.   It  is  accepted  that  in  those
    circumstances she must succeed in her appeal.

    Decisions

22. I find there to be an error of law in the making of the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal, to the extent identified above.

23. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it on asylum and  human
    rights  grounds.  The  Appellant  is  not  entitled   to   humanitarian
    protection because she is a refugee.

24. In view of the subject matter in this appeal I  make  a  direction  for
    anonymity having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders.

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family, nor any  former  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
         applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to
         comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
         proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             17th April 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36
(IAC)

