
IAC-fH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02934/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2014                            |On 14 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     eB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, Counsel instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes before me following a hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 26 June 2014 whereby I found an error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal such that the decision was set aside, to be re-made
    in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Attached as an Annex to this determination is the error of law decision
    described  as  a  "Decision  and  Directions".   It   is   nevertheless
    convenient to quote from the opening paragraphs  of  that  decision  at
    this point in order to describe the background to the  appeal  and  the
    facts upon which it is based.  In the error of law decision I  said  as
    follows:

         "1.  The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 6  May  1988.
             He arrived in the UK on 4 September 2010 with a valid  student
             visa. He was detained by immigration authorities  on  8  March
             2013 on the basis  that  he  was  working  in  breach  of  the
             restrictions on  his  employment.  Ultimately,  the  appellant
             claimed asylum. That claim was refused and a decision made  on
             2 May 2014 to remove him to Sri Lanka.

         2.   His appeal against that decision was dismissed  by  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Froom after a  hearing  on  2  June  2014,  the
             hearing having commenced and been adjourned on  15  May  2014.
             Permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Froom's  decision  was
             granted on 18 June 2014.

         3.   The basis of the appellant's claim, in summary, is that he had
             been a member of the Tamil Students' Union and had attended  a
             number of student demonstrations until he left Jaffna in 2007.
             Before that he had assisted the LTTE by  transporting  parcels
             on his bicycle. He ceased those activities  in  2006.  He  did
             other work for the LTTE when he went to Colombo.

         4.   Between 2008 and 2010 he worked as a journalist on a voluntary
             basis, writing articles critical of the human rights record of
             the government, under a  pseudonym.  However,  other  articles
             that he wrote were related to student activities and were  not
             critical of the government.

         5.   He says that he was arrested on 2 August 2010 at a checkpoint,
             being told that he was suspected of being a terrorist. He  was
             detained for eight days and ill-treated during his  detention.
             He was released on payment of a bribe by his father.

         6.   Judge Froom rejected the appellant's claim that  he  had  ever
             been the subject of  adverse  attention  by  the  authorities,
             concluding that it was not reasonably likely that he had  been
             detained in 2010.

         7.   He accepted that the  appellant  had  worked  as  a  volunteer
             journalist, and  that  he  had,  under  a  pseudonym,  written
             articles that  criticised  the  human  rights  record  of  the
             government. However, he found that  the  authorities  had  not
             discovered that he was the author of those  articles  and  nor
             would they on his return to Sri Lanka.  Although  he  accepted
             that the appellant is a person  who  holds  sincere  political
             views adverse to the government, he concluded that he was  not
             reasonably likely to bring himself to  the  attention  of  the
             authorities by writing further articles.

         8.   He accepted that the appellant had taken part in meetings  and
             demonstrations in the UK in support of Tamils, as referred  to
             in his  witness  statement  at  [16],  but  found  that  those
             activities were not reasonably likely to  lead  to  his  being
             identified as  being  involved  in  those  activities  by  the
             authorities. Thus, he would not be at risk for that reason  on
             return to Sri Lanka."



 3. As can be seen from the error of law decision, this appeal started life
    as a fast track appeal.  On 29 June 2014, as well as setting aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error of law,  I  decided  that
    the appeal should no longer be subject to  the  fast  track  procedure.
    Amongst other directions, I directed that the findings of fact made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal,  except  insofar  as  any  such  findings  are
    infected by error of law, were to stand.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom  made  the  following  findings,  these
    being findings that are preserved:

           . The appellant is a Tamil from Jaffna.

           . The appellant was a member of the North Sri  Lanka  Journalist
             Association ("NSJA") between April 2008 and August 2010  as  a
             media worker for Tamil Media.  He was assigned to  provide  IT
             training for Tamil Media personnel and to oversee the computer
             systems, maintenance, IT security and networking.

           . The appellant worked with Pathivu  Online  Tamil  Media  as  a
             reporter.

           . The appellant was an employee of Pathivu Online and worked  as
             a news reporter from  January  2008  until  August  2010.   He
             worked   for   that   organisation   under    the    pseudonym
             "Veeraputhirar".  He was a volunteer for that organisation.

           . The appellant wrote  articles  more  as  a  hobby  than  as  a
             profession.

           . The appellant attends Tamil meetings and demonstrations in the
             UK on a regular basis.  This is consistent  with  his  holding
             strong views about the Tamil struggle for independence.

           . The appellant gave a truthful account of writing  articles  in
             Tamil media under a pseudonym.

           . The appellant is a person who holds sincere political opinions
             adverse to the Government of Sri Lanka.

Submissions

 5. On behalf of the respondent, accepting that certain  findings  of  fact
    are to stand, it was submitted that the key question is  whether  there
    would be a link between the appellant's real name  and  his  pseudonym.
    The evidence that he used both names in writing articles was  only  his
    oral evidence.  The articles do not show what email address was  given.
    It is surprising that he was able to produce copies of  documents  sent
    under his pseudonym but not those under his own name.  Accordingly,  it
    was submitted that limited weight should be given to his oral  evidence
    on that issue.  It is also to be borne in mind that he  was  not  found
    entirely credible by the First-tier Judge, for example in terms of  his
    detention.  There is therefore, no indication  that  the  appellant  is
    being sought in Sri Lanka.   There  is  no  evidence  that  anyone  has
    approached the family or made enquiries as to his whereabouts.  He  has
    not yet therefore come to the attention of the authorities.

 6. It is also relevant to bear in mind that he was able to  leave  legally
    using his own passport.  He left Sri Lanka in 2010 and  has  not  since
    been active in terms of journalistic activities.

 7. He had  delayed  claiming  asylum  and  had  resisted  removal  on  two
    occasions.  He had claimed asylum as a last resort and  these  are  not
    the actions of someone genuinely in fear.

 8. The organisation Pathivu had now been blocked.  It  was  not  therefore
    established to the lower standard that there would  be  any  link  made
    between him and any articles he had written critical of the government.
     So far as pages 231-245 of the appellant's bundle are concerned, these
    were written about five and a half years ago.  Although  they  do  have
    his name on them, his claim previously was that there would be  a  risk
    to him because of a link  made  with  his  email  address  rather  than
    because the articles in his name are critical of the government.

 9. Ms Bayati relied on the skeleton argument.  She submitted that  it  had
    always been his claim that he was a journalist in  Sri  Lanka  and  had
    written articles for various organisations including Pathivu.

10. However, bearing in mind that his appeal was part  of  the  fast  track
    process, the articles he produced at that time were  those  which  used
    his  pseudonym.   This  can  be  seen  from  [39]  of   Judge   Froom's
    determination and from which it can also be seen that a question  arose
    as to whether the appellant had mentioned  in  his  interview  that  he
    wrote articles under a pseudonym.  The letter from Pathivu at page 3 of
    the appellant's original bundle does not state that he only wrote under
    a pseudonym.  The further material from page 231 of the updated  bundle
    indicates that he also wrote articles under his  real  name.   To  that
    extent the "understanding" of his case has evolved.

11. Thus, there are articles under his real  name  as  well  as  under  his
    pseudonym.  The 'new' articles relied on were written for Pathivu which
    was blocked in May 2014.  This can be seen from, for example,  page  52
    of the appellant's original bundle, being a news  report  referring  to
    the blocking of five Tamil news websites by the  government.   This  is
    also confirmed in a letter at page 16 dated 28 May 2014 from the  NSJA,
    as well as confirming that a magazine "Salaram" was also banned by  the
    government.  This was a magazine that the appellant also wrote for.

12. It was submitted by Ms Bayati that the difficulty  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was the lack of written articles in the appellant's own  name.
    It is not the case that his claim has changed.   He  had  written  some
    articles which were political and some which were not.  Judge Froom had
    accepted that he wrote articles critical of the state but the  question
    was whether a link  could  be  made  between  those  articles  and  the
    appellant.  The appellant's evidence was that  he  had  used  the  same
    email address for those articles and there was evidence that Gmail  and
    hotmail accounts are monitored.  There are now  articles  from  Pathivu
    critical of the government in the appellant's own name.

13. Whether or not the articles he had written for Salaram were critical of
    the government, that publication is nevertheless  viewed  as  an  anti-
    government publication.  That would be sufficient to put him at risk.

14. Judge Froom did not accept that the appellant had been detained  before
    he left, the claim being of detention in August 2010, and it is  agreed
    that there is no basis for that finding to be re-opened.  However,  the
    fact that he was not  targeted  before  he  left  Sri  Lanka  does  not
    indicate that he would not be at risk today on return.  Since  the  end
    of the conflict the  government  in  Sri  Lanka  has  been  focused  on
    ensuring that there is no resurgence of the LTTE.  The aim has been  to
    stamp out criticism, in particular from the media.  Thus, even  in  May
    2014, Pathivu was blocked.

15. In the light  of  the  decision  in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) he would be  questioned
    on return and information would be passed to the local  area  where  he
    would be monitored.  He would be recorded as having written articles in
    relation to publications, one of which is banned and the other blocked.



16. Furthermore, although he has not been involved in organising activities
    in the UK for the Tamil Diaspora, the authorities do  undertake  strict
    surveillance and are able  to  distinguish  between  those  who  simply
    attend.  Enquiries would be made to see if he is in fact a threat.

My assessment

17. The appellant's claim to have been detained in August 2010 was rejected
    by Judge Froom and it is accepted that that finding is to stand.

18. It was also found by Judge  Froom  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    reasonably likely to bring himself to the attention of the  authorities
    on return by writing further articles.  Amongst his reasons for  coming
    to that view were that the appellant's  interest  in  writing  articles
    appears to have waned since August 2010 although it was  accepted  that
    the appellant is a person who holds sincere political opinions  adverse
    to the Government of Sri Lanka, that finding again is not  infected  by
    the error of law.  Whilst this particular finding was not  the  subject
    of submissions by either side before me, by the same token on behalf of
    the appellant it was not suggested that this finding  could  no  longer
    stand.  There is in fact nothing to  suggest  that  the  appellant  has
    indicated that he does intend to write further articles were he  to  be
    returned.

19. A number of adverse credibility issues are raised in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  Some of those issues were resolved in the  appellant's
    favour.  However, a matter  that  remains  an  issue  that  potentially
    undermines his credibility is his failure to have claimed  asylum  much
    sooner than he did.

20. The evidence and competing arguments on this issue are clearly set  out
    at [50] of Judge Froom's  determination.   In  summary,  the  appellant
    arrived in the UK in September 2010 with a valid student visa  but  did
    not claim asylum until April 2014, after removal  directions  had  been
    set twice.  Prior to the claim for asylum the appellant had  made  what
    is described in the refusal  letter  as  a  human  rights  application,
    presumably under Article 8.  The appellant's explanation for not having
    claimed asylum at the time when removal directions were  initially  set
    seems to have been that he  feared  being  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  by
    charter  flight.   In  cross-examination  he  said  that  he   had   no
    opportunity to claim asylum earlier, or at that point, and had to wait.
     Submissions were made to Judge Froom on behalf of the appellant to the
    effect that a person who holds a student visa  and  who  is  under  the
    influence of an agent might hold back from claiming asylum at the point
    of arrival and even during the currency of their leave.

21. On the face of it, in my  judgement  the  delay  by  the  appellant  in
    claiming asylum is a matter that has the  potential  to  undermine  the
    credibility of his claim to fear return.

22. The appellant gave evidence before Judge Froom to the effect  that  the
    email address that  he  used  for  the  articles  that  he  wrote  that
    criticised the government was the same email address that  he  used  to
    write non-critical articles of the government.  As  I  pointed  out  at
    [15] of the error of law decision, the  judge's  manuscript  record  of
    proceedings recorded this as the appellant's evidence and  Ms  Bayati's
    note  of  the  evidence  was  to  the  same  effect.   Of  course,  the
    appellant's evidence has not been accepted in all  its  respects.   For
    example, a fundamental aspect of his account which was rejected was his
    claim of having been detained in August 2010.  Accordingly,  it  cannot
    be taken as read that anything the appellant asserts must be accepted.

23. Although it is suggested in the appellant's skeleton argument before me
    that it was implicit that Judge Froom accepted the appellant's evidence
    that he used his pseudonym email account to send articles  in  his  own
    name as well, such a conclusion is inconsistent with the  conclusion  I
    expressed in my error of law decision.   It  is  necessary  to  make  a
    separate finding on that matter.

24. Having said that,  Judge  Froom's  positive  credibility  findings  all
    relate to the appellant's journalistic activities, and  which  are,  to
    varying  degrees,  supported  by  the  documentary   evidence.    Those
    activities include then, the email  account  that  he  used.  In  those
    circumstances, I am satisfied that it is  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant has given a credible account of having used  the  same  email
    address in sending articles  written  in  his  own  name  and  articles
    written in a pseudonym.

25. Aside from the issue of which email  addresses  were  used,  before  me
    further evidence was adduced in relation to  articles  written  by  the
    appellant.  This evidence consists of two articles dated 13 March  2009
    and 9 May 2009, respectively, both for  Pathivu.   In  translation  the
    articles plainly have the appellant's full name at the top.   There  is
    no need to set out in detail the content of those articles.  Suffice to
    say, they unambiguously criticise the government's human rights  record
    in relation to Tamils and  express  support  for  the  cause  of  Tamil
    separatism.

26. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent before me that  there  was
    no evidence of  where  those  articles  came  from,  and  that  it  was
    significant that they were written about five and a half years ago.  It
    was accepted that they  had  the  appellant's  name  on  them  but  his
    previous claim was that the risk to him arises as a result  of  a  link
    between email addresses rather than because of  articles  in  his  name
    that are critical of the government.

27. Notwithstanding those submissions, there is little basis from which  to
    conclude that those documents  are  not  reliable,  when  seen  in  the
    context of the evidence overall.  The integrity of  the  evidence  from
    that same organisation, Pathivu,  was  accepted  by  Judge  Froom.   Ms
    Bayati in submissions explained the basis on which the understanding of
    the appellant's claim has evolved in the light of evidence that he  has
    been able to produce over the course of the proceedings.

28. Thus, I am satisfied that it is established as reasonably  likely  that
    the appellant worked as a journalist, writing articles critical of  the
    Sri Lankan Government, both under a pseudonym and under his real  name.
    Pathivu Online, for which he wrote some of those articles  critical  of
    the government, has been blocked by the government, as demonstrated  by
    the evidence to which I have referred.  Similarly,  although  he  wrote
    articles that were not critical of the government for  the  publication
    known as Salaram, that has also been blocked or banned.

29. According to GJ, one of the categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return  to  Sri  Lanka  is  "Journalists
    (whether in print or other media) or human rights  activists,  who,  in
    either case, have criticised the Sri Lankan Government,  in  particular
    its human rights  record,  or  who  are  associated  with  publications
    critical of the Sri Lankan Government."

30. I bear in mind such adverse credibility findings as have been  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I also take into account the submissions made
    on behalf of the respondent at the hearing before me to the effect that
    there  is  no  evidence  that  the  authorities  have  approached   the
    appellant's family or have made enquiries as  to  his  whereabouts,  it
    being submitted that he has not therefore, come to the attention of the
    authorities.  I also bear in mind that he was able to leave  Sri  Lanka
    legally on his own passport.  There is also the delay in  his  claiming
    asylum  and  the  question  of  when  he  undertook  his   journalistic
    activities, in terms of the risk to him now.

31. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the facts  of  the  appellant's  case
    which have been established to  the  lower  standard  clearly  put  him
    within one of the risk categories identified in GJ.

32. It does not seem to me that his  activities  in  the  UK  in  terms  of
    attending demonstrations and meetings would, on a self-contained basis,
    create a real risk on return.  However,  those  activities  are  to  be
    considered in the context of his journalism and  what  is  said  in  GJ
    about the monitoring by the Sri  Lankan  security  forces  of  Diaspora
    activity in the UK.  In any event, even without taking into account his
    political activities  in  the  UK,  such  as  they  are,  the  risk  is
    established.

33.  In  these  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established to the required standard that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return to Sri Lanka on account of his actual or  imputed
    political opinion.  It follows in this case that there is also  a  real
    risk of a breach of his human rights with reference to Article 3 of the
    ECHR.

Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside and the decision re-made, allowing the appeal on asylum  grounds,
    and on human rights grounds under Article 3 of the ECHR.

Anonymity

In the light of my conclusions, I consider that the appellant should not  be
identified. Accordingly, I  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules   2008.   Consequently,   this
determination identifies the appellant by initials only.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 9/01/15
              ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:AA/02934/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Harmondsworth                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June  2014                              |On 14 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     EB
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms C. Bayati, Counsel instructed by A&P Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M. Logo, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born  on  6  May  1988.  He
       arrived in the UK on 4 September 2010 with a valid student visa.  He
       was detained by immigration authorities on 8 March 2013 on the basis
       that he was working in breach of the restrictions on his employment.
       Ultimately, the appellant claimed asylum. That claim was refused and
       a decision made on 2 May 2014 to remove him to Sri Lanka.

    2. His  appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Froom after a hearing on 2  June  2014,  the  hearing
       having commenced and been adjourned on 15 May  2014.  Permission  to
       appeal against Judge Froom's decision was granted on 18 June 2014.

    3. The basis of the appellant's claim, in summary, is that he had  been
       a member of the Tamil Students' Union and had attended a  number  of
       student demonstrations until he left Jaffna in 2007. Before that  he
       had assisted the LTTE by transporting parcels  on  his  bicycle.  He
       ceased those activities in 2006. He did other work for the LTTE when
       he went to Colombo.

    4. Between 2008 and 2010 he worked  as  a  journalist  on  a  voluntary
       basis, writing articles critical of the human rights record  of  the
       government, under a pseudonym. However, other articles that he wrote
       were related to student activities and  were  not  critical  of  the
       government.

    5. He says that he was arrested on 2 August 2010 at a checkpoint, being
       told that he was suspected of being a terrorist. He was detained for
       eight days and ill-treated during his detention. He was released  on
       payment of a bribe by his father.

    6. Judge Froom rejected the appellant's claim that he had ever been the
       subject of adverse attention by the authorities, concluding that  it
       was not reasonably likely that he had been detained in 2010.

    7. He accepted that the appellant had worked as a volunteer journalist,
       and that he had, under a pseudonym, written articles that criticised
       the human rights record of the government. However,  he  found  that
       the authorities had not discovered that he was the author  of  those
       articles and nor would they on his return to Sri Lanka. Although  he
       accepted that the appellant is a person who holds sincere  political
       views adverse to the  government,  he  concluded  that  he  was  not
       reasonably  likely  to  bring  himself  to  the  attention  of   the
       authorities by writing further articles.

    8. He accepted that the  appellant  had  taken  part  in  meetings  and
       demonstrations in the UK in support of Tamils, as referred to in his
       witness statement at [16], but found that those activities were  not
       reasonably likely to lead to his being identified as being  involved
       in those activities by the authorities. Thus, he  would  not  be  at
       risk for that reason on return to Sri Lanka.



Submissions

    9. Ms Bayati relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. She
       said that there was no challenge to the findings  of  fact  made  by
       Judge Froom who had accepted that the appellant had written articles
       critical of the government of Sri Lanka under a pseudonym.  Evidence
       was given by the appellant at the hearing before Judge Froom that he
       had used the same e-mail address in relation to  the  articles  that
       were critical of the government, and those that were not. The  judge
       had not referred to that  evidence  which  was  fundamental  to  the
       question of whether or not there was a reasonable likelihood that  a
       link would be made to the appellant as the author  of  the  articles
       that were critical of the government.

   10. In addition, the judge did not consider the question of  whether  in
       any event the appellant would be at risk because of his  link  to  a
       publication that was perceived to be against the  government.  There
       was  evidence  that  a  journalist  working  for  the  same  student
       publication 'Saalaman', had been shot and that the  publication  had
       been banned. The judge had accepted that the appellant  had  written
       articles for that publication, albeit ones that  did  not  criticise
       the government.

   11. Although it had  been  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  given  a
       credible account of his attendance at demonstrations, there  was  no
       assessment of the extent  to  which  the  appellant  would  thus  be
       identified and then linked to his  journalistic  activities.  I  was
       referred  to  the  decision  in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil   war:
       returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)

   12. Mr Logo submitted that the matters relied on really only amounted to
       a disagreement with the findings that were open  to  the  First-tier
       judge. In relation to the issue of the e-mail accounts, the question
       was what weight should be attached to that matter.  Considering  the
       determination as a whole it is apparent that Judge Froom  took  into
       account all the evidence. He was not  required  to  refer  to  every
       piece of evidence.

   13. It was further submitted that even if there was an error of  law  in
       the judge's decision, it was not an error of law that was  material.
       In relation to the appellant's  attendance  at  demonstrations,  the
       judge had applied GJ and concluded that such  attendance  would  not
       put him at risk.

My assessment

   14. I announced at the hearing that I was satisfied  that  there  is  an
       error of law in the First-tier judge's decision such as  to  require
       the decision to be set aside. My reasons are as follows.

   15. Although not referred to in the determination, I am  satisfied  that
       the appellant gave evidence that the e-mail address that he used for
       the articles that he wrote that criticised the  government  was  the
       same e-mail address  that  he  used  to  write  other,  non-critical
       articles. This is revealed  in  the  judge's  manuscript  record  of
       proceedings which I read to the parties. Ms  Bayati's  note  of  the
       evidence given at the hearing is to the same effect. In addition, in
       closing submissions at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       this evidence was referred to as an  indication  of  risk  that  the
       appellant would be connected to the anti-government  articles,  when
       considered against the background of the sophisticated  intelligence
       network of the Sri Lankan government.

   16. At [47] of the determination  there  is  reference  to  Ms  Bayati's
       submission in terms of the routine  monitoring  of  Gmail  accounts.
       However, the judge noted that at [162] of GJ the evidence  was  only
       that computers could be traced where Hotmail accounts were used.  As
       the appellant's e-mail account does not contain his  real  name  the
       judge concluded that it was difficult to see how this could have led
       the authorities to the appellant.

   17. However, I am satisfied that that  conclusion  fails  to  take  into
       account the evidence from the appellant that he used the same e-mail
       account for both types of article. I am satisfied that in failing to
       take into account this evidence the judge erred in law.  Of  course,
       it is not encumbent on a judge to refer to every piece of  evidence,
       but I do consider that this was important evidence that needed to be
       taken into account. I do not agree with Mr Logo's submission that if
       there was an error of law in this respect it is not an error of  law
       that is material. I am satisfied that it is evidence that could have
       had an effect on the outcome of the appeal. The use by the appellant
       of the same e-mail account is evidence from which it could be argued
       at least, that a  link  could  be  made  to  his  writing  of  anti-
       government articles.

   18. The appellant is said to have written for Pathivu Online, and  there
       was supporting evidence to that effect from Pathivu.com, as well  as
       evidence in the letter dated 28 May 2014 from the  North  Sri  Lanka
       Journalists' Association ("NSJA"). That letter also referred to  the
       appellant having written for a student publication  referred  to  in
       the letter as "Salaram" but referred to in the grounds of appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal as "Salaaram" or  "Chaalaram".  The  NSJA  letter
       states that both Pathivu Online and Salaram have been either blocked
       or banned because of, in essence,  the  anti-government  content  of
       those publications. Judge Froom referred to this letter and  to  its
       stating that Pathivu Online had been blocked by the authorities.

   19. In the determination the country guidance in GJ is  quoted.  One  of
       the risk categories is  "Journalists  (whether  in  print  or  other
       media)  or  human  rights  activists,  who,  in  either  case,  have
       criticised the Sri Lankan government, in particular its human rights
       record, or who are associated with publications critical of the  Sri
       Lankan government." (my emphasis). I am  not  satisfied  that  Judge
       Froom considered the potential for risk to the appellant  by  reason
       of association with publications critical of the government  on  the
       basis of the evidence before him. That is not  to  say  that  in  so
       concluding I have come to any view on whether the appellant does  in
       fact come within that risk category, merely that I am satisfied that
       the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  give  the  matter   appropriate
       consideration in the light of  the  evidence  before  him.  In  this
       respect I am also satisfied that there was an error of  law  in  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and again that it is  an  error
       of law that means that the decision should be set aside.

   20. It was accepted by the First-tier judge that the appellant had taken
       part in certain 'diaspora activities' in the UK. At  [53]  there  is
       reference to the fact that there was unchallenged evidence  on  that
       issue. In the same paragraph there is reference to GJ at  [336]  and
       the conclusion that was reached in that  case  to  the  effect  that
       attendance at demonstrations is alone not  sufficient  to  create  a
       real risk of adverse attention from the Sri Lankan authorities.  The
       same paragraph of  GJ,  and  quoted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       determination,  also  refers  to  the  diaspora  as  being  "heavily
       penetrated by the security forces", with photographs being taken  of
       public demonstrations and with the Sri  Lankan  government  possibly
       using face recognition  technology,  and  that  the  question  which
       concerns the government of Sri Lanka is the identification of  Tamil
       activists working  for  Tamil  separatism  and  to  destabilise  the
       unitary Sri Lankan state. It is also to be noted that  at  [353]  it
       refers to the sophisticated intelligence enabling it to  distinguish
       those who are actively involved in seeking to revive and re-fund the
       separatist movement within the diaspora.

   21. Whilst I do not, for the moment at least, consider this  to  be  the
       strongest of the grounds, it seems to me that there is merit in  the
       submissions made by Ms Bayati to  the  effect  that  the  First-tier
       judge ought to have considered the appellant's activities in the  UK
       in conjunction with,  rather  than  separately  from,  his  history.
       Whilst it is evident that Judge Froom  did  refer  at  [54]  to  the
       appellant's history in terms of his finding that the  appellant  had
       not come to the attention of the authorities in Sri Lanka, it is the
       appellant's journalist history which appears to me  to  be  of  most
       significance in this regard. Subject to any later further  argument,
       what is said in GJ about the Sri Lankan  authorities  distinguishing
       those involved in diaspora activities who are of interest (and those
       who are not), indicates that there is a means to identify particular
       individuals.  The  appellant's  journalistic  history  is   arguably
       relevant in this context.

   22. Judge Froom clearly gave careful consideration  to  the  appellant's
       account,  to  the  background  material  and  to  relevant   country
       guidance. He made detailed and helpful findings of fact. However,  I
       am satisfied that in the respects to which I have referred above, he
       erred in law, requiring the decision to be set aside.

   23. In the light of the very detailed findings of  fact  made  by  Judge
       Froom, I do not consider that it is appropriate for the appeal to be
       remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Neither  party  before  me
       dissented from that view. It was not possible to proceed to the  re-
       making of the decision at the hearing before me,  in  the  light  of
       what I was told about further evidence that was to be relied  on  on
       behalf of the appellant. Mr Logo was also in some difficulty because
       of his late involvement with this appeal due to some  administrative
       difficulty within his office.

   24. Notwithstanding the submissions made by Mr Logo, I announced at  the
       hearing that I was satisfied that the appeal  should  no  longer  be
       subject to the fast-track procedure, having regard to  rule  5(4)(b)
       of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

   25. The parties' attention is drawn to the directions set out below.

   Anonymity

       I make an anonymity order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure  (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008.   Consequently,   this
       determination identifies the appellant by initials only.






                  DIRECTIONS

      1.  The decision will be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

      2.      No later than 14 days before the next  date  of  hearing,  the
          parties are to file and serve any further evidence relied on.

      3.      Within the same time frame, the appellant is to file and serve
          a skeleton argument which includes consideration  of  the  matters
          referred to in the paragraphs below.

      4.      Subject to any further  submissions  from  either  party,  the
          findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal, except in so far
          as any such findings are infected by the error(s) of law,  are  to
          stand.

      5.      The parties must  be  prepared  to  make  submissions  at  the
          resumed hearing in terms of whether any further findings  of  fact
          are required relating  to  the  appellant's  account.  A  possible
          example is the appellant's evidence that he used the  same  e-mail
          address in relation to both types of articles that were published.

      6.      The parties are also required to be in a  position  to  assist
          the Tribunal in relation to how best  to  ensure  the  appellant's
          anonymity in the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 26/06/14

