
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02788/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Date sent                    |
|on 9th August 2013                            |On 12th August 2013          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     T S
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Harrison of Halliday Reeves Law Firm.
For the Respondent: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Thorne, promulgated on 28th May 2013, in which  he  dismissed
        the appellant's claim on asylum and human  rights  grounds  against
        the direction of his removal to Afghanistan  that  accompanied  the
        rejection  of  his  claim  for  asylum  or  any   other   form   of
        international protection.


     2. Judge Thorne considered two key elements of the  appellants  claim;
        the first being whether he is Sikh and the second whether he  is  a
        citizen of Afghanistan. The  appellant,  who  was  born  on  the  1
        January 1985, claimed to be both as a result of which  he  faces  a
        real risk of persecution as a result of his religion if returned to
        Afghanistan. The Secretary  of  State  does  not  accept  that  the
        appellant is an Afghan national or a Sikh.


     3. The Grounds seeking permission to appeal challenge the rejection of
        the appellant's religious identity and, in relation to the  finding
        he is not an Afghan national, acknowledge that this  is  a  finding
        based  on  numerous  aspects  of  the  evidence.  The  decision  is
        challenged as  there  are  several  relatives  in  the  UK  of  the
        appellant and his wife. It is said in paragraph 8  of  the  grounds
        that it was wrong for the Judge to  dismiss  the  evidence  of  the
        named witness so readily as the witness is related to the appellant
        and/or his wife and clearly has a place of birth in Kabul.


     4. The nationality element was an appropriate starting point  for  the
        hearing, for if the finding the  appellant  is  not  a  citizen  of
        Afghanistan is a sustainable finding whether  he  is  of  the  Sikh
        religion or not will not be a material issue.



Discussion



     5. As acknowledged by Ms Harrison,  the  Judge  when  considering  the
        issue of nationality took into account a number of aspects  of  the
        evidence including (i) the ID cards and the  information  contained
        therein, (ii) the fact they speak Punjabi and (iii) the appellant's
        apparent lack of knowledge of Afghanistan.


     6. I accept there is other evidence but the grounds are, in effect,  a
        challenge to the weight given to the evidence that  was  considered
        by the Judge when weight is an  issue  for  the  Judge.  The  Judge
        particularly notes in paragraph 65 of the  determination  that  the
        appellant admitted to entering  the  United  Kingdom  using  forged
        identity documents obtained by his father who it appears  was  able
        to obtain such documents easily for a number of people. It is  also
        noted that a limited number of documents were provided [66] one  of
        which described the wife's mother tongue as  Urdu.  No  explanation
        was provided for why this language was described  when  he  claimed
        that their language was Punjabi and why it described the  appellant
        as a 'vendor' when he was unemployed. The appellant  did  not  know
        where his father got the documents from or how  he  obtained  them.
        It was unclear why his father allegedly told him to bring  them  to
        the UK with him. The Judge's core finding in relation to the weight
        attached to the documents is as follows:


              ".... bearing in mind the  fact  as  outlined  above  and  the
   inconsistencies in           these documents I do not consider that  they
   provide independent  support            for  the  appellant's  claims  of
   nationality."


     7. In paragraph 67 the Judge also noted that he had not been  referred
        to reliable objective evidence indicating Punjabi is spoken  widely
        in Afghanistan or that it is considered to be  spoken  sufficiently
        to be recorded in the general country  information  as  a  language
        spoken in that  country.  The  claim  by  the  appellant  that  the
        neighbour threatened him in Punjabi was found not to be credible as
        it was stated this neighbour was a fervent Afghan Muslim who  hated
        Sikhs. It was found unlikely that this person would have taken time
        to study such a language.


     8. In paragraph 66 the Judge also notes, having analysed  the  answers
        given  at  interview  about  the   appellant's   understanding   of
        Afghanistan, that his level of knowledge is not consistent with his
        claim to be a national of that country, even  taking  into  account
        his intelligence and level of education.


     9. Having considered the determination as a whole and having  reviewed
        the evidence I find the conclusions  reached  in  relation  to  the
        nationality issue, namely that the appellant has not discharged the
        burden of proof upon him to the required standard to prove he is an
        Afghan national, is a decision in accordance with the evidence  and
        one properly available to the Judge. No legal error  is  proved  in
        relation to this finding.


    10. In light of the above I have not gone to consider  issues  relating
        to the appellant's religion for if he is not an Afghan national his
        claim to be at risk of persecution in Afghanistan must fail.  There
        is no material error in the determination.


Decision

    11. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


          I continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9th August 2013








