
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02388/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 2nd December 2013                          |On 2nd June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                          MR PRATHEES THARMALINHAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


  REASONS FOR FINDING THAT THE DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL CONTAINS
             AN ERROR OF LAW SUCH THAT IT FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lucas  ("the
    judge") in a determination promulgated on  11th  September  2013.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who claimed to be at risk on return
    as a person of adverse interest to the authorities of that country.

2.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  from  the  appellant's
    partner.  It was claimed that the couple  were  living  together  in  a
    durable relationship.  The  appellant's  partner  is  an  EEA  national
    working in the United Kingdom.

3.   The judge found the appellant's core claims regarding ill-treatment  in
    Sri Lanka were without any foundation.  He would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return.  So far as the relationship with his partner was concerned, the
    judge gave no weight to the claims that a  marriage  was  intended  and
    that the appellant could rely upon the 2006 Regulations or Article 8 of
    the Human Rights Convention, as an "extended family member".  The judge
    did not accept the core claim in this context that the appellant was in
    a durable relationship and went on to find that the appellant's removal
    to Sri Lanka would be a proportionate response.

4.   In the grounds in support of the application for permission to  appeal,
    it was contended that the judge erred in several respects.   First,  in
    failing to address the explanation given by the appellant regarding his
    failure to claim asylum at an early opportunity.   Second,  in  finding
    that the appellant's ability to leave Sri Lanka in the  manner  claimed
    showed that he was not a person of adverse interest.  The judge  failed
    to have regard to country evidence and to the guidance given in GJ (Sri
    Lanka), regarding a person being able to leave the airport  at  Colombo
    without difficulty, notwithstanding a serious interest in  him  on  the
    part of the authorities.  Third, in failing to explain  his  conclusion
    that the presence of scarring on the  appellant's  back  and  documents
    corroborating  his  claims  when  arrested  by   the   United   Kingdom
    authorities were consistent with someone prepared to lodge an unfounded
    claim.

5.   It was also contended that the judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    evidence.  Having found that the appellant's account  of  detention  by
    reason of  his activities for the LTTE fell to be disbelieved, he  went
    on to find that "it follows" that no weight could be  placed  upon  the
    documents relied upon.   This  approach  was  flawed.   The  judge  was
    required to assess all the evidence in the round and failed to  do  so.
    The Secretary of State had claimed that the documents were not  genuine
    without producing supporting evidence and the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    simply adopted that finding.

6.   In a further ground, it was contended that the judge's risk  assessment
    was flawed.  Notwithstanding rejection of the appellant's  account,  it
    remained the case that he was a Tamil, present in  the  United  Kingdom
    for four years, with scarring on his back.  The judge was  required  to
    assess risk on this basis but failed to do so.

7.   Finally, it was contended that the judge also erred in  his  assessment
    of the relationship between the appellant and his French partner.   The
    judge noted that he only had evidence of co-habitation since May  2013,
    in the form of a tenancy agreement  and  that  there  was  no  evidence
    showing a durable relationship.  This overlooked the core  evidence  of
    the appellant's partner.  At the very least, findings were required  on
    that evidence.  Further, the judge's comment at  paragraph  71  of  the
    determination that the proposition that the relationship  between  them
    should prevent removal "is simply not credible" was  inappropriate  and
    incorrect.  If a durable relationship were shown, it would be  for  the
    Secretary of State to consider the  exercise  of  discretion  regarding
    whether or not to issue a residence card.  The judge appeared to accept
    (at paragraph 72) that there was a relationship "of some sort".

8.   Permission to appeal was  granted  on  2nd  October  2013.   The  judge
    granting permission considered that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    failed to deal with the oral evidence  given  by  the  appellant's  EEA
    national partner, regarding the relationship.  The determination showed
    that she attended the hearing and gave evidence but it  was  not  clear
    what weight, if any, the judge gave  to  her  evidence.   Although  the
    other grounds appeared to have less merit, they too were  arguable  and
    permission was granted on all grounds.

9.   In a brief rule 24 response made on 31st October  2013,  the  Secretary
    of State informed the Upper Tribunal that the respondent  would  submit
    that the  judge  directed  himself  appropriately  and  considered  the
    appellant's Article 8 and EEA rights, in the light of the  relationship
    with his partner.  He considered these matters at paragraphs 69  to  71
    of the determination.

Submissions on Error of Law

10.   Mr  Lewis  adopted  the  written  grounds.   Dealing  first  with  the
    appellant's relationship with an EEA national, oral evidence was  given
    by both the appellant and his partner.  She provided a statement  which
    included a claim that they were living together.  This did  not  appear
    to have been challenged by the Secretary of State.  This undermined the
    conclusion reached by the judge at paragraph 71.  Moreover,  the  judge
    appeared to give weight to the fact that the relationship  was  entered
    into in the knowledge that the appellant's visa expired in 2011.

11.  The judge found that there was no other evidence of  co-habitation  but
    that overlooked the oral evidence given  by  the  two  witnesses.   The
    judge was obliged to engage with the evidence and manifestly did not do
    so.  This amounted to a material error.

12.  The approach to the asylum claim and removal decision was also  flawed.
     In rejecting the appellant's account, the judge relied  in  part  upon
    the appellant's exit from Sri Lanka, without difficulty, with  a  valid
    student visa.  This point had been conceded by the Secretary  of  State
    in GJ.  The judge's emphasis in the present appeal on  the  absence  of
    difficulty in exiting Sri Lanka had no regard to GJ although the  judge
    did mention the  case  (recorded  as  "CJ")  in  paragraph  52  of  the
    determination).  So far as delay in claiming asylum was concerned,  the
    appellant worried that he would be returned if he made his  claim.   He
    remained here and assumed that he would be safe.  He hoped that  things
    would evolve.

13.  The appellant had scarring and although the medical report  before  the
    Tribunal, from  Sri  Lanka,  did  not  go  into  much  detail,  it  was
    insufficient for the  judge  to  make  the  brief  adverse  finding  in
    paragraph 60.

14.   Overall,  the  judge's  reliance  on  exit  through  the  airport,  as
    undermining the reliability of the arrest warrant  in  the  appellant's
    name, rendered the decision unsafe.  In  this  context,  the  appellant
    obtained his passport and visa before he came to the attention  of  the
    authorities.

15.  The Court of Appeal had now given judgment in GJ.   The  appellant  was
    an individual from London and this factor fell to be taken into account
    in the assessment of risk, should an error of law be found.

16.  Mr Jack said that the judge did not materially err.  So far as the  EEA
    aspect was concerned, the Secretary of State's decision letter included
    a finding  that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship (paragraph 54 of her letter).  It was on that  basis  that
    the judge dealt with the case.  He referred to  the  tenancy  agreement
    produced by the appellant, at paragraph 29, and recorded the  partner's
    evidence, at paragraph 41.  She had provided a letter (page C7  in  the
    respondent's bundle) which was  very  brief.   There  was  no  detailed
    witness statement.  Although the judge did not set  down  the  evidence
    given by the partner, he did note, at paragraph 48, that  her  evidence
    was dealt with by the appellant's counsel, in submissions.   The  judge
    found that the appellant was an economic migrant.   He  summarised  the
    EEA case at paragraph 69 of the determination and then made his Article
    8 assessment  in  paragraph  70.   The  conclusion  reached,  that  the
    evidence did not show a durable relationship, was open  to  the  judge.
    There was limited evidence before the Tribunal.

17.  So far as the asylum aspect was concerned, the  judge  properly  looked
    at the documentary evidence  in  the  round.   The  guidance  given  in
    Tanveer Ahmed was properly applied.  Mr Jack handed up a  copy  of  the
    Upper Tribunal decision in MJ [2013] UKUT 00253.  The judge had  looked
    at the documents in  the  round.   There  were  extensive  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's credibility.  At paragraph  33,  the  judge
    noted that the appellant accepted that he gave  a  false  identity  and
    date of birth when arrested in the United Kingdom.  Although he was  in
    possession of a student visa, he did not study here.  There was a  lack
    of supporting evidence and discrepancies in  the  appellant's  account.
    When asked questions about the arrest warrant, he stated  that  he  did
    not know how his mother acquired it.  There was  little  to  guide  the
    Tribunal in relation to the weight to be given to  this  item  and  the
    judge did not materially err in approaching the evidence as he did.  At
    paragraphs 56 to 61, the judge made his assessment and  concluded  that
    the appellant was not a person  of  adverse  interest.   He  found  the
    appellant not to be a witness of truth.

18.  Mr Jack submitted that the judge's findings  regarding  exit  from  Sri
    Lanka had to be read in the light of the rest of the findings.   Again,
    the judge did not materially err.

19.   In  a  brief  response,  Mr  Lewis  submitted  that  so  far  as   the
    relationship with the EEA national partner was concerned, there was  no
    "primary  purpose"  rule.    Their   evidence   suggested   a   durable
    relationship and was not challenged by the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    judge had made an obvious error in failing to take  into  account  this
    evidence and give weight to it.  So far as  exit  from  Sri  Lanka  was
    concerned, the judge repeatedly relied on the  appellant's  ability  to
    leave without difficulty, in order  to  discount  the  documents  which
    corroborated his case.  The general findings on credibility were relied
    upon to undermine the reliability of the documents.   This  too  was  a
    clear error.  The appellant did not exaggerate his  claimed  role  with
    the LTTE.  He had no detailed knowledge but the account he gave in  his
    evidence was consistent with the limited role he claimed.

Conclusion on Error of Law

20.  I deal first with the appellant's claim that he and  his  EEA  national
    partner were in a durable relationship which had lasted for over a year
    and eight months by the time of the hearing.  At paragraph  41  of  the
    determination, the judge noted that the  appellant's  partner  attended
    and gave evidence.  He recorded that her evidence included an awareness
    of the appellant's  immigration  status.   He  went  on  to  note  that
    "nothing further" emerged in cross-examination.  At  paragraph  48,  he
    summarised submissions made by the appellant's counsel,  in  which  the
    relationship itself featured.  Reading those two  paragraphs  together,
    the obvious  inference  is  that  although  he  did  not  refer  to  it
    expressly, the oral evidence from the  partner  included  an  assertion
    that the relationship was indeed durable.

21.  The judge's assessment of this part of the case appears  at  paragraphs
    69 to 72.  Having found that the asylum claim  had  no  foundation,  he
    went on to conclude that the appellant had no basis at all to be in the
    United Kingdom between 2009 and 2013.  He continued:

         "This is the context in which any  application  under  EEA  law  or
         indeed under Article 8 of ECHR must be considered."


    With great respect to the judge, this is simply not so.   As  Mr  Lewis
    submitted, the clear basis of the  appellant's  claim  under  the  2006
    Regulations was the simple existence of the durable  relationship  with
    his  partner.   Even  if  his  asylum  claim  had  no  foundation   and
    notwithstanding the fact that the relationship  appears  to  have  been
    established after expiry of the appellant's student visa, the  evidence
    still fell to be weighed in this context.

22.  At paragraph 71 of the determination, the judge noted  the  appellant's
    own evidence, which included a claim that  he  met  his  partner  in  a
    nightclub, and observed that any relationship was in the full knowledge
    of the expiry of the visa.  He took into account, properly, the tenancy
    agreement and went on to find that there was "no other evidence of  co-
    habitation"  and  "certainly  ...  no  evidence"   showing   that   the
    relationship was sufficient to enable the appellant to  qualify  as  an
    "extended family member".

23.  A conclusion that no durable relationship  was  shown,  falling  within
    scope of the 2006 Regulations, could only properly be reached following
    an  assessment  of  all  the  evidence.   What  was  missing  from  the
    assessment was the partner's oral evidence,  although  the  judge  made
    brief mention of  it  earlier  in  the  determination.   Findings  were
    required in this context and, with respect, the adverse  findings  made
    by the judge in relation  to  the  asylum  claim  and  the  appellant's
    immigration history were incapable, in themselves (although  they  were
    relevant factors) to undermine the appellant's reliance upon  the  2006
    Regulations.  The judge materially erred in law in this context.

24.  So far as the protection claim is concerned, I  accept  the  submission
    made in the written grounds (and by Mr Lewis) that the judge  erred  at
    paragraph 62 in finding that "it follows"  that  the  documents  relied
    upon should be given no weight, in the light  of  the  judge's  earlier
    finding that the appellant was not a person of adverse  interest.   All
    the evidence fell to be weighed in the round and the  judge's  reliance
    on adverse credibility findings as substantially diminishing the weight
    to be given to documentary evidence reflects the  error  identified  by
    the Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 (the court found  an
    error where medical evidence was assessed  only  after  an  adjudicator
    articulated conclusions that the appellant's central  claims  were  not
    credible).

25.  Moreover, in this context, I accept  Mr  Lewis's  submission  that  the
    judge   clearly   gave   substantial   weight   to   the    appellant's
    straightforward exit from Sri Lanka.  At paragraph 57, for example,  he
    noted the appellant's claim to have been arrested and tortured in  2009
    and asked to report to a local police station.  There was a warrant for
    his arrest.  He went on to find that it was difficult to see  how  exit
    without difficulty  would  have  been  possible.   Notwithstanding  his
    mention of the relevant country guidance case, I find  that  the  judge
    erred in giving the weight he did to this factor, in the light  of  the
    Secretary of State's concession in GJ [2013] UKUT 00319.

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law and must be set aside and remade.

27.  In a brief discussion with the representatives, the  appropriate  venue
    for the remaking of the decision was canvassed.  As the errors  of  law
    concerned the two key features of the case, the claim to be at risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka and the  2006  Regulations,  I  conclude  that  the
    remaking of the decision should take place in the First-tier  Tribunal,
    at Taylor House, before a judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas.  I have taken  into  account  the  extent  of  the  fact-finding
    required and paragraph 7 of the  Practice  Statement  issued  in  2010.
    What is required is a complete rehearing and I remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunal,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.  The only direction required at this stage is
    that the appeal should be listed  for  a  Case  Management  hearing  at
    Taylor House.  The appeal will be  listed  for  a  substantive  hearing
    thereafter, by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law such that  it
falls to be set aside.  The decision  shall  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal, at Taylor House, before a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Lucas.

Anonymity

The judge made no anonymity direction and there has been no  application  in
the Upper Tribunal.  In these circumstances, I make  no  direction  on  this
occasion although it remains open to the  parties  to  make  an  application
should they consider it appropriate.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


