
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/02084/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                 Decision & Reasons     |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 13 July 2017                    |                 On 24 July 2017        |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     DM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Malcolm (FtJ), promulgated on 19 January 2017,  dismissing
        the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  of  30
        January 2015 refusing her asylum claim and the decision  to  remove
        her under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.



   Factual Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
        (DRC), date of birth 7 March 1995. She arrived in the UK on 16 July
        2013 in the identity of EM, a national of Zambia. After  making  an
        appointment on 25 October 2013 with the asylum screening  unit  she
        claimed asylum on 28 November 2013.


     3. The following is a brief summary of the Appellant's  asylum  claim.
        Her family are involved in the UDPS political  party.  In  February
        2012 soldiers came to her family home and started shooting  causing
        the death of her sister, K, and her father. The  Appellant  escaped
        to a local church where she hid for a year.  In  February  2013  an
        agent arranged for her travel to Zambia and then obtained  for  the
        Appellant a Zambian passport in another identity which she used  to
        travel to the UK. After arriving in the UK the  agent  located  the
        Appellant's sister, LM, and the two of them now reside together. LM
        entered the UK in 1999 and claimed asylum but her asylum claim  was
        refused. She was nevertheless granted leave to remain and  obtained
        ILR in August 2008, and became a British citizen in August 2011.


     4. The Respondent did not accept the Appellant was a  citizen  of  the
        DRC. Given that she used a  Zambian  passport,  and  based  on  her
        answers in  her  asylum  interview,  the  Respondent  believed  the
        Appellant was a Zambian national. Nor did the Respondent accept  as
        credible  the  Appellant's  account  of  events  in  the  DRC.  The
        Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  substantiated
        her claim to be a member of the UDPS.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The FtJ heard evidence from both the Appellant and her sister.  The
        FtJ additionally considered a large number of  documents  including
        statements  from  the  Appellant  and  her  sister,  DNA   evidence
        attesting to the relationship between the Appellant and her sister,
        a letter from the UDP's office in London dated 11 May 2015, a  UDPS
        card issued to the Appellant, and  a  range  of  news  reports  and
        background evidence relating to conditions in the DRC.


     6. Having recorded the evidence given by the Appellant and her sister,
        and the submissions made by the representatives, the  FtJ  set  out
        her findings at [67] to [92]. Having regard to the DNA evidence the
        FtJ accepted that the Appellant was a national of the DRC  and  was
        the sister of LM. The FtJ noted that, even on the  Appellant's  own
        account, she was a low-level member of the UDPS. The FtJ pointed to
        the UDPS letter dated 11 May 2015 which indicated that, as a minor,
        the Appellant would not have been politically active  in  the  DRC.
        The FtJ found that the Appellant had not shown  a  high  degree  of
        knowledge of the UDPS in her asylum interview. From  [73]  to  [77]
        the  FtJ  considered  the  evidence  relating  to  the  Appellant's
        involvement in the UDPS since her arrival in the UK. Based  on  the
        evidence before her the FtJ did not accept that the  Appellant  had
        been a member of the UDPS UK prior to January 2015.


     7. At [78] the FtJ found that the Appellant's credibility was  damaged
        by reference to the delay in her asylum claim and by her use  of  a
        false identity to enter the UK. At [79] the FtJ found the  evidence
        of the Appellant's sister to be incredible (a conclusion  based  in
        large part upon a significant inconsistency as to when their father
        died).


     8. At [84] the FtJ stated,


         If the Appellant's evidence is accepted at its highest she was
         involved in assisting her father in the Congo, she came [sic] the
         UK in 2013 and joined the UDPS in 2015 having attended meetings
         since on or around May 2015, her involvement being a low-level
         member.


     9. At [85] to [87] the FtJ referred to the applicable country guidance
        cases of BK (failed asylum seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT  00098,  MM
        (UDPS members - Risk on return) Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  CG
        [2007] UKAIT 00023, and BM and Others (returnees - criminal and non-
        criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC), and  indicated  that  she
        had taken account  of  the  country  information  provided  by  the
        Appellant's  representatives.  At  [88]  the   FtJ   rejected   the
        Appellant's claim to have been involved in political activities  in
        the Congo. At [89] the FtJ stated,

         The letter from the UDPS  UK  details  the  high  profile  of  her
         father, I do not consider that this  of  itself  would  place  the
         Appellant at risk.

    10. Having found that  the  Appellant  had  only  involved  herself  in
        political activities in the UK in order to aid her asylum claim the
        FtJ concluded that there was  no  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
        Appellant would be persecuted on return to the DRC  on  account  of
        her membership of the UDPS or any  other  political  activities  or
        political affiliations. The asylum claim was therefore dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    11. The grounds contend that the FtJ failed to give any or satisfactory
        reasons as to why the Appellant  would  not  come  to  the  adverse
        attention of the authorities on return to the DRC given  the  FtJ's
        apparent acceptance of the father's  high  profile  role,  and  the
        FtJ's acceptance that the Appellant is a low level  member  of  the
        UDP's in the UK. The grounds  additionally  content  that  the  FtJ
        failed to make any finding as to whether the Appellant's sister was
        an officeholder in the UDPS in the UK, an additional  factor  that,
        when cumulatively considered, may render the Appellant at real risk
        of ill-treatment if removed.


    12. Upper Tribunal judge Kamara granted  permission  in  the  following
        terms:


          Notwithstanding the judge's unchallenged credibility findings, it
          is arguable that the judge's conclusions as to risk on return to
          the DRC are flawed if it is the case that it was accepted that the
          Appellant's father was a high-profile UDPS member, when combined
          with the Appellant's low-level UDPS activities in the UK as well
          as her sister's involvement as a UDPS officeholder in the United
          Kingdom.


    13. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing I indicated to Mr Tufan
        my concern at the apparent absence of any specific findings of fact
        by the FtJ in relation to the Appellant's account of events in 2012
        that caused her to flee the DRC and her  father's  position  within
        the UDPS. Mr Tufan accepted that there did not  appear  to  be  any
        specific findings in relation to the core of this  core  aspect  of
        the  Appellant's  account,  although  the  FtJ  had  rejected   the
        Appellant's claim to be a member of the UDPS prior to January  2015
        had found that her sister was incredible, and had appeared to  take
        the Appellant's case at its highest. I  additionally  indicated  my
        concern at the absence of any  finding  relating  to  the  sister's
        involvement in the UDPS in the UK, despite the FtJ finding that the
        sister was not credible.  Mr  Tufan  accepted  that  there  was  no
        specific finding on this point.


    14. After receiving further brief submissions from both representatives
        I indicated to the  parties  that  I  was  satisfied  the  FtJ  had
        materially erred in law and that the determination was unsafe.

Discussion

    15. Whilst the FtJ found that aspects of the Appellant's claim were not
        credible (such as her claim to have been a member of  the  UDPS  UK
        prior to January 2015), there have been no actual findings of  fact
        in respect of the Appellant's account of the shooting  by  soldiers
        that caused the death of her father and her sister in 2012.  Whilst
        the FtJ found that the Appellant's credibility was damaged  by  her
        delay in claiming asylum and her use of a false identity, and  that
        the Appellant's sister was not credible, it is not apparent from  a
        holistic assessment of the decision whether the FtJ regarded  these
        adverse credibility points as fundamentally  undermining  the  core
        elements of the Appellant's  account.  There  has  simply  been  no
        factual findings as to whether the Appellant's father was killed in
        the manner claimed, or in respect  of  the  position  held  by  the
        Appellant's father in the UDPS.


    16. Although the FtJ gave an indication that she  was  considering  the
        Appellant's claim at its highest, her conclusion at [89], that  the
        high profile of the Appellant's father would not  of  itself  place
        the Appellant at risk, was not  supported  by  adequate  reasoning.
        Given that the Appellant's account of the prominence of her  father
        and the circumstances of his  death  were  supported  by  the  UDPS
        letter of 11 May 2015, and that the FtJ did not  find  this  letter
        unreliable, it  was  incumbent  on  the  FtJ  to  give  a  reasoned
        explanation as to why the Appellant would not come to  the  adverse
        attention of the authorities if returned to the  DRC,  particularly
        given the acceptance that the Appellant was a low-level  member  of
        the UDPS UK and the evidence that her sister held a position within
        the UDPS UK. There has been no  assessment  at  all  of  this  last
        point. The UDPS letter of 11 May 2015 stated that LM was an  active
        member of UDPS UK, attended meetings and, in  September  2014,  was
        appointed Under Secretary of Ligue des Femmes in the  local  London
        Branch. Having  regard  to  the  country  guidance  cases  and  the
        background evidence provided by the Appellant, and in  the  absence
        of any specific finding of fact as to the core of  the  Appellant's
        account of the position held by her father, I am satisfied that the
        decision is unsafe.

    17. Given that there have been no primary findings of fact  in  respect
        of the Appellant's account of the events  that  are  said  to  have
        occurred in 2012, or  of  the  position  held  by  the  Appellant's
        father, it is appropriate to remit this case back to the First-tier
        Tribunal to be  considered  again  by  a  judge  other  than  judge
        Malcolm. I canvassed with the parties whether any factual  findings
        should remain. Mr Tufan noted the  DNA  evidence  provided  by  the
        Appellant and the absence of any challenge by the Respondent in the
        rule 24 response or at the hearing to the factual finding that  the
        Appellant is a citizen of the DRC. In these circumstances the First-
        tier Tribunal is directed to consider the matter afresh  save  that
        the Appellant is to be regarded as a citizen of the DRC,  that  she
        is the sister of LM, and that her date of birth is 7 March 1995.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.
The matter is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
afresh, save for the retained findings identified at paragraph  17  of  this
decision, by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malcolm.

Signed

[pic]
Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
                              Date 21 July 2017


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
                            Date 21 July 2017

