

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal Number: AA/02249/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 14 August                                  |On 22 October 2013           |
|and 1 October 2013                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     DZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms J Fisher (14 August) and Ms S Akinbolu (1
                    October) instructed by Simman Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr P Deller (14 August) and Mr G Saunders (1
                    October), Senior Home Office Presenting Officers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran whose date of birth is now accepted
      to be 21 March 1993.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 5  May  2009
      and claimed asylum.  The Secretary of State refused his application on
      1 July 2009 but, as an unaccompanied minor, was granted  discretionary
      leave until 21 September 2010.   On that date, the  appellant  applied
      for an extension of his leave on the basis that he would be persecuted
      for a Convention reason if returned to Iran.  On 7 February 2011,  the
      Secretary of State refused to vary the appellant's leave to remain and
      refused  the  appellant's  application  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
      protection for the reasons previously set out in the  decision  letter
      of 1 July 2009.

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 28 April 2011, Immigration Judge Pedro dismissed the appellant's
      appeal on all grounds.   On  27  July  2011  UTJ  Jordan  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Following  a
      hearing on 24 January 2012, the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Grubb  and  DUTJ
      Drabu) set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  it  had
      erred in law in failing to grant the appellant an adjournment to  deal
      with what, was disputed at  the  time,  namely  the  appellant's  age.
      Following that decision, it was directed that a resumed hearing should
      take place before Judge Drabu alone  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  a
      determination  dated  26  April  2012,  Judge  Drabu   dismissed   the
      appellant's appeal on all grounds.  On  11  December  2012,  Moses  LJ
      granted the appellant permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  On
      17 June 2013, a Consent Order of  the  Court  of  Appeal  quashed  the
      decision of the Upper Tribunal and remitted the appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   4. The appeal was first listed before me on 14 August 2013 when Ms Fisher
      represented the appellant and Mr Deller, the Secretary of  State.   At
      my instigation, the appeal was re-listed for further submissions on  1
      October 2013 on the sole issue of whether  the  appellant  could  fall
      within a 'particular social group' ('PSG') for  the  purposes  of  the
      Refugee Convention when the appellant was represented by  Ms  Akinbolu
      and the Secretary of State by Mr Saunders.

Initial Matters

   5. At the outset of the initial hearing I drew  to  both  representatives
      attention the fact that I had been a member of the  panel  sitting  in
      the Upper Tribunal which had found an error  of  law  in  the  initial
      First-tier Tribunal decision of Judge Pedro and had set it  aside.   I
      had taken no part in the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  subsequently  to
      dismiss the appellant's appeal which had been successfully appealed to
      the Court of Appeal.

   6. Having taken time to consider the matter, Ms Fisher indicated that she
      had no objection to me hearing the appellant's appeal now.  Mr  Deller
      also indicated that he had no objection on behalf of the Secretary  of
      State.

   7. A further preliminary matter arose, namely the scope  of  the  current
      appeal in the Upper Tribunal.

   8. The issue boils down to this.  In remitting the appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal the "Statement of Reasons" states at para 4 that:

           "It is agreed between the parties that the determination dated 1
           May 2012 should be remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  (Asylum  and
           Immigration Chamber) on the basis that there was  a  failure  to
           give sufficient consideration to the report of Dr Kakhki."

   9. Ms Fisher submitted that Dr Kakhki's report dealt  both  with  matters
      going to the appellant's credibility and also the  objective  risk  to
      him on return to Iran including any risk as a person returning who had
      illegally exited Iran.  She pointed out that the grounds of appeal  to
      the Court of Appeal challenged the Upper Tribunal's decision  both  in
      regard to its adverse finding on credibility and  risk  on  return  by
      failing to take Dr  Kakhki's  report  into  account.   She  submitted,
      therefore, that the Court of Appeal had in  all  probability  remitted
      the appeal to the Upper Tribunal to hear de novo.

  10. Mr Deller accepted that the "Statement of  Reasons"  accompanying  the
      Court of Appeal's Consent Order was broad  enough  to  show  that  the
      Court of Appeal  had  intended  to  set  aside  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      decision both in relation to credibility and risk on return.  However,
      he drew to my attention the terms of the grant of permission to appeal
      by Moses LJ which, in para  1,  appeared  to  restrict  the  grant  of
      permission (based upon the Upper Tribunal's  failure  to  consider  Dr
      Kakhki's report) solely in respect of any risk to the appellant  as  a
      result of his illegal exit from Iran.  Mr Deller submitted that it was
      not clear, therefore, what was intended to be the effect of the  Court
      of Appeal's Consent Order.  However, he accepted that in the interests
      of justice, given that the  appellant  had  sought  to  challenge  the
      adverse credibility finding on the basis of a failure to  consider  Dr
      Kakhki's report, that I should conclude that the Court of  Appeal  had
      set aside the Upper Tribunal's decision in respect both of its adverse
      credibility finding and its finding in relation to risk on return.

  11. Having heard the parties' submissions, I indicated that, in  my  view,
      the Court of Appeal had by its order set aside  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      decision both in respect of its adverse  credibility  finding  and  in
      relation to any risk on return to Iran.

  12. The appeal, therefore, proceeded on the basis of a de novo hearing  in
      relation to the appellant's claim under the  Refugee  Convention,  for
      humanitarian protection and under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.   It  was,
      however, accepted by both representatives that Judge  Drabu's  finding
      in relation to the appellant's age should stand, namely  that  he  was
      born on 21 March 1993 and not in 1995 as he  claimed.   The  appellant
      was, as a consequence, 16 years of age when he arrived in the  UK  and
      when he  was  interviewed  in  relation  to  his  asylum  claim.   The
      appellant is, therefore, now 20 years of age.

The Appellant's Claim

  13. The appellant's claim is set out in his screening interview on  5  May
      2009, his asylum interview on 8 June 2009; in three witness statements
      dated 3 June 2009, 15 April 2011 and 9 July 2012 which  the  appellant
      adopted in his oral evidence; and, finally, in his brief oral evidence
      given at the hearing.

  14. The appellant's claim is that he formed a relationship with a girl  in
      Iran, "F".  That relationship was platonic and one of friendship only.
       F was born in March 1994.  She is, in other words, approximately  one
      year  younger  than  the  appellant.   Their  relationship  began   in
      August/September 2008 when the appellant was 15 years of age and F was
      13.  They met when the appellant saw F outside her  school  whilst  he
      was passing on  his  motorbike.   They  noticed  each  other  and  the
      appellant stopped.  He walked in front of F and left on the pavement a
      piece of paper with his mobile phone number.  F picked up  that  piece
      of paper and subsequently phoned the appellant and their  relationship
      began.  The appellant phoned F from a  telephone  box  after  she  had
      phoned him to let him know that it was safe to  call.   The  appellant
      used a telephone box because he did not want a record of the telephone
      calls on his mobile phone or hers.  The appellant and F met  regularly
      on Fridays in secret because their relationship was illegal as it  was
      one outside marriage.  The appellant says that  the  meeting  occurred
      because F would make an excuse to go and see her aunt and  would  meet
      the appellant.  Their relationship went  on  for  some  six  to  seven
      months.

  15. On F's birthday in 2009, the appellant wanted to meet F  in  order  to
      give her a present that he had bought for her.  They arranged to  meet
      secretly in the afternoon in a building which had a shop on the ground
      floor but private accommodation above.  F knew this shop  because  she
      went there to buy things.  They met and went to the second floor.

  16. Whilst they were there, F's father came up the stairs.  He worked  for
      the local  government  and  was  wearing  his  uniform.   He  saw  the
      appellant and F and became furious.  He questioned the  appellant  and
      grabbed hold of the appellant, beating him and saying  that  he  would
      kill the appellant.  The appellant was frightened and tried to release
      himself from F's father and run away.  As he did so, F's  father  fell
      down the stairs leading from the  shop  below.   F's  father  was  not
      moving.  F was in hysterics and the appellant panicked.  He  ran  away
      because he thought that if someone had seen him,  or  F's  father  had
      woken up they would blame the  appellant  for  trying  to  murder  F's
      father.  He went on his motorbike to his paternal uncle's  house  some
      five minutes away.   There,  he  told  his  paternal  uncle  what  had
      happened.  His paternal uncle took him to the  house  of  one  of  his
      friends and said that he would find out what had happened.  His  uncle
      left and tried to investigate what had happened.

  17. The next day, his uncle called the friend and told him that F's father
      had fallen down the stairs and had died.  He said that the appellant's
      father had been arrested; they were asking  about  the  appellant  and
      blaming his father for  hiding  the  appellant.   His  uncle's  friend
      relayed this to the appellant.  His uncle also told the friend that it
      was not safe for the appellant to  stay  in  Iran.   In  the  evening,
      someone came to the house of his uncle's friend and helped him escape.
       He was told by his uncle's friend that his uncle had  said  that  the
      appellant should not make any contact with members of  the  family  as
      this would put them in danger.  They walked a  long  distance  through
      some mountains to a village where, the appellant says, the people were
      talking in Turkish.  The appellant stayed there  for  one  week  after
      which he was put in a lorry,  and  having  changed  lorries  on  three
      occasions, arrived in the UK.

  18. The appellant says that he has not been in contact with his family  in
      Iran because he fears they would be in danger.   He  fears  return  to
      Iran because he will be prosecuted for the murder of  F's  father  and
      also for the illicit relationship that he had with F.



Issues

  19. The issues identified by the representatives in their oral submissions
      and by Ms Fisher in her skeleton argument are as follows:

      1) Is the appellant credible and is his  account  of  events  in  Iran
         accepted?

      2) If it is accepted, is the appellant at risk of prosecution for  the
         murder of F's father and for the "illegal relationship" with F?

      3) If yes, would any punishment or treatment that the appellant  might
         face in prison  amount  to  persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment
         contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR?

      4) Would any such ill-treatment be for a  reason  falling  within  the
         Refugee Convention?  And finally,

      5) Is the appellant at risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment on
         return to Iran on the basis that he illegally exited the country?

Law

  20. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish that there is a
      real risk that on return to Iran he would be  subject  to  persecution
      for a Convention reason, namely because of race, religion, nationality
      or membership of a particular social group, or  serious  ill-treatment
      or death contrary to Arts 3 and 2  of  the  ECHR  or  Art  15  of  the
      Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC).

Discussion and Findings

      1. Submissions

  21. It is now accepted that the appellant was a minor when he came to  the
      UK.   He  was  16  years  of  age.   In  his  submissions,  Mr  Deller
      acknowledged that the appellant's evidence should be seen in the light
      of the fact that he  was  a  minor.   He  submitted  that  the  proper
      approach for a claim involving a  child  was  not  to  concentrate  on
      credibility issues but rather to  consider  his  account  against  the
      background material and he urged caution in doing so.  He reminded  me
      that the appellant's relationship with F was  not,  as  the  appellant
      made clear in his oral evidence, an intimate  one,  and  that  in  the
      light of that actual relationship the appellant was not at  real  risk
      of prosecution on  the  basis  of  that  "illicit"  relationship.   He
      reminded me that there was  no  subsequent  evidence  to  support  the
      appellant's claim that he was wanted by  the  authorities.   The  only
      evidence was what he said his uncle had told the friend and which  had
      been passed on to the appellant, namely that  the  appellant's  father
      had  been  arrested  whilst  the  authorities  were  looking  for  the
      appellant.  The appellant had not made  subsequent  contact  with  his
      family and, Mr Deller  submitted,  I  should  assess  the  appellant's
      explanation that he had not done so because it would be  dangerous  to
      his family.

  22. As regards the expert evidence, again Mr Deller invited me to approach
      it with a certain  degree  of  caution.   He  acknowledged  that  that
      evidence demonstrated that no particular mercy was shown  to  juvenile
      offenders.

  23. Ms Fisher submitted that I should find the appellant to  be  credible.
      She  submitted  that  the  core  of  his  claim  had  been  consistent
      throughout.   There  were  minor  discrepancies  in  the   appellant's
      evidence, for example whether F's father had died from a "head injury"
      or a "stroke" but, she submitted, the  appellant's  account  of  being
      confronted by F's father was not implausible and was supported  by  Dr
      Kakhki in his report at page 23 of the appellant's additional  bundle.
      Equally, it was not implausible that the appellant would be prosecuted
      for murder or for the illicit relationship.   She  submitted  that  Dr
      Kakhki's report supported the risk of prosecution and, in relation  to
      the illicit relationship, that risk existed even if  the  relationship
      was not an intimate one.

  24. Mr Deller acknowledged that if the appellant's evidence was  accepted,
      it would  be  difficult  on  the  basis  of  the  background  evidence
      (including the expert evidence) to demonstrate  that  he  was  not  at
      risk.  However, Mr Deller submitted that the appellant was not at risk
      by  virtue  of  any  Convention  reason,  whether  religious,  imputed
      political opinion or part of a particular  social  group  (PSG).   The
      appellant could only succeed in establishing that he was  entitled  to
      humanitarian protection or that his removal would breach Art 3 of  the
      ECHR.

  25. Ms Fisher submitted that, if  the  appellant  was  at  risk,  then  in
      relation to any prosecution for the illicit relationship he  was  part
      of a PSG namely those  "transgressing  social  mores"  in  Iran.   She
      accepted that his prosecution for murder and any consequences  flowing
      from conviction would not engage the Refugee Convention.

      2. Credibility

  26. In reaching my factual findings, I have done so in the context of  the
      background situation in Iran set out in the material to  which  I  was
      referred, in particular the expert report of  Roya  Kashefi  dated  12
      April 2011 (at pages 19-25 of the appellant's bundle) and that  of  Dr
      Kakhki  dated  5  April  2012  (at  pages  11-46  of  the  appellant's
      additional bundle).  I was not  specifically  referred  to  any  other
      background material by either Mr Deller or Ms Fisher.

  27. Additionally, in  reaching  my  finding,  I  bear  in  mind  that  the
      appellant was a minor, aged 16 on arrival and also a minor when he was
      interviewed.  I assess his evidence in the light of that.  I also take
      into account the appellant's evidence in his witness statement dated 9
      July 2012 at paras 4 and 5 in which he relates a violent attack on him
      that occurred in November 2010 and which resulted  in  a  head  injury
      which, the appellant says, caused him to suffer from  memory  loss  as
      well as anxiety and fear and headaches.

  28. As I have  indicated,  Mr  Deller  did  not  subject  the  appellant's
      evidence  to  detailed  forensic  scrutiny  so  as  to  highlight  any
      significant discrepancies in the appellant's evidence.  There are some
      discrepancies.  For example the appellant said in his first  statement
      that he had been told that  F's  father  had  died  from  a  "stroke".
      Subsequently, and in his oral evidence, he said that  F's  father  had
      died from "head injuries".  The appellant in his  oral  evidence  said
      that he had never said that F's father had  died  from  a  stroke;  in
      other words that was a  mistaken  record  of  his  evidence.   In  her
      decision letter dated 1 July 2009, the Secretary of State offered  few
      reasons  for  doubting  the  appellant's  account.   At  para  30  the
      Secretary of State stated that:  "If you were suspected by the Iranian
      authorities of having a  relationship  outside  marriage,  they  would
      commence prosecution procedures." Then, at para 31  the  Secretary  of
      State did not accept that F's father knew about the secret meeting  of
      the appellant and F on her birthday: "You have provided no  reasonable
      explanation for your girlfriend's  father  knowing  about  the  secret
      location and the time you planned to meet your girlfriend there."

  29. In his report, Dr Kakhki (at page 23  of  the  appellant's  additional
      bundle) states this:

         "At this juncture, I would like to discuss  the  reasonableness  of
         [the appellant's] girlfriend's father discovering/suspecting her of
         entering  into  an  illicit  relationship.   Within   the   Iranian
         patriarchal  societies,  wherein  the  honour  of  the  family   is
         enshrined and revered both  within  the  culture  and  through  the
         Islamic doctrine, it  is  unsurprising  that  the  father,  who  is
         responsible for leading  the  family  and  protecting  its/his  own
         integrity, would  come  to  know  what  is  happening  in  his  own
         household.  This is especially the case within smaller, more tribal-
         based cities in Iran, where a family's reputation is  intrinsically
         linked to their perceived honour and where many families know  each
         other  socially.   In  such  circumstances  and  in  view  of  [the
         appellant's]  girlfriend's  father's   professional   role   as   a
         police/government officer, in my opinion, it is culturally the norm
         for him to monitor the moral wellbeing of his daughter and it would
         be relatively easy for him to discover what she is partaking in and
         where, either using his police resources or general  common  sense.
         It is normal practice within most Iranian families to  specifically
         monitor the behaviour of their children, especially the  daughters,
         who would be perceived to be vulnerable and defenceless if they are
         not protected by the male family members.  This is motivated either
         by religious belief of the  family,  or  the  culturally  ingrained
         concept of honour."

  30. Both Dr Kakhki and Roya Kashefi in her report, provide ample  evidence
      of the background situation in Iran concerning the  impropriety  of  a
      relationship outside marriage between a man and a woman, including the
      potential legal consequences of such a relationship.  At  page  22  of
      the appellant's additional bundle, Dr Kakhki states that:

         "Applying these Articles to [the appellant's] case, if it is proven
         that he has entered into any form of relationship with an unrelated
         women, he would be punished under the above  Articles.   If  it  is
         proven that the relationship expanded to  sexual  intercourse,  the
         punishment would be 100 lashes  as  highlighted  in  the  provision
         below."

  31. The reference to the "Articles" above is to Article 637 and 638 of the
      Islamic Penal Code which are in the following terms.

         "When there is evidence of an extra-marital  relationship  existing
         without  sufficient  evidence  to  prove  that  sexual  intercourse
         occurred, the parties would  be  punished  according  to  following
         legal Articles.

         According to Article 637 of the Islamic Penal Code, whenever a  man
         and a woman, who are not married to each other, commit any  illegal
         relationship or a crime against decency (except sexual intercourse)
         they would be sentenced to 99 lashes if the act was  not  committed
         under duress.  In cases of  duress,  only  the  agitator  would  be
         punished.

         Article 638 states that  anyone  who  commits  an  offence  against
         'public morality' in any place where people are assembled  together
         (streets, meetings, private parties etc) will, at the discretion of
         the judge (and as long as the judge does not decide that an offence
         has been committed against the Shari'a law  of  Islam),  receive  a
         prison sentence of ten days to two months and up to  74  lashes  of
         the whip."

  32. Dr Kakhki continues:

         "The standard of proof in such cases include the confession of  the
         perpetrators, witness testimony, circumstantial  evidence  and  the
         knowledge of the judge, discussed above.  In my opinion,  it  would
         not be  difficult  in  [the  appellant's]  case  to  establish  the
         existence  of  his  illegal   relationship,   regardless   of   any
         investigation based on the  homicide  aspect  of  his  case.   Such
         evidence could be gathered from  telephone  records,  testimony  of
         witnesses who may have  seen  the  couple  together,  the  birthday
         present he purchased for his girlfriend etc.  All  these  may  form
         circumstantial evidence that may be used to  trigger  the  'Judge's
         Knowledge' method of proof and render him liable for these crimes."

  33. Those views are supported by Roya Kashefi in her report.  At paras 2.9
      and 2.10 she states:

         "2.9     It is this honour code and staying  out  of  public's  eye
             that takes them to the second floor landing of a  building  on
             her birthday.  The Reasons for Refusal  Letter  of  July  2009
             questions how her father knew where they were.   Based  on  my
             knowledge of Iran and small traditional towns  it  would  have
             been enough for one person to have seen them together to fetch
             her father.  It did not matter that sex was not part of  their
             relationship.  To ruin a young girl's  reputation  and  family
             honour it is enough to see her  with  a  stranger,  everything
             else is  implied.   Therefore,  in  the  same  way  that  [the
             appellant] was protecting her reputation by putting a piece of
             paper on the floor, her father was doing the same  by  beating
             her boyfriend.

         2.10     Up to this point of [the appellant's] claim is  completely
             in keeping with my knowledge  of  Iran  and  plausible  in  my
             view."

  34. In my view, both experts support the appellant's claim concerning  the
      circumstances of his relationship with F and the consequences  to  him
      if that relationship was discovered by F's father.

  35. Turning to the appellant's evidence that he pushed F's father down the
      stairs and, as a result he died,  and  the  appellant  now  faces  the
      prospect of prosecution for murder, both experts  deal  with  this  in
      their reports.  Both recognise that the  appellant,  if  convicted  of
      murder, would be at  risk  of  execution.   At  paras  2.11-2.12  Roya
      Kashefi says this:

         "2.11    [The appellant] states  that  fearful  for  his  life,  he
             pushed his girlfriend's father  away  to  get  away  from  the
             beatings and he  fell  down  the  stairs.   If  this  is  what
             happened, according to article 205 and 206(B)  of  Book  Three
             (Qesas) the Islamic Penal  Code,  'cases  where  the  murderer
             intentionally makes an action that is inherently lethal,  even
             if he does not intend to kill  the  victim',  [the  appellant]
             could be sentenced to death by order of Qesas.  It  is  highly
             likely that he would also be sentenced to  receive  up  to  99
             lashes for his  relationship  with  his  girlfriend  based  on
             article 637.

         2.12      Under  increasing  international  pressure  the   Islamic
             Republic has stated that it will not execute  children.   What
             has happened is that the child offenders have either  remained
             in detention until they reach 18 years of  age  and  are  then
             sentenced to death or that they are sentenced to death and the
             sentence is held off until they reach the  age  of  18.   Both
             scenarios have been  commented  upon  and  condemned  in  many
             international human rights reports.  I would like to draw your
             attention to a paragraph from  one  such  report  prepared  by
             Amnesty International and published in June 2007 the report is
             entitled, Iran:  the last executioner of children:

             2.12.1    'On 10 January 2005, the Speaker  of  the  Judiciary
                  reportedly dismissed  reports  that  Iran  executed  child
                  offenders as 'foreign propaganda ... aimed  at  distorting
                  the image of the Islamic Republic'.  The  same  month  the
                  Committee on the  Rights  of  the  Child  noted  that  the
                  Iranian delegation appearing before  it  had  stated  that
                  Iran  had  suspended  executions  of  people  for   crimes
                  committed before they were 18.   However,  on  19  January
                  2005, the same day  that  the  Committee  examined  Iran's
                  report, 17-year-old Iman Farokhi  was  executed  in  Iran.
                  The Committee deplored the fact that 'such executions have
                  continued since the consideration  of  the  State  party's
                  initial report, including one such execution  on  the  day
                  the second report was being considered.'"

  36. At para 3.1, Roya Kashefi states that if the appellant: "Is wanted for
      murder this would become known to the security and intelligence agents
      present at the airport."

  37. At para 4.1 and 4.3 Roya Kashefi concludes as follows:

         "4.1     The bias of the courts  and  poor  standards  under  which
             trials are held in Iran violate Islamic Republic's own limited
             safeguards for due process and fair and impartial  hearing  as
             well as its international obligations and undertakings.  These
             have been the subject much criticism in numerous international
             human rights  reports.   Every  judge  has  his  own  personal
             understanding and interpretation of the Islamic laws  and  the
             same case can have as many different  outcomes  as  there  are
             judges.  This arbitrary application of justice makes  it  very
             difficult to comment on the fairness and impartiality  of  the
             entire judicial  system.   However,  the  use  of  torture  to
             extract information and summary trials are  not  exclusive  to
             political  cases  and  since  in  the  last  two  years   many
             journalists, lawyers and human rights defenders have ended  up
             in unclassified cells in jails we are hearing  more  and  more
             about how torture, coercion and ill treatment have  been  used
             to extract information and/or  confessions  in  non  political
             cases.

            ....

         4.3       If  it  is  accepted  that  [the  appellant]  pushed  his
             girlfriend's father down some stairs and consequently he died,
             according to article 205 and 206(B) of Book Three (Qesas)  the
             Islamic Penal Code, 'cases where  the  murderer  intentionally
             makes an action that is inherently lethal, even if he does not
             intend to kill the victim', [the appellant] could be sentenced
             to death by order of Qesas.  It is highly likely that he would
             also  be  sentenced  to  receive  up  to  99  lashes  for  his
             relationship with his girlfriend based on article 637  because
             it was this relationship that brought everyone together on the
             day of the incident."

  38. Dr Kakhki deals at length with the law relating to  homicide  in  Iran
      (see pages 12 et seq of the appellant's additional bundle).  Dr Kakhki
      concludes that the appellant is at risk of prosecution for murder and,
      in relation to proof, states (at page 15 of the bundle) that:

         "If [the appellant] is viewed to have fled the  crime  scene  after
         the commission  of  the  offence  this,  in  conjunction  with  any
         testimony  or  information  extracted  from  his  girlfriend,   may
         constitute to satisfy the knowledge of the judge criteria."

  39. At page 16 Dr Kakhki continues that:

         "Due to the alleged identity of the victim as a police officer  and
         his  subsequent   escape,   the   authorities   would   extensively
         investigate the circumstances of the killing, with the  likely  use
         of torture."

  40. And further at page 16 continues:

         "As is evident from the above account, the fact of innocence of the
         individual concerned does not prevent the authorities from pursuing
         the matter in the judiciary and securing a conviction, even  if  by
         means of forced confession .... This may  have  relevance  to  [the
         appellant's] account,  particularly  if  there  is  indeed  a  bias
         against him in the investigation due to  the  victim's  role  as  a
         police officer  in  a  local  district  where  the  case  would  be
         proceeding."

  41. At page 16 Dr Kakhki states that:

         "With regards to the implication of [the appellant's] purported age
         at the time of the offence, I would like to  highlight  that  there
         are numerous instances of the  Iranian  authorities  arresting  and
         executing individuals for murder, even if they were younger than 15
         at the time of commission."

  42. At page 19, he states that:

         "In the light of [the appellant's] account, namely that the  murder
         was committed against someone who was  a  police  officer  and  his
         father was arrested for possibly assisting his endeavours  to  hide
         from the authorities, it is  apparent  that  they  would  seek  the
         strictest possible penalty open to them.  As such, in  my  opinion,
         [the appellant's] age at the time of the alleged murder  would  not
         be of significant importance if he returned to Iran  as  (if  found
         guilty) he may be executed after the age of 18, if not  reached  so
         far."

  43. As I  have  already  indicated,  in  my  view,  these  expert  reports
      materially support the appellant's account and his fear of prosecution
      both for murder and for his illicit relationship with F.  I accept the
      evidence contained in  the  two  experts'  reports.   The  appellant's
      account has been largely consistent throughout  and,  as  I  indicated
      above, Mr Deller did not seek to subject the appellant's evidence both
      prior to the hearing and given orally at the hearing  to  any  intense
      forensic scrutiny.  The appellant's account of how  he  conducted  his
      relationship  with  F  in  secret  is  entirely  consistent  with  the
      background evidence concerning the near  impossibility  of  conducting
      such a relationship in public in Iran.  Likewise, given  the  position
      of F's father, it is not implausible that he would have the means  and
      wherewithal both to monitor and, as the appellant claims, discover the
      whereabouts of his daughter when she was meeting the appellant on  her
      birthday above the shop.  The appellant's reaction, following what  he
      claims happened to F's father, by running away is  entirely  plausible
      given the risks he then ran if F's father  died  and  because  of  the
      discovery of his relationship with F.

  44. I accept the appellant's explanation why  he  has  not  contacted  his
      family since coming to the UK.  If indeed he is  wanted  in  Iran  for
      murder or because of his relationship with F, then  contact  with  his
      family would potentially put them at risk if only of interrogation and
      enquiry by the Iranian authorities.

  45. For these reasons, I find the appellant to be credible.  I accept  his
      evidence.  I find that he was in a platonic relationship  with  F.   I
      accept that their relationship was discovered by F's father who was  a
      police officer.  I accept that  in  a  confrontation  F's  father  was
      pushed away by the appellant, fell down some stairs and, as a  result,
      died.  On the basis of the background  evidence,  I  accept  that  the
      appellant is at risk of  prosecution  for  murder  and  also  for  his
      illicit relationship with F.

  46. As regards the former, I  find  that  the  appellant  is  at  risk  of
      execution and, if not, imprisonment in circumstances in which  (and  I
      did not understand Mr Deller to challenge this) give rise to a risk of
      torture or inhumane or degrading treatment.  Likewise, as regards  the
      latter, the appellant is at risk of prosecution and punishment  of  up
      to 99 lashes.  Mr Deller's position is amply supported by  the  report
      of Dr Kakhki dealing with the use of torture, and the  conditions,  in
      Iranian prisons (see pages 16-26 under the heading "The Use of Torture
      in the Iranian Legal System").  Those consequences,  in  my  judgment,
      amounts to serious ill-treatment and inhumane or  degrading  treatment
      contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

  47. Consequently, I am satisfied on the evidence that on  return  to  Iran
      there is a real risk the appellant will be subject to persecution (for
      the purposes of the Refugee Convention) and serious ill-treatment  (or
      death) for the purposes of humanitarian protection and Art  3  of  the
      ECHR (or Art 2 of the ECHR).

      3. PSG

  48. There remains the issue of whether, in relation to  the  risk  arising
      from the prosecution and punishment for his illicit relationship  that
      would be for a  Convention  reason  such  as  to  engage  the  Refugee
      Convention and entitle the appellant to asylum.  It is  not  suggested
      that the risk arising from his prosecution and punishment  for  murder
      engages the Refugee Convention. I now turn to that issue.

  49. I  begin  with  Art  10.1(d)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  (the
      "Qualification Directive") (transposed in reg 6(1)(d) of  the  Refugee
      or Person in Need of International  Protection  Regulations  2006  (SI
      2006/2525) (the "2006 Regulations")).   It provides a definition of  a
      PSG as follows:
           "(d)  a group shall be considered to form a  particular  social
           group where in particular:
           -  members of that group share an innate  characteristic,  or  a
           common  background  that  cannot  be   changed,   or   share   a
           characteristic or belief that is so fundamental to  identity  or
           conscience that a person should not be forced  to  renounce  it,
           and
           -   that group has a distinct identity in the relevant  country,
           because it is perceived as being different  by  the  surrounding
           society;
           depending on the circumstances  in  the  country  of  origin,  a
           particular social group might include a group based on a  common
           characteristic of sexual orientation. Sexual orientation  cannot
           be understood to include  acts  considered  to  be  criminal  in
           accordance with  national  law  of  the  Member  States:  Gender
           related aspects might be considered, without by themselves alone
           creating a presumption for the applicability of this Article."

  50. Ms Akinbolu submitted that the consequences faced by the appellant  as
      a result of prosecution for  the  illicit  relationship  with  F  fell
      within the Refugee Convention.  She submitted that the  appellant  was
      part of a PSG which she defined as:

            'people who have breached or are perceived to have breached  the
            moral code in Iran.'

  51. Ms Akinbolu relied upon the definition of PSG in Art  10.1(d)  of  the
      Qualification  Directive  (see  also   reg   6(1)(d)   of   the   2006
      Regulations).  Ms Akinbolu relied upon the expert reports of Dr Kakhki
      at page 12 and also section 2 of Roya Kashefi's report headed  "Honour
      and Shame" which, she submitted, identified  the  appellant  as  being
      part of a group in Iran which "shared an innate characteristic" or has
      a "common background" that could not be changed and which gave rise to
      a "distinct identity" in Iran.  She also relied on the House of Lords'
      decision in Islam v SSHD; R v IAT  ex  parte  Shah  [1999]  2  AC  629
      (hereafter "Shah and Islam").  In  particular,  she  relied  upon  the
      speeches of Lords  Steyn  and  Hutton  who  concluded  that  women  in
      Pakistan suspected of adultery and who lacked the  protection  of  the
      state were a PSG.  By analogy, Ms Akinbolu submitted that the evidence
      established the appellant was part of a PSG based upon his breach,  or
      perceived breach, of the moral code in Iran.

  52. Mr Saunders (in his brief submissions) adopted the same stance as  had
      Mr Deller at  the  earlier  hearing.   He  did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant was part of a  PSG.   He  did  not  accept  that  there  the
      appellant (as part of a wider group) had an "innate characteristic" or
      of a group that had a "common background" or that  the  claimed  group
      was a "distinct entity" in Iran.

  53. I have already set out at some length passages from both  Dr  Kakhki's
      and Roya Kashefi's reports above.  I do not repeat  those  here.   The
      background to Iranian society and attitudes to sexual mores and,  what
      Roya Kashefi  refers to as, 'codes of honour and shame' are set out in
      her report at paras 2.1-2.4 as follows:

            "2.   Honour and Shame

                    1. While in theory codes of honour and shame  refer  to
                       the behaviour of both men and women, in Iran, honour
                       is seen more as men's responsibility  and  shame  as
                       women's.  This  division  of  honour  and  shame  is
                       related to the fact that honour is seen as  actively
                       achieved while shame is seen as passively  defended,
                       resulting in  different  expectations  of  behaviour
                       from men and women.

                    2. The woman's chastity belongs to the family and is  a
                       measure of the family's  honour.   Maintaining  this
                       chastity  honour,  therefore,  becomes  a  tool   of
                       control - consciously by the men and  subconsciously
                       by the woman herself who constantly has to check her
                       appearance, actions and choices against the accepted
                       and expected honour codes.

                    3. Virginity at  the  time  of  marriage  is  the  most
                       crucial  aspect  of  this  expected   honour   code.
                       Traditionally,  the  men  who  are  responsible  for
                       safeguarding this chastity  and  family  honour  are
                       responsible for the  women  in  the  family;  before
                       marriage the woman belongs to her father and brother
                       even if he is younger and after marriage her  public
                       and  private  interaction  is  controlled   by   her
                       husband.

                    4. The essence, sex out of marriage is not only  a  sin
                       but a codified  offence  according  to  the  Islamic
                       Penal Code.  However, sex out  of  marriage  is  the
                       ultimate dishonour  which  is  why  it  carries  the
                       ultimate  punishment  of  death  by  stoning.   This
                       stress on sex within the  confines  of  marriage  is
                       evident in the punishment  of  Zena  (adultery).   A
                       married man who can have "legal' sex with  his  wife
                       as and when he chooses will be stoned to  death  but
                       an unmarried man (or woman) will be  punished  by  a
                       hundred lashes."

  54. Both her report and that of Dr Kakhi emphasis the importance of  moral
      observance and strict sexual mores in Iran. At para 2.7  Roya  Kashefi
      states:

            "The importance of a  young  woman's  chastity  and  maintaining
            honour are part of children's upbringing in  traditional  homes.
            Maintaining this honour and  good  name  in  small  towns  where
            people tend to know each other is much more crucial than in  big
            cities like Tehran.  In small towns the circle of honour is much
            wider than family and friends."

  55. The behaviour of the appellant - whose evidence I have accepted  -  is
      entirely  consistent  with  the  need  to   preserve   a   fa�ade   of
      respectability and even deniability of any relationship with  a  young
      woman in Iran.  His approach to F was clandestine, leaving a note  for
      her to pick up.  Their meeting was clandestine and the reaction of F's
      father wholly consistent with the strict 'honour and shame' codes  the
      experts refer to in their reports.  Society's disapproval  of  conduct
      breaching its moral codes is directed (although not identically)  both
      against women and men (see Roya Kashefi's report at para 2.1) and  the
      offence reflecting the moral code is applicable to both. Further,  the
      criminal offences identified in both reports for engaging in  "illicit
      relationships" reflect the prevailing social mores (see Roya Kashefi's
      report at para 2.6 and Dr Kakhki's report at para 1.2).

  56. On the basis of this evidence, I accept that the appellant forms  part
      of a PSG as propounded  by  Ms  Akinbolu  in  her  submissions.  I  am
      persuaded that he shares "an innate characteristic" with others in his
      position or together with others who have, or are perceived  to  have,
      transgressed Iranian social mores;  he  shares  "a  common  background
      which cannot be changed".  The appellant (and any other person in  his
      position) cannot change the fact that they  have  offended  the  moral
      code even if they are subsequently prosecuted and convicted for  their
      behaviour.  The persecution through the criminal justice  system  does
      not define the group - which would be fatal to it  being  a  PSG  (see
      Shah and Islam and K v SSHD; Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46) - it merely
      reflects the potential response of the state to some who are  in  that
      group.  It is the individual's behaviour  and  its  disapprobation  by
      reference to the moral codes of  Iranian  society  which  defines  the
      group.

  57. The evidence in this appeal echoes and provides an  analogy  with  the
      PSG accepted in Shah and Islam by Lord Steyn (at  page  645  and  with
      whom Lord Hutton agreed at pp.658-9) of women  who  had  offended  the
      social mores of Pakistan.  Having accepted the 'wider' PSG  of  "women
      in Pakistan" recognised by Lords Hope and  Hoffman,  Lord  Steyn  said
      this in acknowledging that there was also a 'narrower' PSG established
      on the evidence (at page 654):
           "If I had not accepted that women in Pakistan are a  "particular
           social group," I would have held that the appellants are members
           of a more narrowly circumscribed group as defined by counsel for
           the appellants. I will  explain  the  basis  of  this  reasoning
           briefly. It depends on the coincidence  of  three  factors:  the
           gender of the appellants, the suspicion of adultery,  and  their
           unprotected position in Pakistan. The Court of Appeal held  (and
           counsel for the Secretary of State argued)  that  this  argument
           falls  foul  of  the  principle  that  the  group   must   exist
           independently of the persecution. In my view this  reasoning  is
           not valid. The unifying characteristics of gender, suspicion  of
           adultery, and lack of protection, do not involve an assertion of
           persecution. The cases under consideration can be compared  with
           a more narrowly defined group of homosexuals, namely  practising
           homosexuals who are unprotected by a state. Conceptually such  a
           group does not in a relevant sense depend for its  existence  on
           persecution.  The  principle   that   the   group   must   exist
           independently of the persecution has an important role to  play.
           But counsel for the Secretary of State  is  giving  it  a  reach
           which neither logic nor good sense demands. In  A.  v.  Minister
           for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 142 A.L.R. 331, 359 McHugh J.
           explained the limits of the principle. He said:
                  "Nevertheless, while persecutory conduct  cannot  define
                 the social group, the actions of the persecutors may serve
                 to identify or even cause the  creation  of  a  particular
                 social  group  in  society.  Left-handed  men  are  not  a
                 particular social group.  But,  if  they  were  persecuted
                 because they were left-handed, they would no doubt quickly
                 become recognisable  in  their  society  as  a  particular
                 social group.  Their  persecution  for  being  left-handed
                 would  create  a  public  perception  that  they  were   a
                 particular social group. But it would be the attribute  of
                 being left-handed and not the persecutory acts that  would
                 identify them as a particular social group."
           The same view is articulated by  Goodwin-Gill,  The  Refugee  in
           International Law, 2nd ed., (1996) at p. 362. I am in respectful
           agreement with this qualification of the  general  principle.  I
           would hold that  the  general  principle  does  not  defeat  the
           argument of counsel for the appellants.
           My Lords, it is unchallenged that  the  women  in  Pakistan  are
           unprotected by state and public authorities if  a  suspicion  of
           adultery falls on them. The reasoning in Acosta, which has  been
           followed in Canada  and  Australia,  is  applicable.  There  are
           unifying characteristics which justify the conclusion that women
           such as the appellants are members of a relevant  social  group.
           On this additional ground I  would  hold  that  the  women  fall
           within the scope of the words "particular social group."

  58. Here too the group  shares  a  unifying  characteristic  and  lack  of
      protection from the State.   Indeed,  thorough  the  criminal  justice
      system there is actual persecution by the State.

  59. On its face, Art 10.1(d) indent 2 would also appear  to  require  that
      the group have "a distinct identity" in Iran "because it is  perceived
      as being different by the surrounding society".  To  the  extent  this
      might be thought to impose an additional definitional  requirement  to
      that in indent 1, it has been doubted by Lord Bingham in K and  Fornah
      at [16] as it would propound "a test more stringent than is  warranted
      by international authority".  Likewise, Lord Brown  in  K  and  Fornah
      considered that the  definition  in  Art  10.1(d)  would  have  to  be
      interpreted "consistently" with the definition of  PSG  in  the  UNHCR
      Guidelines on International Protection (7 May 2002)  which  defines  a
      PSG  either  by  reference  to  a  shared,   common   (often   innate)
      characteristic or a group that is "cognizable" in the society  despite
      its members not sharing such a characteristic (set out at [15] of Lord
      Bingham's speech in K and Fornah).  Had I been pressed  to  do  so,  I
      would have interpreted  the  Qualification  Directive  (and  the  2006
      Regulations) consistently with the doubts expressed in  the  House  of
      Lords as those provisions were, undoubtedly, intended to  give  effect
      to  the  law  as  it  was  understood  and  adopted  in  a  number  of
      jurisdictions in the world applying the Refugee Convention.   However,
      it is not necessary for me to do so.  In this appeal, in any event,  I
      am satisfied that the group to which  the  appellant  belongs  is  one
      which, on the evidence, Iranian society recognises  as  "setting  them
      apart" and "different" by others in society.

  60. For these reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  meets  the
      requirements of Art 10.1(d) and  is  part  of  a  PSG.   Further,  the
      persecution  that  he  fears,  namely  prosecution,   conviction   and
      punishment for his illicit relationship with F, is  "for  reasons  of"
      his membership of that PSG.

      4. Conclusion

  61. Consequently, I am satisfied that  the  appellant's  removal  to  Iran
      would breach the Refugee Convention and Arts 3 and 2 of the ECHR.

      5. Illegal Exit

  62. Ms Fisher also relied upon the risk to  the  appellant  on  return  as
      someone  who  had  illegally  exited  Iran.   I  have   accepted   the
      appellant's evidence, I also accept that when he travelled to  the  UK
      he left Iran illegally, crossing its border to,  in  all  probability,
      Turkey.

  63. Following my  acceptance  of  the  appellant's  account  and  that  he
      therefore  succeeds  in  establishing  his  claim  under  the  Refugee
      Convention and Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR, it is not strictly  necessary
      to consider what risk, if any, he would hypothetically be  exposed  to
      simply on the basis that he had left Iran illegally.

  64. I will, however, deal with this matter in brief.  It was common ground
      between the representatives that the appellant could  not  succeed  if
      the situation was governed by the country guidance case of SB (Risk on
      return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 0053.  Ms  Fisher  invited
      me to depart from SB on the basis that there were "cogent reasons" for
      doing so in the light of the expert report of Dr Kakhki.  In  essence,
      she relied on Dr Kakhki's report in two respects.  First, at  page  37
      of the appellant's additional bundle, he noted that Article 34 of  the
      Passport Law had been amended with effect from 21 February 2010.   The
      effect of this amendment was to increase the potential fine to between
      500,000 and 3,000,000 Tomans.  Previously, the fine, as  the  Tribunal
      had noted (again) on the basis of the evidence of Dr Kakhki at [21] of
      the determination, was between  100,000  and  500,000  Rials.   I  was
      informed that 1 Toman was the equivalent of 10  Rials.   Consequently,
      the minimum fine had arisen from 100,000 Rials to 5,000,000 Rials  and
      the maximum fine had risen from 500,000 Rials to 30,000,000 Rials.  Ms
      Fisher submitted that there  was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      family could meet any fine imposed and therefore  that  increased  the
      likelihood of the appellant being detained with possible  consequences
      to him of that.  Secondly, she submitted that the Tribunal  in  SB  at
      [51] had  identified  few  incidents  in  the  evidence  of  returnees
      suffering any difficulty.  Dr Kakhki's report highlighted a number  of
      other incidents which, therefore, demonstrated an  increased  risk  to
      the appellant.

  65. Mr Deller submitted that the evidence did not justify a departure from
      SB.  He reminded me that the term of imprisonment had not changed  and
      it was difficult, in his submission, to see how a larger fine could in
      itself amount to serious ill-treatment.

  66. As I have indicated, it is not strictly necessary for me to  determine
      whether the evidence justifies a  departure  from  SB.   Had  it  been
      necessary,  I  would  have  concluded  that  the  evidence   was   not
      sufficiently cogent to justify departing from the Tribunal findings in
      SB.  First, Dr Kakhki's own conclusion that the appellant was at  risk
      of prosecution if he returned to Iran appears, at least in part, to be
      premised on the fact that the appellant faces charges of homicide  and
      immoral relationships which "constitute additional risk factors"  (see
      page 39 of the appellant's additional bundle).   Secondly,  I  am  not
      satisfied that the increase in the minimum and maximum  fine  for  the
      offence creates a risk of serious ill-treatment falling within  Art  3
      of the ECHR.  There is simply no evidence  concerning  the  wealth  or
      resources of the appellant's family to meet any such fine if one  were
      imposed.  The appellant has presented no evidence on that issue  which
      is an entirely discrete matter from whether or not the  appellant  has
      been able or willing to contact his family  since  being  in  the  UK.
      Thirdly, whilst  Dr  Kakhki's  report  identifies  some  instances  of
      returnees facing prosecution on the basis of their illegal  exit,  the
      examples largely relate to individuals  who  have  some  political  or
      human  rights  background  (see,  in  particular,  page  41   of   the
      appellant's  additional  bundle).   In  assessing  the  risk  to   the
      appellant simply on the basis of his illegal exit, the appellant would
      have no such background.  Fourthly, Dr Kakhki's view is not  supported
      by Roya Kashefi in her expert report.  In para 3.1 of her  report  (at
      page 24 of the appellant's bundle), Roya Kashefi identifies  the  risk
      to the appellant on return if he is wanted for  murder  and  concludes
      that he would be at risk of being identified at the airport.  However,
      at para 3.2 she considers the situation if the appellant is not wanted
      by the authorities as follows:

         "If [the appellant] is not wanted by the authorities then he  would
         have no problem in returning  to  his  home  town  where  he  could
         benefit from familial support to settle back into life in Iran."

  67. In other words, Roya  Kashefi  does  not  identify  any  risk  to  the
      appellant on return simply on the basis that he has  illegally  exited
      Iran.

  68. For these reasons, the expert evidence relied upon before me would not
      justify a departure from the country guidance  case  of  SB  that  (at
      [52]):  "Illegal exit is not a factor which in itself is a significant
      risk factor."

Decision

  69. Ms Fisher also relied upon Art 8  of  the  ECHR  and  the  appellant's
      private life in the UK formed since 2009, in  particular  through  his
      time as a student in the UK with leave  granted  as  an  unaccompanied
      minor.  In the light of my finding that the appellant  succeeds  under
      the Refugee Convention and Arts  2  and  3  of  the  ECHR  it  is  not
      necessary to consider the hypothetical question of whether (if none of
      those were established) he could succeed under Art 8 alone.

  70. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and under Arts 2 and 3 of  the
      ECHR.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
