
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02799/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2015                          |On 22 June 2015                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                                   Between

                           Miss Eki Cynthia Idele
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In the light of the  assistance  given  to  us  by  Mr  Duffy  and  the
    production of relevant documentation which  regrettably  had  not  been
    produced before now it is plain that this appeal is going to have to be
    allowed.  We do not need to go into any great detail.   Suffice  it  to
    say that the appellant's case was that she has been trafficked to  this
    country and she gave an account of what she had suffered in Nigeria and
    what had led to trafficking.

2.   Before the First-tier Judge the issue related to  her  credibility  and
    it was a decision made a very long time ago now back in April of  2013.
    Essentially the Secretary of State had rejected her claim not believing
    her and the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  that.   One  of  the
    important issues obviously was whether her trafficking claim  had  been
    accepted by the competent authority and regrettably it seems that  full
    information was not given at material times either to the First-tier or
    more particularly to the Upper Tier Tribunal.  Suffice it to  say  that
    the Secretary of State has now accepted and in a letter of  6  December
    2013 which has now been produced has indicated that it is accepted that
    she was trafficked.

3.   It seems that that decision was influenced strongly  by  a  psychiatric
    report which had been obtained and that her mental condition  was  such
    as means that what appeared to be incredible might not  be  incredible.
    However, it was clear that the whole decision-making process below  was
    based upon the assertion that her account was not credible.   In  those
    circumstances, and Mr Duffy has not  dissented  from  this,  indeed  he
    suggested it might well be the right thing for  this  Tribunal  to  do,
    rather than keep the appeal in being and remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it  would  be  sensible  in  all  the  circumstances  for  the
    Secretary of State to reconsider the decision.  No doubt the  appellant
    will be able to put in any fresh material that she wishes to put in  or
    is advised to  put  in  by  those  representing  her  but  in  all  the
    circumstances we will therefore allow this appeal.

4.   The only matter we would  add  is  that  we  would  indicate  that  the
    Tribunal requires from the Secretary of State full  information  as  to
    why the proper information had not been given to the  Tribunal  at  all
    material times.  It led to the need to go to the Court  of  Appeal  and
    get an order from the Court of Appeal which effectively overturned  the
    decision of the Upper Tier Tribunal who dismissed the  appeal,  unaware
    of the true position in relation  to  the  decision  of  the  competent
    authority.  Accordingly the Secretary of State is directed  to  provide
    the Tribunal with a detailed explanation within 14 days of the date  of
    the sending out of this decision.

5.   For the reasons given, this appeal is allowed.



Signed   Date 16 June 2015

[pic]

p.p. Mr Justice Collins


