
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02564/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3 March 2016                          |On 6 April 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                       MR MOHAMED RIYAS ABDUL MUTHALEF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T C N Kumudusen, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the
    respondent, taken on 30 January 2015, refusing  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum.

Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 10 April  1986.
    The appellant applied for a Tier 4 Student visa to come to  the  United
    Kingdom on 11 August 2009.  This was granted on 20  August  2009  valid
    from 28 September 2009 to 12 February 2012.  The appellant applied  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student on  29  November  2011  and
    this was granted until 17 June 2012.  On 13 March  2012  the  appellant
    applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1  post-study  worker  which  was
    granted until 23 July 2014.  On 28 March  2014  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum.  The respondent refused that application because the respondent
    did not accept the appellant's account of his involvement with  a  non-
    governmental organisation ("NGO") and his detention in Sri Lanka.   The
    respondent did not consider that the appellant fell  into  any  of  the
    categories of members of the Sri Lankan diaspora who  are  at  risk  on
    return.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 17 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge H Clark dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.  The Tribunal found that, despite  having  some
    concerns about the plausibility  of  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    detention, mistreatment and release, there was a reasonable chance that
    it had occurred and therefore that the appellant was of interest to the
    Sri Lankan authorities in 2012, was beaten during his interrogation and
    released on payment  of  a  bribe  after  five  days.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge, however, found that the appellant would not be at  risk
    on return to Sri Lanka.  The judge did not accept that the  authorities
    have shown a continued interest in the appellant  and  thus  the  judge
    rejected the evidence of the appellant's father to  that  effect.   The
    judge did not consider that it was reasonably likely that the appellant
    faces outstanding arrest warrants or court summonses connected  to  any
    political activities or that he would be on a  stop  list  such  as  to
    expose him to a risk on the basis of his imputed political opinions  on
    return to Sri Lanka.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  9
    September 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  refused  permission  to
    appeal.  The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and on 5 November 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill
    granted permission to appeal.  The grant of permission  sets  out  that
    the judge may have erred in his assessment of the future  risk.   Thus,
    the appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal are lengthy as were the oral submissions. I  have
    summarised the arguments and have considered related grounds together.







The appellant's submissions

 6. Lack of documentation and interest in the  appellant.  The  grounds  of
    appeal assert that the judge erred when making  findings  that,  "given
    the lack of any documentation confirming  that  the  appellant  is  the
    subject of either an arrest warrant or that he  has  been  issued  with
    court summonses", there was no ongoing interest in the appellant. It is
    asserted that the findings are against the objective evidence  and  the
    country guidance.  Reference is made to the Country of  Origin  Report,
    Sri Lanka 2011, BHC letter of 14 September 2010 where  it  is  reported
    that it is difficult for the accused to be able to  obtain  a  copy  of
    his/her own arrest warrant.  It is asserted that as  the  appellant  is
    unable to obtain a copy of the arrest warrant he cannot  be  prejudiced
    for this.  Mr Kumudusen submitted that credibility is not in dispute in
    this case; the issue focuses on whether or not the judge  assessed  the
    risk on return properly.  He referred to paragraph 55 of  the  decision
    and submitted that the judge, having accepted credibility, was wrong to
    expect the appellant to submit a warrant of arrest.  He referred to the
    grounds of appeal and the COI Report at paragraph 10.1.3.  He  asserted
    that it was not reasonably practicable to obtain an arrest warrant.  He
    submitted that the judge erroneously concluded that the absence  of  an
    arrest warrant meant that the appellant should be treated as  a  person
    who was not at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  He referred  to  paragraph
    56 of the decision and submitted  that  there  was  evidence  that  the
    family were continuously under threat and that that was not disputed. I
    asked Mr Kumudusen where it was in the decision that the judge accepted
    this.  He responded that the judge did not officially accept that there
    was an ongoing interest in the appellant.  He submitted that  there  is
    no requirement for corroborative evidence. With  regard  to  the  court
    summons he submitted that the objective evidence suggests  that  arrest
    of LTTE members is often without an arrest warrant. If the  authorities
    had arrested him without  a  warrant  then  there  would  be  no  court
    involvement but when they failed to  find  the  appellant  their  final
    option would be an order from  a  court.   He  submitted  that  it  was
    possible that at that time the authorities may have been trying to  get
    him and to kill him without involvement of the court.  He  referred  to
    paragraph 275 of GJ and asserted that this  supported  the  submissions
    made. It is asserted that the judge erred as she failed to consider the
    appellant's claim with anxious scrutiny as she has failed  to  consider
    that the appellant explained that the  authorities  have  continued  to
    visit his home and continue to make enquiries about him

 7. The appellant's wife's departure.  It  is  asserted  that  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant will not face persecution on his return  to
    Sri Lanka because the appellant's wife did not  face  any  problems  in
    leaving Sri  Lanka  is  against  the  objective  evidence  and  country
    guidance.  Reference is  made  to  the  COI  March  2012  Report.   The
    appellant's wife did not have any problems with the authorities in  Sri
    Lanka and was not subjected to an arrest warrant;  hence  she  did  not
    have any problems leaving Sri Lanka.  Mr Kumudusen submitted  that  the
    judge was wrong to consider that because  the  appellant's  wife  could
    travel without any problems that there was no ongoing risk  to  him  on
    return to Sri Lanka.  He submitted that  the  appellant's  problems  go
    back to 2006.  His wife had no connection with the  appellant  at  that
    time.  He submitted that the appellant's wife using  her  own  passport
    had no relevance; she was not a person with whom  the  authorities  had
    any interest.  In response to the respondent's submissions Mr Kumudusen
    accepted that the judge was entitled to make the findings regarding the
    appellant's wife's departure from Sri Lanka but that  what  went  wrong
    was that the relevant factors were not considered.   He  asserted  that
    there is no way to know whether or not the authorities knew that she is
    his wife. In the absence of that fact the benefit of the  doubt  should
    be given.  Mr Kumudusen submitted  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    married in 2011 which is before he was  detained  but  that  they  were
    looking for the appellant  because  of  his  activities  prior  to  his
    marriage to his wife.

 8. The delay in claiming asylum. It is submitted that the judge  erred  as
    she assessed the appellant's further risk of persecution based  on  the
    appellant's delay in claiming asylum.  It is asserted  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the explanation  given  by  the  appellant  for  the
    delay.  Reliance is placed on the case of JT (Cameroon) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878  which  held  that  a
    global assessment of credibility is required.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge applied Section 8 finding  that  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum
    adversely affected the appellant's credibility.  He submitted that this
    was illogical as the judge had  accepted  the  appellant's  credibility
    overall.  He submitted that the judge had  not  taken  the  appellant's
    explanation into account that  he  had  valid  leave  and  had  medical
    evidence confirming his torture.

 9. Own assumptions. The grounds assert that  the  judge  erred  by  making
    findings based on her own assumptions.  The judge  made  findings  that
    "the Sri Lankan government can be expected to know that  the  appellant
    has  not  been  engaged  in  LTTE  activities  in  the  diaspora...  No
    explanation has been given as to why the authorities would have  waited
    until early 2014 to issue court summonses as opposed to  the  immediate
    aftermath of his escape." It is  asserted  that  it  is  unsafe  for  a
    decision maker to reject evidence simply because he believes  that  the
    appellant  or  other  parties  would  have  acted  differently  in  the
    circumstances.  Reliance is placed on MM  (plausibility  (DRC))  [2005]
    UKIAT 00019.

10. Supply of resources. It is submitted that the judge  drew  support  for
    her finding that the appellant will not  be  at  risk  because  of  the
    findings of the Upper  Tribunal  in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) ("GJ") with  regard  to
    the second appellant in that case.  It is asserted that  the  appellant
    is more in line with  the  first  appellant  in  GJ  on  the  basis  of
    supplying resources rather  than  the  first  appellant  who  was  only
    supplying manual labour. Mr Kumudusen referred to paragraph 55  of  the
    decision and submitted that it was  clear  that  the  appellant  was  a
    person who was  perceived  to  have  a  connection  with  the  LTTE  by
    providing  resources  although  the  appellant  did  not  provide   any
    resources to the LTTE.  He asserted that there must  be  a  presumption
    that the authorities were targeting him  at  that  point  because  they
    suspected  him  of  providing  resources.   On  the  basis   that   the
    appellant's credibility was accepted he  asserted  that  the  appellant
    fell in this category in GJ.

11. Release as a result of bribery. It is asserted that the  judge  records
    the evidence that the appellant's release by bribery was to be recorded
    as an escape yet the judge  made  no  clear  findings  on  whether  she
    rejects or accepts this crucial aspect of the  claim.   It  is  further
    asserted that the judge failed to assess this aspect of  the  claim  in
    light of the evidence before him in GJ which supported  the  view  that
    release by bribery was likely to be regarded as an escape.  Reliance is
    placed on paragraph 146 of GJ.  It is asserted that the expert evidence
    of Mr Punethanayagam where he  gives  evidence  that  bribery  is  very
    common in the IDP camps as well as  detention  centres  and  that  such
    cases would normally be  recorded  as  escape  from  detention  in  the
    database of the police.  Mr Kumudusen submitted that the judge had  not
    set out sufficient reasons for his findings.  He asserted that  if  the
    judge accepted that the appellant bribed the authorities  in  order  to
    escape, it was illogical  that  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    authorities would come to look for him.  It was obvious that they would
    look for him.  He asserted that the judge omitted to look at giving the
    appellant the benefit of the doubt.  He asserted that  the  family  was
    targeted but they did not want  to  approach  the  authorities  to  get
    information as the family was traumatised.

12. UK Diaspora hotspot. Mr Kumudusen also asserted that the judge did  not
    consider that the appellant would be sent back from the  UK,  which  is
    considered to be a diaspora hotspot, and  the  judge  should  therefore
    have assessed that there was a reasonable  chance  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk being returned from the UK.

The Respondent's Submissions

13. The respondent served a Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008) response. The respondent asserts that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge fully considered the appellant's  claimed  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka whilst bearing in mind the appellant's  credibility
    and lack of a timely asylum claim.  It is asserted that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal was fully open to it and the finding  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk of return to Sri Lanka was supported  by
    a full and reasoned assessment of the country guidance in the  case  of
    GJ.

14. Mr Avery submitted that there was no error of law.  The judge was alive
    to the issues and the problems.  He referred to  paragraph  45  of  the
    decision onwards and submitted that the judge undertook a comprehensive
    review of the risk taking into account the  case  law  and  the  likely
    factors that might pose a  risk  on  return.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge's findings were perfectly sustainable and  were  ones  that  were
    open to the judge to make.  He referred to paragraph 55  and  submitted
    that the lack of documents were relevant.   Tribunals  are  aware  that
    appellants can and do obtain copies of arrest warrants  as  they  often
    see  arrest  warrants  in  support  of  applications  for  asylum.   He
    submitted that paragraph 5 of the grounds are an attack on the  judge's
    findings but no error of law is  identified.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellant's case was that the authorities were interested  in  him  and
    were constantly harassing his family, therefore it would be  surprising
    that the appellant's wife was not included  in  that  category  as  the
    closest person to the appellant.  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  there  is
    sophisticated  intelligence,  which  is  a  good  reason  why,  if  the
    authorities had any interest in the appellant, they would be interested
    in stopping his wife.  He submitted that it was difficult  to  see  how
    the appellant could argue  that  the  authorities  were  harassing  his
    family and at the same time maintain that they would have  no  interest
    in his wife.  If they were interested in his  family  the  first  place
    they would start asking questions would be with his wife.  He submitted
    that the judge was entitled to  take  into  account  that  nothing  had
    happened to the family and that the finding was open to the judge  that
    the appellant was not telling the truth.  With regard to the  delay  Mr
    Avery submitted that the judge was entitled to make the  findings  that
    if the family were facing constant  visits,  then  notwithstanding  his
    findings on the appellant's credibility with regard to the detention in
    2012 delaying  to  claim  asylum  in  circumstances  where  there  were
    constant  visits  to  his  family  damaged  the  credibility  of   that
    assertion.  He asserted that the weight to be attached to the  father's
    evidence was a matter for the judge.  He referred to  paragraph  11  of
    the grounds and submitted that the judge  found  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities' sophisticated intelligence would be  able  to  demonstrate
    that the appellant was not involved  in  resurgence  activities.   With
    regard to paragraph 12 of the grounds  he  submitted  that  it  is  not
    relevant that the appellant used bribery to obtain his release  because
    one cannot tell whether a legitimate reason would have been put down on
    his record for his release  or  not.   Mr  Avery  did  not  accept  the
    interpretation of GJ  given  by  the  appellant's  representative.   He
    asserted that the  Tribunal  in  GJ  recorded  the  evidence  regarding
    bribery and said that in some respects they gave  some  weight  to  the
    evidence, however GJ did not make findings that they accepted what  the
    witness said about bribery.

Discussion

15. Lack of documentation and interest in the  appellant.  The  judge  took
    into consideration the lack of any documentation but this was only  one
    factor that she took into consideration when arriving at her  findings.
    At paragraphs 55 and 56 the judge set out:

         "55. Given the  lack  of  any  documentation  confirming  that  the
             appellant is the subject of either an arrest warrant  or  that
             he has been issued with court  summonses,  together  with  the
             appellant's failure to claim asylum within a reasonable period
             of his return to the United Kingdom and  the  absence  of  any
             apparent consequences to his family over the two  and  a  half
             years since his release from detention, I do  not  accept  the
             evidence that the authorities have shown a continued  interest
             in the appellant and reject the evidence  of  the  appellant's
             father to that effect.

         56.  The appellant did not  fight  for  the  LTTE,  has  no  family
             connections with the LTTE, none of the alleged threats against
             his family by the authorities have been carried  out,  he  has
             had no involvement with the  LTTE  in  the  diaspora  and  the
             activities about which he was questioned occurred in 2006  and
             were allegations about a low level  of  involvement  with  the
             LTTE.  All these factors contribute to my conclusion that  the
             appellant would not be regarded by the Sri  Lankan  government
             as any risk to the single Sri Lankan state.  Although  I  have
             accepted (albeit not without reservation) that  the  appellant
             was subjected to persecution in 2012,  his  complete  lack  of
             involvement in LTTE activities in the diaspora since 2012  and
             the lack of intervening interest by the Sri Lankan authorities
             in him or his wife and family  suggest  that  there  are  good
             reasons to consider that a repeat of his detention  is  not  a
             serious possibility".

16. The judge was entitled to take into account as one  factor  that  there
    was no documentary evidence.  As submitted by the respondent, Tribunals
    are regularly presented with copies of arrest warrants  and  summonses.
    Whilst there is no requirement for corroborative evidence, as a  factor
    amongst other several others it was permissible for the judge  to  take
    the lack of documentary evidence into  account.   As  set  out  in  the
    paragraphs above there were a number of factors that led to the judge's
    finding that the appellant was not  of  any  ongoing  interest  to  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka.

17. It is asserted that the appellant has explained  that  the  authorities
    have continued to visit his home making enquiries about  him.   As  set
    out above the judge, at paragraphs 55 and 56, considered  a  number  of
    factors in arriving at  her  decision  that  she  did  not  accept  the
    assertion that the authorities have shown a continued interest  in  the
    appellant and led her to reject the evidence of the appellant's  father
    to that effect.  The judge had the benefit of hearing the  evidence  of
    the appellant and assessing his credibility in light of  that  evidence
    and all the other evidence and documents  available.   It  is  asserted
    that the judge failed to consider the appellant's  claim  with  anxious
    scrutiny.  It is clear from reading the decision as a  whole  that  the
    judge has on occasions given the benefit of the doubt to the appellant.
     The judge has not failed to consider  the  claim  with  the  level  of
    anxious scrutiny that should be afforded to such claims.  The  findings
    of the judge were ones that were reasonably open to her.

18. The appellant's wife's departure. It is asserted that the  judge  erred
    by taking into account the fact that the appellant's wife was  able  to
    leave Sri Lanka on her own passport without any problems.  As  set  out
    above there were a considerable number of factors that the  judge  took
    into account when reaching her conclusion that the appellant was not of
    continuing interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities.   The  appellant's
    case was that his family had been visited every two or three months  by
    officers of the CID.  As  submitted  by  the  respondent  it  would  be
    surprising, given the sophisticated level of intelligence available  to
    the authorities, that they would not  be  aware  that  he  was  married
    particularly as he married some sixteen months before he  was  detained
    by the authorities.  It was a factor that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    take into consideration when  determining  whether  it  was  reasonably
    likely that the authorities had a continued interest in  the  appellant
    in Sri Lanka.

19. The delay in claiming asylum. It is asserted that the  judge  erred  by
    assessing the appellant's future persecution based on  the  appellant's
    delay in claiming asylum.  It is asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the explanation given by the appellant. Even though the  judge
    mentioned the explanation, she disregarded that explanation when making
    findings.  It is clear from paragraph 52 that the judge considered  the
    delay in  claiming  asylum  did  not  affect  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim in relation to his detention  in  2012  and  to  that
    extent has not been considered by the judge to  have  undermined  every
    aspect of his credibility.  Where the judge found that  the  delay  did
    undermine the appellant's credibility was with regard to his claim that
    his family was receiving attention from  the  authorities  consistently
    from October 2012.  The judge considered:

         "... If the appellant fled  Sri  Lanka  having  been  detained  and
         tortured and believed that he would be arrested or killed on return
         to Sri Lanka  as  he  had  been  recorded  as  an  escapee,  it  is
         reasonable to expect that he would have made a claim for asylum  in
         the United Kingdom without delay.  Even if not immediately  on  his
         return, certainly when informed  by  his  father  of  the  non-stop
         visits  from  the  authorities.   I,  therefore,  do   regard   the
         appellant's substantially delayed claim for asylum as  damaging  to
         the credibility of his fear of future persecution on return to  Sri
         Lanka ... The appellant delayed his claim  for  asylum  for  nearly
         eighteen months in circumstances where, on his  father's  evidence,
         his family was receiving attention from the authorities in relation
         to the appellant consistently from October 2012".

20. The judge was entitled to take into consideration the delay in claiming
    asylum  when  considering  the  credibility  of  his  fear  of   future
    persecution in the circumstances that were asserted by  the  appellant,
    namely that his family was receiving attention from the authorities  in
    relation to the appellant in Sri Lanka.

21. Making findings based on her own assumptions.  It is asserted  that  it
    is inherently dangerous to place too much weight on  plausibility  when
    assessing credibility  because  a  judge's  judgement  as  to  what  is
    plausible is  bound  to  be  influenced  by  his  or  her  own  values.
    Attention is drawn to paragraph 48 and 51 of the decision.   The  judge
    set out, at paragraph 47, paragraph 324 from GJ. The  comments  of  the
    judge in paragraphs 48 and 51 must be seen, therefore, through the lens
    of what the judge  was  considering,  which  is  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities will have  sophisticated  intelligence  concerning  who  is
    contacting the diaspora or seeking to revive  the  quest  for  a  Tamil
    homeland. These paragraphs consider that the change in focus of the Sri
    Lankan authorities is to those who are at risk of destabilising the Sri
    Lankan state.  The  appellant  has  had  no  involvement  in  any  LTTE
    activities  and  neither  has  his  family  and  he  has  not  attended
    demonstrations in the diaspora.  With regard to the submission that  it
    was possible that at that time the authorities may have been trying  to
    get him and to kill him  without  involvement  of  the  court  this  is
    entirely speculative and does not appear to  be  an  argument  advanced
    before the First-tier Tribunal. I do not consider that  the  judge  was
    making findings based on her own assumptions. She was considering  what
    was likely based on the assessment of evidence in the country  guidance
    case law (GJ).

22. UK Diaspora hotspot. The appellant has not  claimed  to  have  had  any
    involvement at all in the diaspora. Merely  because  the  appellant  is
    being returned from London is not a sufficient risk  factor  in  itself
    without more.

23. Supply of resources. It is asserted that the judge erred by considering
    that the appellant was in a similar position to the second appellant in
    GJ whereas the appellant's position is similar to the  first  appellant
    in GJ as a result of  being  concerned  with  financing  and  supplying
    resources.  In GJ The factors that the Upper  Tribunal  considered  put
    the first appellant at risk were:

         "396.    Given the close connections  the  appellant's  family  had
         with Prabhakaran, and his irregular exit from  Sri  Lanka,  we  are
         satisfied that he is  a  person  with  what  the  UNHCR  Guidelines
         describe as "more elaborate links with the  LTTE"  and  that  there
         remains a real risk that he would be of  interest  on  return.   In
         order to obtain a TTD he will  be  required  to  complete  a  form,
         provide full details of his previous addresses and  family  members
         in Sri Lanka, and attend an interview.   When  he  arrives  in  Sri
         Lanka the authorities will know everything they need to know  about
         him.

         397. The authorities  within  Sri  Lankan  have  knowledge  of  the
         appellant's previous role within the LTTE, and in particularly  his
         significant involvement in the LTTE's finance  wing  and  its  fuel
         supply. This, coupled with his sister's close  connections  to  the
         former leader of the LTTE, his pro-Tamil separatism  activities  in
         the United Kingdom, and the nature of the enquiry made by  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities with the appellant's family since his  departure
         from his homeland, leads us  to  conclude  that  it  is  reasonably
         likely that the Sri Lankan authorities perceive  the  appellant  as
         having a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil
         separatism within the diaspora." [Emphasis added]

24. The facts of the instant case are significantly different. There was no
    family connection with the LTTE at all let alone a connection with  the
    former leader, there was no on-going  interest  in  the  appellant  (as
    found by the judge). The appellant has not been involved  in  pro-Tamil
    separatist activities.  The  suspicion  by  the  authorities  that  the
    appellant had supplied boats (his evidence is that he  did  not  supply
    any  boats  to  the  LTTE)  is  the  most  significant  factor  of  the
    appellant's claim. The supply of fuel was only one of  the  factors  in
    the first appellant's case in GJ.

25. The First-tier Tribunal judge  considered  that  she  could  draw  some
    support from the conclusions reached by the Upper tribunal in  relation
    to the second appellant in GJ. The Upper Tribunal considered:

         429. We have set out our reasons for considering  that  the  GOSL's
         approach has modified since the appellant's  last  detention.   The
         burden is upon the appellant to satisfy us, to the  lower  standard
         of a real risk, or a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,  that  if
         returned he would be at risk of persecution or  serious  harm  from
         the Sri Lankan authorities.  The process of obtaining  a  TTD  will
         mean that the authorities learn all they need  to  know  about  his
         background before issuing a travel document.

         430. Given the sophisticated  intelligence  available  to  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities, within and without Sri Lanka, we consider  that
         they will know what separatist activities he undertook in Sri Lanka
         and what his activities have been in the United Kingdom.   We  must
         ask ourselves, therefore, whether having regard to his  known  low-
         level  activities  during  the   conflict   (bunker   digging   and
         transporting the wounded), there is a real  risk  that  the  second
         appellant will be perceived  to  be  a  diaspora  activist  with  a
         significant role in diaspora activities designed to destabilise the
         unitary Sri Lankan state and revive the internal armed conflict.

26. The appellant in this case was not involved in any diaspora  activities
    and his family has no involvement in the LTTE. The suspicion of the Sri
    Lankan authorities was that the appellant  had  assisted  the  LTTE  by
    supplying boats through his friend. As set out by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    the question is "is there is a real risk that the second appellant will
    be perceived to be a diaspora  activist  with  a  significant  role  in
    diaspora activities designed to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan
    state and revive the internal armed  conflict".  The  findings  of  the
    judge as to whether the  appellant's  previous  detention  would  cause
    adverse interest in him if he were returned now was open to  her  based
    on the evidence and the current focus of interest  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

27. Release as a result of bribery. The grounds assert that the judge  made
    no findings as to whether or  not  she  rejects  or  accepts  that  the
    appellant's release was by bribery.  It is asserted that in GJ supports
    the view that release by bribery  was  likely  to  be  regarded  as  an
    escape. In GJ the assessment of Mr Punethanayagam's evidence was:

           "275.    Mr  Anton  Punethanayagam's  evidence  is  that   of   a
         practitioner who has dealt with 3000 cases of detainees, in Colombo
         and  Vavuniya.   His  evidence  on  the  process  of  bribery   was
         particularly useful.  We did not have the  opportunity  of  hearing
         him give oral evidence, and some of his evidence goes  beyond  what
         he can be taken to know himself but where his evidence concerns the
         criminal processes in Sri Lanka, we consider that it is useful  and
         reliable.   We  take  particular  account  of  his  view  that  the
         seriousness  of  any  charges  against  an   individual   are   not
         determinative of whether a bribe  can  be  paid,  and  that  it  is
         possible to leave through the airport even when a person  is  being
         actively sought. "

28. The judge, at paragraph 49 did consider this issue. Whilst there is  no
    explicit finding as to whether or not she accepted that the appellant's
    release was by bribery the judge  accepted  that  "The  fact  that  the
    appellant left on his own passport in 2012 does  not  necessarily  mean
    that he is not on a "stop" list if a bribe was paid  (and  the  Country
    information suggests that this is a plausible claim), but there  is  no
    pattern of interest in him or his family apart from his 6 day detention
    in 2012." It is clear from  this  passage  that  the  judge  implicitly
    accepted that payment of a bribe secured his release and that obtaining
    release in these circumstances can result in the  authorities  actively
    seeking the person. Given  the  judge's  findings  that  there  was  no
    continued interest even if there was an error in this  regard  t  could
    not be material.

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is well reasoned, detailed  and
    all relevant matters were considered. The findings were all  ones  that
    were open to the judge to arrive at on the basis of the  evidence,  the
    relevant case law and objective evidence.

30. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

31. The appellant has not discharged the burden of satisfying me that there
    were any material errors of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    without which it is not susceptible of being set aside. The  appeal  is
    dismissed. The Secretary of State's decision stands.




Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 20 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

