
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02811/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at in Bradford                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th August 2013 and 8th November 2013       |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between


                                sameer neelam
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Miss S Khan of Counsel instructed by Parker
Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Hindson made following a hearing at Bradford on 30th May 2013.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen  of India. He was born a girl  but  describes
    himself as a transsexual or transman.  In 1998 he changed his name from
    his original female name to a more ambiguous one and  once  in  the  UK
    changed to his current male name.  He began a secret relationship  with
    a girlfriend in 2000 and their relationship lasted until 2010.  He  was
    at the property which he had purchased with her, on 17th November 2010,
    when members of the family came to  the  home  and  attacked  him.   He
    locked himself into the bedroom and rang a  friend  whom  he  asked  to
    contact the police.  A TV crew  arrived  and  he  was  interviewed  and
    during the course of that interview he disclosed his relationship  with
    his girlfriend, which she denied, and his  own  gender  issue  and  the
    programme was subsequently broadcast. The police refused  to  take  his
    allegation of assault seriously.

 3. On 24th November 2009 he came  to  the  UK  with  a  student  visa.  He
    returned to India. In January 2011 at the behest of  his relatives  but
    was again attacked by relatives of his former girlfriend.   The  police
    refused to assist.  He claimed asylum on  29th  February  2012.   In  a
    brief determination the judge wrote as follows:

         "I make the following findings of fact.

          i) I find that the Appellant is a  citizen  of  India  and  is  a
             transman; neither of these are in issue.

         ii) I find that prior to leaving India he lived with difficulty as
             a woman and suffered  discrimination  as  a  result  of  being
             perceived as different.

        iii) I find that he was in a secret relationship with  Radhika  and
             that that relationship broke down in 2010.

         iv) I find that the Appellant went public about that  relationship
             and about his own sexual alignment  issues  on  television  in
             what he now accepts was an ill judged outburst in front  of  a
             camera.  I accept he sought the assistance of  the  police  to
             protect him from Radkhika's family on two occasions  but  they
             did decline to take him seriously."

 4. The judge said that if the Appellant was at risk from Radhika's family,
    which was largely speculative, he could  avoid that risk by  relocating
    elsewhere in India. He is well educated with experience in a number  of
    jobs including law and social work and fluent in English.

 5. The judge was, however, satisfied that he would suffer  persecution  in
    India as a transman, being a member of a particular social  group.   He
    made that finding based on the evidence of the Appellant's  experiences
    in India and on the  background material to which he had been  referred
    by Miss Khan.  He could not return to living as a woman  in  India  and
    would only do  so  in  order  to  avoid  persecution.   The  background
    material provides ample evidence of the way in which sexual minorities,
    specifically lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgender  communities  were
    treated by society and the unwillingness of the authorities to  protect
    them. There were examples of individuals suffering  assault,  rape  and
    murder as well as less physical serious physical assaults.  The  police
    were unwilling to protect them and were often  themselves  perpetrators
    of the violence. On that basis he allowed the appeal on asylum  grounds
    and on Article 2/3 grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had made no findings on whether internal relocation would  be
    an option as a transman and a member  of  a  particular  social  group.
    Neither had the judge sufficiently addressed the  risk  of  persecution
    that the Appellant might face on return  to  India,  having  previously
    worked there, qualified as a lawyer, had a long term  relationship  and
    bought a  house without being subjected to till-treatment.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Brunnen  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 2nd July 2013.

 8.  Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and said that it was  not  at  all
    clear why the Appellant could not relocate in India.

 9. Miss Khan sought to defend the determination by stating that the  judge
    had said that he had taken into account  all  of  the  evidence  before
    reaching his conclusions and that the  determination  was  an  adequate
    consideration of the evidence before the judge.

Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law

10. The Appellant first came to the UK in February  2009  and  returned  to
    India six or seven times before he last  entered  the  UK  in  February
    2011.  There was then a delay of a year before he claimed  asylum.   In
    the reasons for refusal letter, at paragraph 41, the Secretary of State
    outlined a considerable number of reports  relating  to  the  level  of
    protection offered by  the  authorities  in  India.   The  letter  also
    addressed the question of internal relocation in some detail.

11. The claimant also  produced  a  number  of  more  general  reports  and
    specifically a country expert report from Mayur Suresh dated  May  2013
    and a report from Professor Steven Whittal, also dated  May  2013,  who
    has extensive experience of providing support and legal advice services
    to the transgender and transsexual community.  Professor  Whittal  also
    gave oral evidence before the judge.

12. None of this evidence is recorded in the  determination.  The  standard
    paragraph which the judge inserted saying that he had considered all of
    the evidence in the round prior to reaching any of his conclusions does
    not absolve him from the responsibility of engaging with that evidence,
    both that in favour and that against the claimant.

13. The decision is set aside because the judge did not take  into  account
    relevant evidence when making his decision.

14. I proposed to remake the decision.  Miss Khan  objected  to  proceeding
    straightaway because  she  said  that  she  wanted  to  call  Professor
    Whittal, who had given evidence before the First-tier Tribunal but  who
    was away on holiday.  Accordingly I agreed that the  appeal  should  be
    adjourned for a  resumed  hearing  on  the  next  available  date  when
    Professor Whittal would be available.

Resumed Hearing

15. The basis of this hearing is the findings of fact made by Judge Hindson
    at paragraph 27 of the determination, namely that the  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of India and a trans man and prior to leaving India  he  lived,
    with difficulty, as a woman and suffered discrimination as a result  of
    being perceived as different. It was also accepted that  the  Appellant
    had been in a secret relationship, but  if  there  was  risk  from  the
    family of his former girlfriend, that risk was highly speculative,  and
    he could avoid it by relocating within India.  The issue which  has  to
    be decided today is whether the Appellant would suffer persecution as a
    trans man living in India..

16. I heard oral evidence from two witnesses, a friend of the Appellant, Ms
    Fishwick,  a  fellow  member  of  his  church  who  has   offered   him
    considerable support since  he  has  been  in  the  UK,  and  Professor
    Whittal.  She regards him as being particularly vulnerable due  to  his
    alcohol dependency and vulnerability to exploitation and  manipulation.
    He suffers from low mood and has had suicidal episodes.  He  finds  his
    gender transition painful and without the support networks  from  which
    he has benefit in the UK, his vulnerabilities would lead to destructive
    consequences.

17. There is also confirmation of Ms Fishwick's concerns in a  letter  from
    the lifeline project which provided support to persons  suffering  from
    alcoholism.

18. Ms Fishwick accepted that she had no specialist knowledge of  what  the
    Appellant would face on a return to India, but she considered  that  he
    would not be accepted as living as a man and she did not think that the
    churches there would offer him support.

Professor Whittal's Evidence

19. Professor Steven Whittal is an acknowledged  expert,  having  spent  35
    years providing support and advice to the transgender  and  transsexual
    community.  He is a female to male trans man,  having  transitioned  38
    years ago, and lists a number of countries for which  he  has  provided
    reports for Immigration Appeal Tribunals in the past, although India is
    not amongst them.  He knows Mr Neelam personally, having met  with  him
    regularly since early 2012. He is no doubt that he is a female to  male
    transsexual identified person.

20. Mrs Pettersen asked him to comment on the list of organisations set out
    in the reasons for refusal letter which the Respondent argues would  be
    in a position to offer support to the Appellant upon a return to India.
     Professor Whittal said that he was familiar with the organisations but
    they would not be able to support the Appellant because in general they
    offered support for lesbian women or aid support  for  male  to  female
    trans people, commonly known in India as hijra.  The only  organisation
    which might have been able to help seems to have folded in that it  did
    not respond to telephone  calls  or  emails.   Many  were  short-lived.
    Numerically people transitioning from female to  male  were  far  fewer
    than those transitioning from male to female.

21. There was a decision of the Delhi High Court in July 2009  ruling  that
    Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code can no longer  be  used  to  treat
    consensual homosexual conduct between adults  as  a  criminal  offence.
    Professor Whittal said that the decision was limited to  Delhi  but  in
    any event had resulted in retrograde activity by police against gay men
    who had targeted gay activities.  In his view India was very  poor  for
    transgender people.  The hijras were a close-knit community  who  lived
    and worked together, often trading as prostitutes.  So far as female to
    male transgender people were concerned, there was no support available.
     He agreed that it was possible to obtain  surgery  in  India  but  the
    quality was appalling.

22. Professor Whittal said that the law did not give legal  recognition  to
    trans men.  He accepted that it was now possible to register for voting
    as "transgender" but for the Appellant  to  obtain  work  or  obtain  a
    driving licence for example he would have to use his female birth name.
     The position was different in Uttar Pradesh where it was  possible  to
    obtain a driving licence as a transgender person and to register as  an
    electoral candidate  in  the  new  gender.   However,  if  he  went  to
    university the Appellant would have to register in his birth  name  and
    his work and tax records would all be as a female.   It  would  not  be
    possible for him to work without his employer knowing that he had  been
    born female.  The only way in which he could survive in his new  gender
    would be if he set up his own business  and  if  he  had  a  supportive
    family.

23. Professor Whittal said that men felt that they had a right  to  assault
    people seen as vulnerable and the Appellant could only survive in India
    if he went back to living as a woman.  New Delhi  was  no  better  than
    anywhere else and the churches would not offer any support.

24. It was put to him that the Appellant could wear gender neutral  clothes
    and indeed had  done  so  when  he  had  worked  as  a  social  worker.
    Professor Whittal  said  that  the  Appellant  would  not  wear  female
    underwear and it would be difficult to  get  down  the  street  without
    being assaulted.  Even  if  he  could  walk  down  the  street  looking
    masculine, the minute he applied for a job or rented a  flat  it  would
    have to be as a woman.

25. Professor Whittal emphasised the intensity  of  the  feelings  which  a
    person in the Appellant's  position  would  have  in  being  forced  to
    acknowledge his previously female gender.  It would not help  him  that
    he was able to register as a transgender  because  so  far  as  he  was
    concerned he wanted to spend his life as a man.  Although he  would  be
    able to describe himself as transgender legally, that would  be  of  no
    help to him.  Transgender is an umbrella  term  meaning  a  third  sex,
    neither sex, or both and so  far  as  the  Appellant  is  concerned  he
    regards himself as male.

Submissions

26. Mrs Pettersen submitted that Ms Fishwick was not an expert in the field
    and was not in a position to give evidence about what would  happen  to
    the Appellant on return.  She relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter.
     The Appellant came to the UK in 2009 as a student having worked  in  a
    number of professions in India and would be able to return.   Professor
    Whittal had made a number of assumptions about how he would behave, but
    the Appellant had managed to go to work in neutral clothing before  and
    there were legal provisions within India which would allow him to  live
    as the person that he was.  There was no objective evidence  that  this
    particular group were targeted.  Professor Whittal had not been able to
    give any concrete examples of prosecutions and  the  Appellant  himself
    had not been prosecuted in relation to his  "marriage"  to  his  former
    girlfriend.  He could return to India and be  self-employed  and  would
    not have to tell his co-workers of his history.

27. Ms Khan relied on the judge's previous findings of fact, in  particular
    that the Appellant had found it difficult to live as a woman  in  India
    before.  He had been born in the wrong body and he was no  longer  able
    to pretend.  The Appellant had not sought medical intervention  in  the
    UK because  he  had  not  been  able  to  access  treatment  since  his
    immigration status did not allow him to do so.  However, his  intention
    was to complete his MBA and when he had done so to work and to pay  for
    treatment here.

28. Although the asylum claim had not been made until  June  2011,  he  had
    sought advice earlier and the  medical  report  from  the  psychiatrist
    dated 27th June 2011 was prepared for the basis  of  seeking  treatment
    rather than in relation to an asylum claim.  The psychiatrist's opinion
    was that the Appellant met the diagnostic criteria for female  to  male
    transsexualism and that he required  and  would  benefit  from  further
    treatment of his gender condition in terms of access  to  masculinising
    hormones and, as appropriate, surgery.  He  did  not  believe  that  Mr
    Neelam could live as a female in India and would be both  eligible  and
    appropriate for referral to the gender identity clinic at Charing Cross
    Hospital.

29. She asked me to accept Professor Whittal's evidence. He had a wealth of
    experience of transgender issues. She also relied on the country expert
    report of Mayur Suresh who concluded that the  Appellant  would  be  at
    significant risk  on  return  and  accepted  that  there  had  been  an
    expansion of spaces for the gay  male  community  but  there  were  few
    spaces for transgender persons, especially female to male.   If he  was
    faced with physical violence he would not be protected  by  the  police
    who would be likely to harass him or inflict further violence upon him.
     He would not be entitled to recognition as a male and, except for  the
    purposes of voting and accessing limited services available,  would  be
    forced to register himself as  female  in  order  to  gain  employment,
    operate a bank account, register for further education etc.   He  could
    not live as Sameer Neelam if he revealed his  gender  history  and  his
    problems would persist irrespective of his place of residence.

30. Ms Khan submitted that it would not assist the Appellant to be regarded
    as transgender since so far as he  was  concerned  he  was  male.   His
    gender was fundamental to him and it  was  now  essential  for  him  to
    assert his male identity.  She relied on the decision in HJ (Iran).  It
    was not open to the Tribunal to find that the Appellant could avoid his
    problems by passing himself off as a woman.

Findings and Conclusions

31. The psychiatrist referred to there being no  history  of  suicide  risk
    either within the family and indeed said that Mr Neelam has no  history
    of deliberate self-harm or overdose. The Appellant's  case  is  however
    that he could not live as female and if forcibly  returned  would  face
    serious risk of injury and perhaps even death.

32. The Appellant left India on 27th February 2009 to come  to  the  UK  to
    study.  Ms Khan said that his intention was to get  his  MBA  and  then
    work and pay for private medical treatment.  This is supported  by  the
    fact that he applied for further leave to remain as a student  on  28th
    July 2010 and made no application for  asylum.   Indeed  the  Appellant
    returned to India six or seven times during the currency of his student
    visa.

33. It is not being argued on his behalf that he had a fear of  persecution
    on arrival nor indeed on any of his voluntary returns to India when  he
    was studying.  It is said that he has changed whilst being  in  the  UK
    such that he can no longer face his previous life of living as a  woman
    or being regarded as transgender.

34. Professor Whittal gave powerful evidence of how it feels to be  trapped
    in the wrong body.  There is no doubt in my mind  that,  for  Professor
    Whittal, his knowledge that he  ought  to  have  been  born  a  man  is
    absolutely fundamental to who he is.

35. There is no reason at all to doubt that the Appellant has had a  strong
    sense of masculinity since childhood. However, in his case, I conclude,
    for the following reasons, that his sense of self is different to  that
    of Professor Whittal.

36. When he originally  wrote  to  the  Home  Office  enquiring  about  the
    possibility of an asylum claim the Appellant stated:

         "My name  is  Vijusha  Neelam,  I  am  a  transgender,  staying  in
         Birmingham UK on a student visa.  I learned  that  you  would  help
         people like me in trying for asylum seeking in UK.  I would like to
         come for a meeting on May 5th 2011 at London.  I  am  not  choosing
         April month meeting because I have MBA final semester exams."

37. Additionally, there is a letter in the bundle papers which he  produced
    from the CGS Witness Care Unit dated 24th October 2011 addressed to him
    as Ms Neelam at a women's hostel where he was  then  living.   Ms  Khan
    submitted that it is no answer to the Appellant's claim that he is able
    to use the term transgender in India because he does not see himself as
    transgender but as male.  However over two years after the  Appellant's
    arrival in the UK, he was describing himself in his female name.

38. This is not someone whose drive towards transitioning  from  female  to
    male was so strong that he could not bear to live in  his  female  body
    because he continued to use his female name and to describe himself  as
    transgender some two years after his arrival in the UK.

39. There is a spectrum in all  these  matters,  and  some  people  on  the
    spectrum feel the need for gender realignment as utterly  core  to  who
    they are.   Others  would  find  themselves  more  comfortable  without
    surgery providing they were able to wear clothing with which they  felt
    comfortable. Mr Neelam is  a  highly  intelligent  man  with  financial
    resources.  He had the money to be able to pay for an  MBA.  One  would
    have expected him to have used his resources to pay  for  surgery.  His
    case that there has been such a significant shift in his feelings about
    who he is since he came to the UK is not borne out by the facts.

40. This is not a person who had a fear of persecution on arrival,  nor  at
    any time prior to making the application for  asylum.   He  voluntarily
    returned to India on a number of occasions. Mr Suresh's report that the
    Appellant would be at risk of torture and abuse is  undermined  by  the
    Appellant's return to India on seven occasions within the  currency  of
    his student visa.

41. For him it would not be unduly harsh to relocate to  a  city  in  India
    where there are other transgender individuals.  Revealing that  he  was
    born female would not cause  him  unreasonable  difficulty  because  he
    continued to refer to himself as female for two to  three  years  after
    his arrival in the UK in his dealings with the authorities here.  While
    for Professor Whittal it would be unbearable to reveal his birth gender
    for the purposes of employment, for the  Appellant  it  would  not.  He
    could return to a region of India such as Delhi or Uttar Pradesh, if he
    did not want to go back to his home area.  He  clearly  does  not  fear
    acts of violence by the population generally, and must have  some  kind
    of support network  in order for him  to  have  returned  for  numerous
    visits, either family or friends.  I do not accept that  there  are  no
    institutions which would be able to assist.  Whilst it may well be that
    the numbers of people transitioning  from  female  to  male  is  small,
    nevertheless it is clear that there is a large measure of  support  for
    gays, lesbians, bisexuals and transsexuals  more  generally  in  India,
    particularly in the bigger cities.  Some elements of the  church  would
    no doubt disapprove of the Appellant, but there will be others who  are
    more supportive.

42. The Appellant has not identified anyone who would specifically wish  to
    do him harm save possibly for his former girlfriend's family,  but  the
    evidence of their interest in him is slight and the appeal was not  put
    on the basis that he would be at risk of persecution  throughout  India
    at their hands.

43. The Appellant is clearly very vulnerable, suffering  as  he  does  from
    alcohol addiction, and he has clearly made good and supportive  friends
    particularly in the church here. This is not to minimise  his  distress
    and his clear wish to remain in the UK where he has been given kind and
    generous support from his local church.  However, that is not  a  basis
    for a grant of status in the UK.  He has to establish a  real  risk  of
    serious harm, which he has not done.

Decision

The original judge's decision is set aside and is remade  as  follows.   The
claimant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

