
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02260/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 13 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                GODSON IWUJI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Ms R Read, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The  appellant,  a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against a decision by the respondent of 9 January 2015 to refuse
   his application for asylum. Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  N  M  Paul
   dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals with permission  to  this
   Tribunal.

2. In summary the background to this appeal is that the appellant claims  to
   have arrived in the UK in 2004 and claimed asylum following his arrest in
   December 2012. He claims that  he  was  arrested  twice  in  Nigeria  for
   political offences  in  relation  to  his  involvement  with  the  Biafra
   separatist movement. He claims to have been involved  with  a  number  of
   organisations in Nigeria and that he was shot at a demonstration in March
   2004. He says that he came to the UK in 2004 to compile  a  report  about
   the treatment  of  those  supporting  the  Biafran  cause  and  to  raise
   awareness internationally. He claims that the report was shared with  the
   Good Shepherd Movement (GSM), with whom he had become affiliated  in  the
   UK, and that his former colleagues at the Movement for  Actualisation  of
   Sovereign State of Biafra (MASSOB) were angry about this. He claims  that
   the report was shared with the British Government and that this puts  him
   at risk in Nigeria. The appellant  claims  to  have  continued  with  his
   political activities in the UK.

3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant  and
   a witness who says he is a senior figure within the GSM. The Judge  found
   that the appellant had not given a credible or reliable account and  that
   the background evidence is 'all (to some extent) historic' [47]. And that
   the activities being undertaken by the 'multiplicity of organisations' to
   which the appellant and his witness refer is 'of  marginal  relevance  to
   the current political situation in Nigeria' [49].

4. In the grounds of appeal and in her oral  submissions  Ms  Read  contends
   that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to consider the  oral
   evidence of the witness and the statements and letters of support  before
   him.  Ms Read highlighted the supporting statements  in  the  appellant's
   bundle and the  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  State  from  the  Biafran
   Messianic Defense Force which, she said, supported the  appellant's  case
   but which were not considered by  the  Judge.  She  submitted  that  this
   evidence contradicts the Judge's finding that  the  appellant's  evidence
   given by the appellant was in 'a  complete  vacuum  in  relation  to  the
   alleged threats that had been made to him by the organisation in Nigeria'
   [43]. It is contended that the Judge failed to make findings  as  to  the
   appellant's account of his involvement with the Biafran cause in  Nigeria
   and in particular his claim that he was shot or as  to  the  authorities'
   knowledge of the appellant.  It is contended  that  the  Judge  erred  in
   asserting that the evidence of the appellant's witness was 'vague and  in
   the most general terms' given the record  of  the  appellant's  witness's
   oral evidence in the determination. Ms Read submitted that the  appellant
   and his witness did give detailed evidence and that the Judge  failed  to
   say why the evidence was not accepted.

5. Mr Staunton submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out  all  of
   the evidence before him on the day of the hearing at paragraphs 13-25  of
   the determination. He submitted that it is therefore clear that the Judge
   was mindful of  this  evidence.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge  clearly
   considered  the  evidence  before  him  in  paragraphs   47-49   of   the
   determination.

6. Mr Staunton submitted that the Judge made findings on  the  core  of  the
   appellant's claim at paragraphs 43 and 44.  At  paragraph  43  the  Judge
   found that the appellant had not provided  any  evidence  of  the  actual
   disclosure of the report said to  have  been  submitted  to  the  British
   government or any evidence that the government had disclosed  the  report
   to the Nigerian authorities. The Judge noted that there was no supporting
   evidence from any of the people who were apparently part of the group who
   came to the UK in 2004 and Mr Staunton submitted  that  this  too  was  a
   finding in relation to the core of the appellant's  claim.  He  submitted
   that given these findings the contention that the Judge failed to  engage
   with the background evidence falls away.

7. However, although the Judge identified the issues at  the  heart  of  the
   appellant's claim and purported to deal with them, I  am  satisfied  that
   the Judge was wrong to say that the appellant's evidence in  relation  to
   the report was given in a 'complete vacuum'. There was other evidence  as
   to the report and the appellant's  role  from  the  witness  and  in  the
   letters of support in the appellant's bundle. It was, of course, open  to
   the Judge to reject the other evidence in  relation  to  his  matter  but
   instead of engaging with it he concluded that  the  appellant's  evidence
   was given in a 'vacuum'.

8.  Ms  Read  contended  that,  in  finding  that  there  are   no   ongoing
   difficulties in Nigeria for those supporting the Biafran cause, the Judge
   failed to engage with the extensive background evidence  before  him.  Ms
   Read submitted that the Judge failed  to  consider  this  evidence  which
   dates from 2012, 2013 and 2014.

9. I find that the Judge's findings in relation  to  the  appellant's  claim
   are tainted by  his  assessment  of  the  background  evidence  as  being
   'historic' and of 'marginal relevance to the current political  situation
   in Nigeria'. I find that the  Judge's  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
   credibility were made in the light of his assessment that the  oppression
   of pro-Biafran groups is historic. There was  a  considerable  amount  of
   recent evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  I  accept  Mr
   Staunton's submission that, if the appellant was not found to be credible
   in his own account, the Judge did not need to engage with the  background
   evidence. However the Judge  did  consider  the  background  evidence  at
   paragraph 47 before  concluding  that  the  appellant  has  not  given  a
   credible or reliable account. It is therefore clear that the  Judge  took
   into account his inaccurate assessment of the background evidence  before
   reaching a final conclusion as to the  appellant's  credibility.  I  find
   that this was a material error.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  a  material  error  in  failing  to
   adequately engage with the evidence and in failing to  give  reasons  for
   not considering all of the evidence  before  him.  For  that  reason  the
   findings of the First-tier Tribunal are unsustainable and I set aside the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

11. In light of the issues with the Judge's findings  I  am  satisfied  that
   none of the findings can stand. I am satisfied that the appellant has not
   therefore had his case properly considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   The parties were in agreement that, if I  decided  to  set  the  decision
   aside, the nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
   necessary in order for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  (having
   regard to the overriding objective  in  Rule  2  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
   Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed      Date: 11 November 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

