
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02236/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 4th November 2015             |On the 23rd November 2015             |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                 MR YU GUAN
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: No Legal Representative present
For the Respondent: Mr Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole promulgated  on  the  14th  July  2015,
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
       to refuse his application for asylum or humanitarian protection.

    2. The Appellant sought to appeal that decision to the  Upper  Tribunal.
       Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox  on
       the 7th August 2015 who found that  all  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
       listed within the Grounds of Appeal were arguable  and  that  it  was
       arguable that the Judge failed to have proper regard  to  aspects  of
       the evidence and submissions and failed to give adequate or  rational
       reasons for a number of findings, in particular  on  account  of  the
       Appellant's age and ability and that there were concerns  as  to  the
       proper interpretation in any event.

    3. No one attended at the appeal on behalf of the Appellant. However,  a
       letter had been received by the Upper Tribunal on 26th October  2015,
       sent by Messrs Devonshires dated the 23rd October 2015  stating  that
       the Solicitors Regulation Authority  had  intervened  in  respect  of
       Messrs Blavo & Co Solicitors  on  the  14th  October  2015  and  that
       therefore as at that date the legal  practice  of  Blavo  &  Co,  the
       Appellant's representatives, ceased to  exist.  It  was  stated  that
       Devonshires Solicitors had been appointed as Intervention  Agents  by
       the SRA, but had not been instructed to act on behalf of any  of  the
       former clients of Blavo &  Co.  They  had  only  been  authorised  to
       respond to the notice of hearing that had been sent out on  the  16th
       October 2015 listing the appeal before the Upper Tribunal at  2  p.m.
       on Wednesday 4th November 2015 at Field House, 15  Breams  Buildings,
       London EC4A 1DZ. This letter suggested that  the  Tribunal  contacted
       the Appellant directly in  relation  to  the  matter.  There  was  no
       evidence of the Tribunal  having  contacted  the  Appellant  directly
       following receipt of this letter.

    4. Mr Walker acting  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  properly
       conceded that in light of this letter it appeared that  there  was  a
       good explanation as to why no representative had appeared  on  behalf
       of the Appellant. The notice of hearing had been sent to Blavo  &  Co
       on the 16th October 2015, after the date of the intervention, so that
       there was a good explanation for the failure of anyone to  attend  on
       behalf of the Appellant.

    5. However, although Mr Walker conceded that ordinarily this  in  itself
       would be a sufficient ground  for  simply  adjourning  the  case,  Mr
       Walker on behalf of the Respondent conceded that in fact the original
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole  did  contain  a
       material error  of  law  in  respect  of  his  consideration  of  the
       submissions and analysis of the evidence regarding problems with  the
       interpreter at the asylum interview. Mr  Walker  conceded  that  when
       reading the asylum interview, it appeared as though  the  interpreter
       was  speaking  pigeon  English   or   possibly   giving   a   literal
       interpretation of every  word  into  English,  but  that  there  were
       problems with interpretation at  the  interview,  such  that  it  was
       recorded on the asylum interview by  the  interviewing  officer  that
       several of the questions had to be re-asked for the  benefit  of  the
       interpreter, and as was stated at question 108 some of the words  the
       Appellant did not understand. I also noted that it was also  apparent
       having considered the answer at question 188 that it was stated  that
       "the question about logo and Jesus, not sure that words used lead  to
       proper understanding".

    6. Mr Walker also properly conceded that within  the  comments  sent  by
       Messrs Blavo & Co following the  substantive  interview  on  the  9th
       December 2014 regarding the Appellant's  comments  about  the  asylum
       interview which was sent on the 15th December 2014, that it had  been
       stated within those comments that "It was raised during the interview
       that even though our client understood the  Home  Office  interpreter
       (interpreters number 7024) it was  pointed  out  that  she  struggled
       translating some words from Mandarin into English. We have  suggested
       that the interview should stop and be  rescheduled  for  another  day
       with  a  different  interpreter.  However,  the  Immigration  Officer
       suggested we carry on and she would  make  her  questions  easier  to
       understand", such that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  rejection  of
       the further submissions at [14]on the basis that  they  substantially
       rewrote the interview when the proper course would have been to raise
       concerns at the interview, was clearly wrong. I further  accept  that
       as  was  conceded  by  Mr  Walker  there  was  a  problem  with   the
       interpretation at the interview, given that rather than simply trying
       to rewrite the interview as was asserted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Wellesley-Cole, the Appellant's comments upon interview were  in  the
       majority complaints that the interpreter  had  misunderstood  or  not
       properly interpreted what he had said.

    7. However,  given  the  concession  by  Mr  Walker  on  behalf  of  the
       Respondent that there was a material error in the way that the First-
       tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the question of interpretation and his
       failure to take account of what appeared to be  substantial  problems
       with interpretation during the actual interview itself,  does  amount
       to a material error of law, I do find that there was a material error
       of law in respect of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole finding
       that the interview could be relied upon as an accurate account of his
       fear of persecution. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred  in  not
       properly   considerating   the   concerns   raised   regarding    the
       interpreter's  ability  to   translate   into   and   from   English.
       Interpretation is a two-way street. Not  only  does  it  involve  the
       Appellant's ability to understand what the interpreter is  saying  in
       Mandarin, it also  involve  the  interpreter's  ability  to  properly
       understand the questions that are put to  them  in  English  and  the
       interpreter's ability  to  translate  the  Appellant's  answers  from
       Mandarin into English. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has not properly
       taken that into  account  and  the  submissions  made  regarding  the
       problems the interpreter  had  with  English,  when  formulating  his
       decision.

    8. I agree with Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State, that this
       was a material error of law in that it clearly influenced the Judge's
       findings in respect of the Appellant's case on credibility.  In  such
       circumstances,  even  though  no  one  appeared  on  behalf  of   the
       Appellant, given the intervention by the SRA into Blavo & Co, as  the
       Respondent does not seek to challenge  the  appeal  and  agrees  that
       there was a material error of law such that the  decision  should  be
       set aside, I do set aside the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Wellesley-Cole.

    9. Given that the error of law in this  case  does  go  to  the  Judge's
       assessment of credibility in respect of the whole of the  Appellant's
       account, it is appropriate for the case to be remitted  back  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal for rehearing, as otherwise  the  Upper  Tribunal
       would have to effectively rehear the entirety of the asylum claim and
       make  fresh  findings  in  respect  of  credibility.  The  matter  is
       therefore to be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
       reheard by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wellesley-
       Cole.

   10.  Clearly,  given  the  contents  of  the  letter   from   Devonshires
       Solicitors, the Appellant may wish to obtain new representation prior
       to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, given that Blavo &  Co
       have seemingly ceased to exist. However, that is  a  matter  for  the
       Appellant, but  he  should  not  simply  presume  that  his  previous
       solicitors will represent him at the new hearing  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal, given the intervention by  the  Solicitors  Regulation
       Authority and the contents of the letter from Devonshires Solicitors.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  does  contain  a
material error of law and is set aside;

The matter is to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  reheard
by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any order in respect of  anonymity,  no
such order was sought before me. No such order is made.


Signed      Dated 4th November 2015
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
