
[pic]




UPPER TRIBUNAL

IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. AA/02961/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Centre City Tower,         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|Birmingham                           |                                      |
|On: 16 June 2016                     |On: 01 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                                     IMB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms  Rutherford,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Wimbledon
Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 8  June  2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Balloch which allowed the  asylum  and  human
    rights appeals of IMB.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to IMB from  the  contents  of  her  protection
    claim.

 3. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to IMB as the appellant, reflecting their  positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone and was born in 1994. She is
    now 22 years' old. Her brief immigration history is that  she  remained
    in Sierra Leone in  2005  with  her  paternal  grandmother  whilst  her
    parents came to the UK to study. She came here on a  visit  visa  in  8
    March 2008 and was then granted leave  as  a  dependent  child  of  her
    parents. When the family's application for further  leave  was  refused
    and dismissed by Immigration Judge Nightingale in a decision  dated  22
    March 2011, the family made an  asylum  claim  which  was  refused  and
    dismissed by Immigration Judge Pedro in a decision  dated  15  December
    2011. A further application for leave outside the Immigration Rules was
    refused in 2012.

 5. The appellant then made applications in her own right in 2013 and  2014
    for leave on the basis of human rights and  family  and  private  life,
    both being refused. She claimed asylum in her own right  on  26  August
    2014. The refusal on 6 February 2015 led to these proceedings.

 6. The appellant's asylum claim is based  on  a  risk  of  female  genital
    mutilation (FGM). Her parents did not want her to undergo the procedure
    but the remainder  of  her  family  did,  in  particular  her  paternal
    grandmother and a paternal aunt. It was not disputed that she  has  not
    been forced to undergo this procedure although her mother had.

 7. When allowing the protection claim, Judge Balloch  made  the  following
    findings at [103] and [105]:

      a. The appellant was not  from  the  Mende  tribe,  FGM  being  highly
         prevalent amongst members of that tribe

      b. The appellant was not at risk of FGM from close family  members  in
         Sierra Leone

      c. The high level of FGM shown in the country evidence was  sufficient
         to show a real risk on return

 8. The respondent maintained that the finding of a general risk of FGM was
    not lawful. The First-tier Tribunal had not indicated why this would be
    so given that it had not been made out that the appellant was from  the
    Mende tribe and that her family members would not attempt to force  her
    to undergo FGM. The country guidance case of FB (Lone  women  -  PSG  -
    internal relocation - AA (Uganda) considered) Sierra Leone [2008] UKAIT
    00090 had been before the First-tier Tribunal and stated at [4] of  the
    head note on the issue of avoiding the threat of FGM that:

         "There is a significant migration to Freetown from rural areas. For
         migrants to Freetown, those with  the  ability  to  access  support
         would face no risk.  Such support mechanisms might  include  family
         or other connections"

 9. Mr Mills submitted for the respondent that nothing in the  more  recent
    material allowed the judge to go  beyond  what  was  said  in  FB,  the
    country expert report here being found to carry little weight  and  the
    NGO reports relied upon by the appellant showing some progress,  albeit
    only a little.

10. In addition, the FTTJ proceeded on the materially mistaken  basis  that
    the appellant would have to return alone  when  there  was  nothing  to
    prevent her family returning with her as none of them had any status in
    the UK. The First-tier Tribunal had, in fact, found that to  be  so  at
    [113] when considering Article 8 ECHR but had failed  to  approach  the
    asylum assessment on that basis.

11. For the appellant, Ms Rutherford relied on material in the  appellant's
    bundle of country evidence, maintaining that it contained material that
    allowed the First-tier Tribunal to  reach  the  finding  it  did  on  a
    general risk of FGM to a lone young woman.

12. My conclusion was  that  the  respondent's  challenge  had  merit.  The
    finding that the appellant would be at risk was made on the basis  that
    she would be returning alone when this was not correct and was material
    to the finding that the appellant would face FGM on return.

13. The respondent was also correct in maintaining  that  the  new  country
    evidence did not take the case beyond the guidance in FB which had  not
    found a general risk of FGM to all women or even to young single women.
    The "28 Too Many" report from June  2014  at  [8]  of  the  appellant's
    bundle, for example, in the executive summary showed that the situation
    was a little better, certainly not worse, than  when  FB  was  decided,
    with the risk of coming down from 2008 and being lower (80%)  in  urban
    areas.

14. The Article 8 appeal was allowed as the First-tier  Tribunal  found  at
    [121] and [122] that:

         "121. ... It may therefore be very difficult for the  Appellant  to
         engage  in  a  relationship/s,  marriage,  to  contemplate   having
         children or even to have real friendships with other women, without
         first undergoing FGM.

         122. It may be difficult for her  establish  and  maintain  herself
         independently, given the general  inferior  position  of  women  in
         Sierra Leone,  which  is  recognised  in  case  law  including  FB,
         particularly if she does not adhere to the norm of undergoing FGM."

15. This assessment is flawed, in my judgement, for a  number  of  reasons.
    The First-tier Tribunal indicated at [85] and [86] that  little  weight
    attracted to the report of Ms  Monekosso  yet,  without  distinguishing
    these earlier comments appears to  attach  significant  weight  to  the
    description in the report at page 16 concerning difficulty in  marrying
    or having children if someone has not undergone FGM.

16.  Further,  notwithstanding  the  comment  at  [113]  about  the  family
    returning with the appellant,  this  does  not  appear  to  feature  in
    substance in the consideration at [121] and [122]. She  can  expect  to
    return with her parents, both strongly opposed to FGM, who  could  play
    in her life and assisting her to  function  in  society  if  there  was
    hostility or discrimination. The finding  at  [122]  also  ignores  the
    material fact of all members of the family being educated and how  this
    would appear to  place  them  at  an  advantage  economically  and  the
    appellant being less  likely  to  be  unable  to  maintain  herself  or
    disadvantaged on return because of the "general  inferior  position  of
    women in Sierra Leone".

17. There are additional errors in failing to conduct the  Article  8  ECHR
    assessment without any reference to the provisions of  the  Immigration
    Rules, here paragraph 276ADE (vi) and the "very  significant  obstacles
    to reintegration" test. At [120] the  First-tier  Tribunal  appears  to
    place weight  on  the  private  life  established  in  the  UK  without
    substantively  applying  s.117B  (4)  and  (5)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  little  weight  attracting  to  the
    appellant's private life here as she has been in the UK precariously or
    unlawfully at all times. The decision also does  not  show  how  little
    weight attracting  to  any  private  life  established  in  the  UK  is
    sufficient to outweigh the mandatory consideration of  "maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest" in line  with
    subsection 117B (1).

18. I proceeded to re-make the appeal after hearing  submissions  from  the
    parties. The content of the discussion above concerning the  errors  of
    law in the decision set out the salient features here which  mean  that
    the appellant cannot show that she is a refugee or qualifies for  leave
    under Article 8 ECHR.

19. The country evidence does not support a general risk  of  FGM  for  all
    young single women. In addition, this appellant is not someone who  has
    to return alone, as her parents can accompany her and there  are  other
    family members in Sierra Leone who have not been found to wish to force
    her to undergo FGM. A real risk of FGM on return has not been shown.

20. The appellant must show "very significant obstacles  to  reintegration"
    if she is to succeed on private  life  grounds  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. She has lived in Sierra Leone most of her life.  As  above,  she
    can return to Sierra Leone with her immediate family. She has  retained
    other links there; see the undisturbed  finding  of  Judge  Balloch  at
    [118]. When considered against the country evidence, her profile is not
    sufficient to show a risk of FGM. It is  not  sufficient,  if  she  has
    family and friends  around  her,  to  show  discrimination  as  regards
    marriage, having children or in other areas of her  life  amounting  to
    "very significant obstacles". The  assessment  under  paragraph  276ADE
    (vi) takes into account the factors  the  appellant  relies  upon,  any
    consideration outside the Immigration Rules being  additionally  unable
    to succeed because of the provision of s.117B (4) and (5) as to  little
    weight attracting to her private life. The Article 8  ECHR  claim  must
    also be dismissed.





DECISION

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside to be re-made.

22. I re-make the appeal as dismissed on all grounds.


Signed: [pic]    Date: 28 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
