
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02425/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th March 2015                          |On 23rd April 2015                |
|                                           |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                    MS XL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Rutherford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's representative has requested anonymity in  this  appeal
    in view of the appellant's mental illness.  On that basis, and  without
    objection from the respondent, I make the following direction:

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 3. On 12th June 2014 Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  R  C
    Campbell gave permission to the respondent only to appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Tully  in  which  she
    dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds but allowed it  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds against the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse
    asylum and humanitarian protection to the appellant, an  adult  citizen
    of China. The appellant was, nevertheless, granted discretionary  leave
    by the respondent to 27  September  2016  and  so  appeal  rights  were
    restricted  by  operation  of  Section  83(2)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The appellant renewed her application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal but this was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kebede  on
    7th July 2014 on the basis that the appellant's application amounted to
    no more than a disagreement with the judge's adverse findings  of  fact
    in relation to the asylum element of the appeal.

 5. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal  before  me  I  heard  submissions
    relating to the claimed error on  a  point  of  law  and  then,  having
    concluded that the decision contains such an error,  proceeded  to  re-
    make the decision hearing further submissions from the parties.

 6. The appellant was not present for reasons said to  be  associated  with
    her mental condition which had also led to her not being present at the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Neither representative objected
    to the matter proceeding in her absence.

Error on a Point of Law

 7. The grounds of application by the respondent  contend  that  the  judge
    wrongly  conflated  a  potential  breach  of  Articles  3  and  8  with
    humanitarian protection grounds on the basis that the  appellant  would
    not receive the care required to protect  her  from  self  harm  which,
    following the decisions in Pretty [2002] 35 EHRR 1 and N (Kenya) [2004]
    UKIAT 00053 would potentially breach Article 3.  It is argued that self-
    inflicted harm does not come within the confines of "serious  harm"  as
    set out in  paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Humanitarian
    protection does not extend to protecting  an  individual  against  harm
    they may do to themselves. It is contended that the appropriate  avenue
    for such protection is to be found in Articles 3 and 8 neither of which
    are arguable in this case where the appellant has leave to remain until
    September 2016.

 8. Mr Harrison confirmed that the respondent relied upon the grounds which
    I have summarised  He argued that the  appellant  was  someone  with  a
    medical condition and so did not come within  the  meaning  of  serious
    harm in paragraph 339C of the Rules or Article 15 of the  Qualification
    Directive.

 9. Ms Rutherford relied upon her skeleton  argument.   She  also  conceded
    that there was no case law, as  yet,  to  cover  the  position  of  any
    overlap between humanitarian  protection  and  a  human  rights  claim.
    Further, she conceded, along with Mr Harrison, that there could  be  no
    consideration of the appellant's human rights at this stage because  of
    the operation of Section 83(2) and also because the appellant is not at
    risk of removal until 2016.  The skeleton emphasises that the appellant
    suffers from psychotic illness which makes her vulnerable  if  returned
    to China where, because of failures in state  care,  she  would  be  at
    acute risk of relapse and would be unable to  look  after  herself  and
    extremely vulnerable to exploitation.  On this basis there is the  real
    risk that the appellant will face serious harm of the kind  defined  in
    Article 15 of the Qualification Directive which is quoted as follows:

         "Serious harm consists of:

          a) death penalty or execution; or

          b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of  an
             applicant in the country of origin; or

          c) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person
             by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in   situations   of
             international or internal armed conflict."

10. Ms Rutherford relies upon the definition in  paragraph  15(b)  covering
    "torture or inhuman or degrading treatment ...".  She further  contends
    that, as Article 3 of the ECHR covers that kind  of  ill-treatment  and
    because, in Pretty, the risk of suicide and self harm was  said  to  be
    covered by Article 3, it follows that Article 15(b) covers suicide  and
    self harm.  She further argues that the  Qualification  Directive  does
    not limit the application of Article 15 to serious harm caused by state
    actors because Article 6 of the Directive  allows  for  such  non-state
    actors if it can be shown that the state  is  unable  or  unwilling  to
    provide protection.  On this basis she contends that  the  state  would
    not protect the appellant from becoming acutely ill.

Conclusions

11.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  provisions  of  Article  15  of  the
    Qualification Directive (which is incorporated into paragraph  339C  of
    the Immigration Rules) can offer protection to an individual who is not
    a refugee who may  suffer  a  reduction  in  the  standard  of  medical
    treatment available to her  if  returned  to  China  with  a  psychotic
    illness.

12. Ms Rutherford raises the argument that,  because,  in  Pretty,  it  was
    decided that risk of suicide and self harm can be covered by Article  3
    of the ECHR which prohibits torture, inhuman and degrading treatment it
    follows that such serious harm must also be covered by  Article  15(b).
    However, the decision in Pretty predates  the  Qualification  Directive
    (2004/83/EC of 29th April 2004) by almost two years and there has  been
    no subsequent decision or rule change  to  harmonise  the  decision  in
    Pretty with that Directive.  Further, it is important to note that  the
    sad circumstances of the Pretty case related to someone who was seeking
    the right to end their life to avoid suffering yet the ECHR found there
    was no violation of Article 3 of the Convention where a State  did  not
    permit aided suicide.  This has to be  contrasted  with  the  situation
    envisaged in  Article  15(b)  which  requires  torture  or  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment of an applicant  in  the  country  of
    origin.  This does not, in  my  view,  encompass  the  consequences  of
    inferior medical treatment for mental illness which the appellant might
    face on return to  China.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  such  inferior
    treatment can be categorised as "inhuman or degrading treatment" on the
    basis of the objective material which was examined  by  the  First-tier
    Judge from paragraph 28 of her decision.  Certainly, the  appellant  is
    not an activist or petitioner who would be committed to  a  psychiatric
    hospital or involuntary treatment as some of the report suggests.

13.  Although the  First-tier  judge's  motive  for  trying  to  bring  the
    appellant's state of  health  within  the  Qualification  Directive  is
    understandable, she was, in effect, trying to deal with the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds which was not permissible  by  virtue  of  Section
    83(2) of the 2002  Act  as  clearly  explained  in  reported  decisions
    particularly JC(Ethiopia) [2005] UKIAT 00030.

14. I therefore conclude that the judge erred in bringing  the  appellant's
    mental illness within the humanitarian  protection  provisions  of  the
    Qualification  Directive  when  this  is  a  matter  which  should   be
    considered as part of a human rights claim which  cannot,  as  yet,  be
    brought in this appeal as the appellant has leave to remain until 2016.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the asylum  appeal  shall
stand.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal on  humanitarian
protection grounds shows an  error  on  a  point  of  law.   I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing the appeal on that basis.








Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


