
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02959/2013
                                                               AA/02957/2013
                                                               AA/02958/2013
                                                               AA/02960/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Date Sent                    |
|on 5 November 2013                            |On 8 November 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          I Y H + wife + 2 children
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1)  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Iraq.    They   appeal   against   a
   determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie, promulgated on 13 May
   2013, dismissing their appeals on all available grounds.


2) The First-tier Tribunal determination refers to the  first  appellant  as
   "the appellant".  That was followed in  submissions  before  me,  and  is
   generally adopted in this determination.

3) The second appellant came to the UK under Tier  1  of  the  Points  Based
   System (PBS).

4) The appellant says that a friend introduced him to the leader  of  Asa'ib
   Ahl Al-Haq ("AAA-Haq") with a view to recruiting him as a  candidate  for
   that party, which was turning from  terrorism  to  electoral  aims.   The
   appellant is  apolitical,  and  refused.   On  26  January  2013  he  was
   kidnapped, held overnight and beaten.  His kidnappers told him that  they
   would have killed him but for his connection to his  friend  in  AAA-Haq.
   The appellant concluded that his kidnappers were members of AAA-Haq.   He
   reported the matter to the  police  but  there  was  no  outcome  to  his
   complaint.  He entered the UK on 1 February 2013 as a  dependant  partner
   on  his  wife's  visa,  and  sought  asylum  shortly   thereafter.    His
   credibility was not significantly doubted  by  the  respondent,  and  was
   accepted by the judge.

5) In his determination the judge said:

    21. The main thrust of the refusal letter relates to  such  matters  as
    sufficiency  of  protection,  internal  relocation   and   humanitarian
    protection.


    22. ... Although there is a large section  in  the  refusal  letter  on
    humanitarian protection, the appellant's representative indicated  that
    he was not making a claim in connection with humanitarian protection so
    I will take this matter no further.


6) The judge found against the appellants on both sufficiency of  protection
   and internal relocation.

7) These are the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

   1.   The first two appellants are Iraqi Pharmacists.  The other  two  are
      their children.  The first appellant stated pharmacists are viewed  as
      doctors in Iraq.  There was no contradiction of that evidence.


   2.    In AA (Petitioner) [2011] CSOH 120 it was successfully argued  that
      in light of the evidence contained in HM and  Others  (Article  16(c))
      Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC) and other materials within the knowledge
      of the Secretary of State that doctors  and  some  other  professional
      groups in Iraq were targeted groups who could meet the 15(c)  test  in
      the qualification directive.  That argument was made in the context of
      a Judicial Review relating to a decision of the Secretary of State  on
      an Immigration Rule 353 application.

   3.   That case was reclaimed by the Secretary of  State  but  as  HM  was
      replaced by HM2 the  matter  was  remitted  to  the  Outer  House  for
      reconsideration of the factual material.  The Secretary of State  then
      granted Leave to Remain to the  Petitioner  and  the  matter  did  not
      proceed to a hearing.

   4.   The appeal before the Immigration Judge  proceeded  upon  the  basis
      that there serious and individual  threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
      person  by  reason  of  discriminate   violence   in   situations   of
      international or internal armed conflict.

   5.   In such a situation logically  the  Immigration  Judge  required  to
      consider also whether there was a serious and individual threat  to  a
      civilian's life or person by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
      situations of international or internal armed conflict.

   6.   The Immigration Judge addressed the general position  regarding  the
      sufficiency of protection and internal flight and concluded those were
      available.  At no point  does  the  Immigration  Judge  refer  to  the
      particular dangers faced by medical and other professionals.

   7.   In HM2 at paragraph 57 when considering the 2009 UNHCR Guidelines it
      is said:

      "As  to  (1),  UNHCR  considered  that  for  international  protection
      purposes 'favourable consideration' should be given to persons in  the
      following categories: Iraqis  affiliated  with  political  parties  in
      power struggles; government officials  and  other  persons  associated
      with the current Iraqi  government,  administration  or  institutions;
      Iraqis (perceived to be) opposing armed groups or political  factions;
      Iraqis affiliated with the MNF-1  or  foreign  companies;  members  of
      religious and ethnic  minorities;  certain  professionals  (academics,
      judges, doctors); journalists and media workers; UN and  NGO  workers,
      human rights activists; homosexuals; women and children with  specific
      profiles.  It was made clear that the above list was not  intended  to
      be exhaustive."


   8.  At paragraph 138 it is said:


      There appears to be  a  trend  towards  increasing  targets  of  Iraqi
      security forces and government employees, although  the  UNAMI  Report
      for the January to December 2010 period makes clear that  in  addition
      to public officials, persons  whose  jobs  are  clearly  civilian,  eg
      community and religious leaders, journalists,  medical  and  education
      professionals, were the main targets.  The UN SIGIR  Report  dated  26
      November 2010 states that with United States forces being  less  of  a
      target "armed opposition groups have changed tactics, relying more  on
      a long-range weapons that target indiscriminately.  It is  also  clear
      that the means and methods used in a number of attacks - Vehicle Borne
      IEDs and Small Arms Fire are frequently carried out in  public  spaces
      heedless of the toll on civilian lives ...".


   9.    In the current COI Report at paragraph 8.43 it is  said  "  -  When
      asked about  threats  against  persons  of  certain  professions,  eg,
      judges, doctors, or journalists the international NGO  explained  that
      such a person is better protected in case of threats if he or  she  is
      linked to a tribe or political network ...".


  10.    At 13:35 it is said:

           A more recent report by  the  Washington  Post  entitled  Tribal
           lawsuits,  'fake  sheiks'  threaten  Iraqi  doctors   had   been
           subjected to extortion and threats, under Tribunal  justice,  by
           families and tribal sheiks.  According to the source:  -  ...  a
           more recent development was a  growth  persons  claiming  to  be
           sheiks and exploiting the lack of a rule of law  for  their  own
           benefits: by threats and  the  extortion  of  money.   As  noted
           further: ... They are opportunists, like bullies, said Ali Abbas
           Anbori, a Baghdad doctor who advocates for health care and legal
           reform.  It's all about what kind of force does this person have
           it has nothing to do with malpractice.  If  the  doctor  doesn't
           pay,  they  may  threaten  his  life,  his  family,  kidnap  his
           children." ...  Officials  at  several  Baghdad  hospitals  said
           tribal threats are so pervasive that many  doctors  are  leaving
           the country as they did during the war.


  11.    At 28.05 it is said "In 2008, it was reported that as a  result  of
      the conflict  2,200  doctors  and  nurses  had  been  killed  and  240
      kidnapped since 2003 and that many had also been threatened  by  armed
      groups and forced to leave their jobs."


  12.    At 28.10 is a table showing the reduction in number of  doctors  in
      Iraq and the percentage murdered.  No information is provided  on  the
      number injured.

  13.    At paragraph 29.10 it is said:

           The UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International
           Protection Needs of  Iraqi  Asylum  Seekers  (UNHCR  Guidelines)
           dated April 2009 explained that the number of doctors  kidnapped
           and/or killed since 2003 was into the thousands  and  went  onto
           note that : - Many more have left their jobs or fled the country
           altogether.  Some doctors in Baghdad have  been  virtually  shut
           out from their clinics as they are  locate  in  a  neighbourhood
           that is under control of another sect.  Those that  continue  to
           work in places like Baghdad, speak of conditions  comparable  to
           house arrest as they often live on hospital premises.

  14.    This material  is  relevant  in  two  separate  ways.   Firstly  in
      relation to the appellants' claim to fear discriminate violence it  is
      relevant to his claim that in his  situation  there  would  not  be  a
      sufficiency of protection or an internal flight option.   That  was  a
      relevant matter left out of account.


  15.    Secondly under the sliding scale set out in Elgataji  at  paragraph
      39, HM2 and the respondent's own country of origin information  report
      the Immigration Judge failed to have regard to HM2 and failed to  have
      regard to that in the context of Article 15(c) (whether  or  not  that
      was argued).  Medical professionals are at the  top  of  that  sliding
      scale.  In so failing the Immigration Judge erred in law.

8) "HM2" is a reference to HM and Others Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC).

9) On 26 July 2013 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  granted  permission  to
   appeal, saying this:

    The grounds assert that the judge erred in placing insufficient  weight
    on the fact that the principal appellant was a medical professional and
    that had  implications  when  considering  the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection.  While that is a  somewhat  odd  assertion  given  what  is
    recorded in the determination at paragraph 22 ... it is arguable ...


10) Mr Caskie acknowledged that paragraph 22  of  the  determination  is  an
   accurate record of the case put to the First-tier Tribunal.  However,  he
   said that it was incumbent on a judge in  a  case  concerning  a  medical
   professional to consider Article 15(c) protection even if  expressly  not
   argued.  If what the judge said at paragraph 51 was traced  back  in  the
   determination through paragraphs  46,  45,  44,  39  and  36  it  becomes
   apparent that the judge had to resolve the case on the basis  of  general
   risk to medical and similar professionals.  HM2 was before the First-tier
   Tribunal, as part of the respondent's  bundle.   The  judge  should  have
   addressed the protection and internal relocation issues in the context of
   the appellant's employment  history,  as  accepted  at  paragraph  36  in
   opening his findings.  As HM2 was before the judge, therefore there  were
   also before him the 2009 UNHCR  guidelines,  quoted  in  the  grounds  of
   appeal at paragraph 7, taken from paragraph 57 of HM2.  Further  relevant
   background was in the Country of Origin Information Report, as set out at
   paragraphs 7-12 of the grounds. HM2 was recently upheld in the  Court  of
   Appeal.  The assessment in HM2 by the Upper Tribunal was reached one year
   ago.  It is generally well known  that  the  situation  has  deteriorated
   significantly in Iraq since then. HM1, paragraphs 253 and 255,  tabulates
   civilian casualties in Iraq to 2009.  Paragraph 255 suggests that a level
   of 24,000 civilian deaths per year, as was the case in the peak  year  of
   2006, was likely to have  established  general  risk.   By  the  time  of
   decision the level was around 4,500, which was insufficient.  If error of
   law were to be found and the present decision remade, the appellant would
   seek the admission of further evidence.  One item  would  be  an  article
   from www.iraqbodycount.org giving a figure of 7,000  fatalities  for  the
   year to 28 October 2013, extrapolating to a rate of 8,400 a year.   On  a
   broad numbers approach this case  therefore  required  an  assessment  of
   where the level of indiscriminate violence falls for purposes of  Article
   15(c).  On the sliding scale described in Elgafaji medical  professionals
   fell near the top.  There needed to be a specific evaluation of the  risk
   applying to the appellant and his wife as  potential  targets.   Although
   the essence of the case as now put was specifically not advanced  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal, the judge granting permission must  have  considered
   it to be a potentially obvious point.  The determination  was  inadequate
   in respect of Article 15(c) in a case where the appellants  fell  at  the
   top end of the targeted group and so the decision  ought  to  be  remade.
   That should be at a further adjourned  hearing,  with  the  admission  of
   further evidence.  The case might be apt for country guidance on an issue
   of general importance.

11) Mr Mullen said that the  refusal  letter  rejected  any  case  based  on
   indiscriminate violence, and the respondent placed HM2 before the  judge.
   With these matters in plain view, the judge was entitled to  assume  that
   if the appellant expressly did not advance that case it  was  because  it
   was judged to be one which could not succeed.  The  country  guidance  in
   HM1 and HM2  was  not  to  the  effect  that  doctors  or  other  medical
   professionals, without more, are at  risk  and  qualify  for  protection.
   Although  information  regarding  doctors  was  contained  within   UNHCR
   guidelines  quoted  in  those  cases,  doctors  were   not   specifically
   identified within any of the Upper Tribunal's conclusions.  Doctors might
   be a relevant category, to the extent of being more likely to be at risk,
   but their cases needed individual assessment, and their occupation itself
   did not amount to risk in terms of Article  15(c).   The  judge  accepted
   that the appellant had been kidnapped, but found that not any more likely
   to re-occur in his case than to anyone  else.   There  was  no  objective
   evidence referred to support such a case  for  the  appellant.   Even  if
   there is a higher "body count" in Iraq this year, approaching 7,000, that
   did not suggest on previous authority that it was likely to be held  that
   there is a general risk to all civilians in Iraq so  as  to  qualify  for
   international protection, nor  such  risk  for  members  of  the  medical
   profession.  There was no error  of  law  and  the  determination  should
   stand.  If further evidence  and  a  developing  situation  provided  the
   appellant with any case, his course was to make a further claim in  terms
   of paragraph 353 of the Rules.

12) Mr Caskie in  reply  said  that  HM1  was  overturned  on  a  matter  of
   procedure and not on  the  facts.   Except  on  a  minor  aspect,  of  no
   importance to the present case, HM1 and HM2 reach the  same  conclusions,
   despite changing facts on the ground.   AA,  referred  to  at  Ground  2,
   established that doctors and other medical professionals might  meet  the
   Article 15(c) test.  The Presenting Officer was "not inevitably wrong  in
   submitting that to be an Iraqi doctor  is  not  enough",  but  there  was
   enough substance in the case for the appellant to succeed.  Mr Caskie had
   invited the respondent's representative to point to any consideration  in
   the determination of the situation of medical professionals as  a  group,
   and no such reference could be found.  Given the  changing  situation  in
   Iraq, the case merited further consideration.

13) I reserved my determination.

14) Neither party referred to any authority on when it is  an  error  for  a
   judge not to discern a case which is not made by a party.

15) The Court of Appeal's observations in  Robinson  [1997]  EWCA  Civ  3090
   were as follows:

      Because the rules place an onus on  the  asylum-seeker  to  state  his
      grounds of appeal, we consider that it would be wrong to say that mere
      arguability should be the criterion to be applied  for  the  grant  of
      leave  in  such  circumstances.  A  higher  hurdle  is  required.  The
      appellate  authorities  should  of  course  focus  primarily  on   the
      arguments adduced before them, whether these are to be  found  in  the
      oral argument before  the  special  adjudicator  or,  so  far  as  the
      Tribunal is concerned, in the written grounds of appeal on which leave
      to appeal is sought. They are not required to engage in a  search  for
      new points. If there  is  readily  discernible  an  obvious  point  of
      Convention law which favours the applicant although he has  not  taken
      it, then the special adjudicator should apply it in his favour, but he
      should feel under no obligation to prolong the hearing by  asking  the
      parties for submissions on points which they have not taken but  which
      could be properly categorised  as  merely  "arguable"  as  opposed  to
      "obvious".  Similarly,  if  when  the  Tribunal  reads   the   Special
      Adjudicator's decision there is an obvious  point  of  Convention  law
      favourable to the asylum-seeker which does not appear in the decision,
      it should grant leave to appeal. If it does not do so, there will be a
      danger that this country will be in breach of  its  obligations  under
      the Convention. When we refer to an obvious  point  we  mean  a  point
      which has a strong prospect of success if it is argued.  Nothing  less
      will do. It follows that leave to  apply  for  judicial  review  of  a
      refusal by the Tribunal to grant leave to appeal should be granted  if
      the judge is of the opinion that it is properly arguable that a  point
      not raised in the Grounds of Appeal  to  the  Tribunal  had  a  strong
      prospect of success if leave to appeal were to be granted.

16) Mr Caskie mentioned that the solicitor for the appellant was making  his
   first appearance in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Nevertheless,  where  a
   representative does not  simply  fail  to  mention  a  possible  line  of
   argument but expressly does not rely on it, a judge is entitled to assume
   that is based on consideration of the proper strength of the  case.   The
   duty on a judge to pursue the matter must be less than  where  there  has
   been an oversight.

17) The line of argument for the appellant based only  on  his  professional
   status as a pharmacist is stateable.  To find it without  guidance  among
   the hundreds of pages put before the First-tier  Tribunal  would  not  be
   quite like searching for a needle in a haystack, but it is not blindingly
   obvious.  It requires some ingenuity, is rather novel in its  generality,
   and might well be resolved  eventually  against  the  appellant.   It  is
   conceivable that it might have been considered by  a  representative  but
   eventually not advanced.  It does not  carry  such  strong  prospects  of
   success that the FtT judge should have called for submissions or examined
   the materials so as to identify it himself.


18) Any case such as now suggested is for the appellant to  raise  with  the
   respondent under paragraph 353 of the Immigration  Rules.   It  does  not
   disclose error of law by the First-tier Tribunal, and  its  determination
   shall stand.

19) An anonymity order remains in place.

                               [pic]
                                7 November 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
