
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02454/2015
                                                               AA/02449/2015
                                                               AA/02455/2015
                                                               AA/02456/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 September 2016                         |On 13 October 2016            |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HA
                                     WN
                                     DA
                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. R. Halim, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 28 April 2016, the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 11 May 2015  was  set  aside  to  be
    remade.




 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the Respondent, and to HA, WN, DA and SA as the Appellants,  reflecting
    their position as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. There is an anonymity direction in place, which I have continued.

The hearing


 4. I heard oral evidence from the first and second Appellants.  The second
    Appellant was assisted by the interpreter, Ms A. Elshami, who confirmed
    before proceeding that they both fully  understood  each  other.   Both
    representatives made oral submissions.


 5. I have taken into account the documents in the Respondent's bundle, the
    Appellants' bundle (to Tab D, page 314), the  expert  report  dated  16
    September 2016, the letter from the third Appellant's school, documents
    provided by the  first  Appellant  at  the  hearing,  and  Mr.  Halim's
    skeleton argument.


 6. Ms Isherwood provided a copy of the Country  Information  and  Guidance
    Iraq: Return/Internal relocation, August 2016, the Country  Information
    and Guidance Iraq: Security situation in the "contested" areas,  August
    2016,  and  the  Country  Information  and  Guidance  Iraq:   Religious
    minorities, August 2016.


 7. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I set out  below
    with reasons.


Preliminary issue


 8. In  the  error  of  law  decision  the  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellants' previous residence in Sulymaniyah were preserved.   It  was
    submitted by Mr. Halim that evidence before the First-tier Tribunal had
    not been  taken  into  account,  and  additionally  there  was  further
    evidence, which had not been  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    showed that the Appellants were living in Sinjar  province  during  the
    material period.  I was referred to paragraph 10(ii)  of  the  skeleton
    argument.  There was also evidence  relating  to  the  use  of  agents'
    addresses for the  purposes  of  the  first  Appellant's  student  visa
    application.


 9. Given that there was now evidence before me  that  the  Appellants  had
    been resident in Sinjar, I stated that I would reopen  this  issue  and
    that the findings in relation to the Appellants' previous residence  in
    Sulymaniyah would not be preserved.  Ms Isherwood  confirmed  that  she
    was content with this, and would address this issue in her submissions.


10. It was agreed that the sole issue before me was whether or not  it  was
    reasonable for the Appellants  to  return  to  the  Kurdistan  Regional
    Government area (the "KRG").


Findings and reasons


11. I found the Appellants to be honest and credible witnesses who answered
    all questions put to them and were not evasive.  Both  Appellants  were
    cross examined at some length, in particular the first Appellant, and I
    found the core of their evidence to be consistent with each  other  and
    to be consistent with the documentary evidence.  I did not  find  there
    to be any inconsistencies of any significance which went either to  the
    core of the evidence, or to the issue before me, namely  reasonableness
    of return to the KRG.  Neither had the Respondent  suggested  prior  to
    the remaking hearing that the Appellants were not credible.


12. In particular, I did not  find  there  was  any  inconsistency  in  the
    evidence regarding the language spoken by third Appellant.   The  first
    Appellant said that she spoke very  little  Kurmanji,  and  the  second
    Appellant said that she herself spoke Kurmanji at home.   There  is  no
    inherent inconsistency here and, in any event, the language  spoken  in
    the KRG is not Kurmanji, but Sorani.


13. I found the evidence regarding the contact that the first Appellant had
    had with  his  friend  in  Iraq  to  be  consistent.   In  his  witness
    statement, paragraph 7, he said that he had  called  his  friend,  with
    whom he had had contact sometime previously when "he had called me from
    Iraq" (B2).  This was consistent with his evidence at the hearing  that
    his friend had first called him asking him about life outside Iraq, and
    that the Appellant had later called him when he was  seeking  a  letter
    confirming his residence in  Sinjar.   I  found  his  evidence  at  the
    hearing to be  consistent  with  the  evidence  given  in  his  witness
    statement.


14. Ms Isherwood suggested that it was implausible  the  first  Appellant's
    sister had been able to call the first Appellant  after  she  had  been
    "captured" by Daesh.  However, it is more accurate to  say  that  Daesh
    had taken control of the area, rather than that she had been "captured,
    and I find it is plausible that she had her brother's telephone number,
    given that he had left for the United Kingdom to study,  and  therefore
    in no rush.  It is understandable that she would have  wanted  to  call
    her brother to tell him what had happened to the family.


15. Taking all of the Appellant's evidence into account, I find that  there
    were no inconsistencies of any significance between the evidence  given
    at the hearing and the evidence in the witness statements.  I find that
    I can rely on the evidence of the Appellants.


Previous place of residence


16. It is the Appellants' evidence that they never lived in Sulymaniyah but
    that they only lived in Sinjar.  It was due to the address given on the
    visa application form for the first Appellant, and the  fact  that  the
    third  Appellant  had  been  born  in  the  KRG,  that  the  Respondent
    considered that the Appellants had lived in Sulymaniyah prior to coming
    to the United Kingdom.


17. In support of their claim to have lived in Sinjar and not  Sulymaniyah,
    the Appellants provided the first Appellant's membership card  for  the
    "Lalish Cultural & Social Center", Shingal  branch  issued  on  12  May
    2007, expiry 12 May 2009,  and  a  membership  card  for  the  "Shingal
    Cultural And Social  Center"  dated  1  June  2005  (B17  -B18).   They
    provided a power of attorney given  by  the  first  Appellant's  father
    dated 5 July 2009, allowing him to access his father's bank account  in
    Sinjar (B12-B14).


18. The Appellant also  provided  a  letter  from  the  Nineveh  Provincial
    Council dated 10 May  2016  (B19-B21).   This  stated  that  the  first
    Appellant was born in the Sinjar area and was resident there until  the
    beginning of 2011.  This letter was examined by Mr. Sheri Laizer in his
    expert report.  At paragraph 1(xvi) he sets out his qualifications  and
    expertise in undertaking authentication of documents, and on pages  10-
    12 gives his opinion on the document.  He concludes that the  documents
    is  genuine  because  of   its   "physical   appearance,   professional
    presentation, language and non-self-serving brevity".  He  states  that
    the logo is correct and that the document shows signs  of  having  been
    handled.


19. I find  that  Mr.  Laizer  has  experience  in  the  authentication  of
    documents.  I find that he has  carefully  examined  the  document  and
    given reasons for his findings.  I find that his evidence can be relied
    on.  I find on the balance  of  probabilities  that  this  document  is
    genuine and corroborates the  Appellants'  claim  that  they  lived  in
    Sinjar until they came to the United Kingdom.


20. I was also referred to evidence which had been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the form of the Appellants' food ration card (C5-C6).  This
    indicated that in 2014/2015 the  first  Appellant  was  issued  with  a
    ration card to be used at the supply centre in Sinjar.


21. The second Appellant gave evidence in her witness  statement  regarding
    the birth of the  third  Appellant  [5]  and  [6].   She  was  born  in
    Sulymaniyah owing to the fact that she was in the breach position.  She
    gave evidence that they stayed for only one day and  then  returned  to
    Sinjar.  At the hearing the first Appellant said that they had  had  to
    go to the KRG for the birth of the third  Appellant  as  there  was  no
    maternity hospital in Sinjar, only a small clinic which could not  cope
    with a breach birth.  He gave evidence that they had paid for this care
    in a private hospital.  The following day,  as  they  did  not  have  a
    sponsor, they had had to leave the KRG.


22. I found the evidence of the Appellants to be consistent.  I find on the
    balance of probabilities that the third Appellant was born in the  KRG,
    and that the Appellants stayed there for only one night,  returning  to
    Sinjar on the following day.


23. It is the first Appellant's evidence that he used an agent when  making
    his  student  visa  application  which  is  why  the  address  on   his
    application form was  in  Sulymaniyah.   At  the  hearing  he  provided
    evidence relating to an application that  he  had  made  to  Nottingham
    University at the same time as he had applied  to  Harper  Adams.   The
    letter was addressed to the Appellant "next to Khabat News Paper, 40  M
    Street, Ronaki  District,  Erbil"  (C22).   The  Appellant  provided  a
    printout from  the  Nottingham  University  website  showing  that  the
    university's overseas representative in Iraq is  the  Lano  Center  for
    Educational Studies.  While the Nottingham University website  did  not
    give an address for the Lano Center, the  Appellant  provided  evidence
    that this agency is used by other universities for  example,  Sheffield
    Hallam and South Wales, and their websites give  the  address  for  the
    Lano Center as  "Next  to  Khabat  News  Paper,  40  M  Street,  Ronaki
    District, Erbil".  I find on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    Appellant was not living at the address given on the  letter  addressed
    to him from Nottingham University but that this was the address  of  an
    agent.  I find that this corroborates the Appellant's  claim  that  the
    address on the visa application form was the address of  the  agent  he
    used to make the application to Harper Adams.  I find  that  the  first
    Appellant  was  not  living  at  the  address  he  gave  to  Nottingham
    University and I find on the balance of probabilities that he  was  not
    living at the address used  in  association  with  his  application  to
    Harper Adams.


24. As stated above, I found the Appellants to be  credible  witnesses.   I
    found the evidence regarding the third Appellant's  birth  in  the  KRG
    credible.  I find that the evidence of the Appellants  is  corroborated
    by the documentary evidence provided, in particular the letter from the
    Nineveh Provincial Council, on which I can rely.  I find that there was
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of the Appellants' residence in
    Sinjar in the form of the ration  card.   I  find  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellants did not live  in  the  KRG  prior  to
    coming to United Kingdom, but that they lived in Sinjar province.


Sponsorship by the KRG


25. It is the first Appellant's  evidence  that,  while  he  was  initially
    sponsored by the KRG, this sponsorship was withdrawn.  I  was  referred
    to evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal consisting of  two
    lists entitled  "the  final  list  of  candidates  for  human  capacity
    programme for studying PhD in agriculture field" (C7-C10).   The  first
    is dated 2010, and indicates that the first Appellant  is  an  accepted
    candidate.  The second is dated  2011  and  indicates  that  the  first
    Appellant is an unacceptable candidate.  It states "after checking  the
    results Hadi's name has been deleted from  the  list  of  accepted  and
    another name has been added because Hadi's  score  was  less  than  the
    other."


26. The first Appellant gave evidence that he was given a support letter by
    the KRG which was sent with his application,  but  that  after  he  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom his support  letter  was  cancelled.   He
    provided his bank statements as evidence that he did  not  receive  any
    money from the KRG (C11 to C27).  These bank statements do not have any
    transfers from the KRG.  However the Appellant said at the hearing that
    he had another bank statement, which evidence he had  provided  to  his
    representatives, but which was not before me.


27. However, notwithstanding the failure to  provide  statements  for  both
    accounts, I found the first Appellant to be a credible  witness  and  I
    find, taking into account the evidence of the first Appellant  and  the
    corroborative  evidence,  that  he  did  not   receive   the   promised
    sponsorship from the KRG, but that his father paid for his studies.


28. I find therefore that the Appellants have never lived in the  KRG,  and
    that the first Appellant's sponsorship by the KRG was withdrawn so that
    he has not had any financial support  from  the  KRG.   The  Respondent
    accepted in the reasons for refusal letter  that  the  Appellants  were
    Yazidis, and that they were born in Nineveh.  I  therefore  find  that,
    were the Appellants to be returned to  the  KRG,  it  would  not  be  a
    situation  where  they  were  returning  to  a  place  where  they  had
    previously lived, and where they had contacts and support.   They  have
    no familial support.  I therefore find that they would be in  the  same
    situation as any other internally  displaced  persons  ("IDP")  of  the
    Yazidi  religion  relocating  to  the  KRG.   It  is  accepted  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellants cannot be returned to any other area  in
    Iraq.


Reasonableness of returning the Appellants to the KRG


29. I  was  referred  to  the  UNHCR  report  entitled  "Relevant  COI  for
    Assessments on the Availability of an  Internal  Flight  or  Relocation
    Alternative (IFA/IRA) for Yazidis in the Kurdistan region of Iraq  (KR-
    I)". This states:

         "In light of massive new internal displacement coupled with a large-
         scale humanitarian crisis, mounting sectarian tensions and reported
         access restriction, particularly into the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
         UNHCR does in principle not consider it appropriate for  States  to
         deny persons from Iraq international protection on the basis of the
         applicability of an internal  flight  or  relocation  alternative."
         (D242)

30. I have taken into account all of this report, and I do  not  intend  to
    set it out in full here.  In relation to the  position  of  Yazidis  it
    states:

         "Where an IFA to the KR-I is proposed  for  Yazidi  applicants,  it
         should be noted that the majority of Yazidis present  in  the  KR-I
         find themselves in a situation of internal displacement,  in  often
         precarious living conditions and  with  no  or  limited  access  to
         livelihood opportunities." (D243-D244)

31. In relation to the problems of shelter in the KRG it states:

         "Pressure on the existing housing market is high,  and  rents  have
         increased in light of heightened demand.  IDPs are reported  to  be
         forced to move between districts and shelters in search of  cheaper
         housing.  Furthermore, available housing  often  does  not  provide
         adequate living conditions, as many  are  unfurnished,  dilapidated
         and overcrowded. Many IDPs have been displaced for over a year  and
         their coping capacity is reportedly  diminishing.   Many  IDPs  are
         thus increasingly unable to pay the increasing rents, putting  them
         at risk of eviction  and  renewed  displacement.  IDPs  who  cannot
         afford rent are seeking shelter in camps, however  many  camps  are
         full and there are waiting lists to move into camps." (D244)


         "Furthermore, close to 109,000  IDPs  are  recorded  as  living  in
         critical  shelter  arrangements  such  as   informal   settlements,
         religious buildings, schools and unfinished or abandoned buildings.
          Those living in critical shelter arrangements are  often  deprived
         of access to adequate water, electricity and sanitation.  The  lack
         of adequate shelter has reportedly led to  loss  of  lives  due  to
         adverse weather conditions." (D244)

32. In relation to food security it states:

         "More than 765,000 persons in KR-I are estimated  to  require  food
         assistance;  however,  the  Public  Distribution  System  (PDS)  is
         reportedly not fully functioning and many IDP  families  reportedly
         do  not  have  access  to  their  food  rations  in  the  place  of
         displacement.  Recent cutbacks in food  vouchers  are  expected  to
         further worsen food insecurity." (D245)

33. I have also taken into account the  Country  Information  and  Guidance
    Iraq: Return/Internal relocation, August 2016.  At paragraph 2.2.12  it
    states:

         "It is unlikely that non-Kurds from outside of the KRI will be able
         to relocate there. The UT held that: '...we do not  consider  that,
         as a general matter, relocation to the IKR  [for  non-Kurds]  is  a
         reasonable proposition. The risk of being turned away at the  point
         of entry is significant,  unless  a  person  has  connections  with
         people in the IKR' (paragraph 172)."

34. I have found that the Appellants do not have any connections  with  the
    KRG, and so I find that the Respondent's own  guidance,  following  the
    country guidance from the Upper Tribunal, indicates that relocation  to
    the KRG for the Appellants would not be reasonable.


35. I have also considered the evidence in the bundle referred  to  in  the
    skeleton argument at paragraph 17, which  largely  predates  the  UNHCR
    report.  This  includes  evidence  from  the  US  Department  of  State
    entitled "2014 country reports on human rights practices; Iraq 24  June
    2015" referring to the harsh living conditions faced  by  IDPs  in  the
    KRG.  It includes evidence of the "spread of transferable diseases  and
    infestation" in the camps where Yazidis are living (D118).  It includes
    evidence of the overcrowding in the KRG and the pressure on  resources,
    including education (D192).


36. I have also considered the expert report.  This was not referred to  in
    submissions by Mr. Halim,  given  his  reliance  on  the  UNHCR  report
    referred to above.  I have considered the experience and  expertise  of
    Mr. Laizer, and I find that his evidence can be relied on.   He  quotes
    from the ACAPS (Assessment Capacities Project) report from August 2016,
    which states that "the KRG has said that it will  not  allow  any  more
    IDPs  to  enter  its  cities,  instead   containing   newly   displaced
    populations at camps along its borders."


37. I place considerable weight on the evidence from the  UNHCR,  which  is
    clear that it does not consider  it  appropriate  for  states  to  deny
    protection to individuals from  Iraq  on  the  grounds  that  they  can
    relocate to the KRG.  The UNHCR evidence of the situation in the KRG is
    consistent with the other background evidence  provided  which  details
    the ongoing and worsening problems in the KRG.   The  Respondent's  own
    guidance issued in August 2016 accepts that relocation to  the  KRG  is
    unlikely to be  reasonable.    I  have  also  taken  into  account  the
    evidence of Mr. Laizer.


38. I find that the first and second Appellants  would  be  returning  with
    their three young children, the third Appellant who is eight years old,
    the fourth Appellant who is three years old, and their son, born  since
    the asylum claim was made, who is two  years  old.   I  find  that  the
    Appellants would be unable  to  support  themselves,  with  limited  or
    uncertain access to  permanent  shelter  and  food,  as  shown  by  the
    evidence referred to above.  I find, taking into  account  all  of  the
    evidence, and placing considerable weight on the evidence of the UNHCR,
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the Appellants to relocate to
    the KRG, and that it would be unduly harsh to expect them to do so.


39. I therefore find that the Appellants have demonstrated that they are in
    need of international protection, and so their claims succeed on asylum
    grounds.


Notice of Decision

The appeals are allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


