
[pic]
IAC-fH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02142/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th July 2015                    |On 10th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     M U
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Albania  born  on  5th  May  1991.   She
    appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie
    dismissing her appeal against the refusal to vary leave  under  Section
    83 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  on  asylum
    grounds.

2.   The grounds in  essence  argue  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons, failed to apply country guidance and failed  to  take
    into account the background material.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    on 3rd June 2015 on the ground that at paragraph 12 of the decision the
    judge found that the Appellant was of Gorani ethnicity and that she had
    been raped.  However, he then did not go on  to  make  findings  as  to
    whether or not the Appellant would be at  risk  on  return  because  of
    these facts and as a member of a particular social group.

4.   First-tier Judge Andrew was further satisfied that the judge had  given
    inadequate reasons for his findings at paragraph 11 of the decision and
    therefore the grounds disclosed an arguable error of law.

5.   In the Rule 24 response, the  Respondent  stated  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself  appropriately  and  comprehensively
    referred to AM and BM (Trafficked women)  Albania  CG  [2010]  UKUT  80
    (IAC) at paragraph 10 of the decision. At paragraph 11 the judge gave a
    plethora of reasons why the Appellant lacked credibility including  the
    provenance of the money used to travel to Europe and the UK.  The judge
    found that the Appellant struggled with her  explanation  and  details.
    In respect of the rape the judge found that the Appellant would not  be
    at risk given she  remained  in  Albania  for  three  years  after  the
    incident.

Submissions

6.   Mr Howard, for the Appellant, relied on his  grounds  and  stated  that
    they were essentially three challenges  to  the  determination,  namely
    that there was a total  lack  of  reasons,  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the risk on return in accordance with the country guidance and
    the background material and, thirdly, he failed to consider the risk on
    return as a lone woman  with  a  child  including  the  risk  of  being
    trafficked.

7.   Mr Howard submitted that there were insufficient reasons  at  paragraph
    11 to support the judge's conclusions.  The judge did not refer to  any
    of the inconsistencies or the explanations given by the  Appellant  nor
    did he state why he had rejected them.  In any event,  the  Appellant's
    evidence was clear and detailed and  not  vague  as  suggested  by  the
    judge.  There was a total lack of reasoning in paragraphs 12 and 13  of
    the decision.

8.   The Appellant was a lone  woman  of  Gorani  ethnicity  with  a  child.
    There were no findings on sufficiency  of  protection  or  whether  the
    Appellant as a member of a particular social group would be at risk  on
    return. There were no reasons to support the finding that the Appellant
    was not exposed to a real  risk  of  harm  from  her  family  or  other
    persons.

9.   The judge had failed to look at the enhanced risk factors  set  out  in
    the country guidance. Essentially the judge had failed to apply AM  and
    BM, the country guidance, to the facts of the Appellant's case and  had
    failed to consider the fact that the Appellant was  in  fear  of  being
    trafficked on return.  The  judge  had  also  failed  to  consider  the
    background material,  which  showed  extensive  discrimination  of  the
    Gorani community. Accordingly, the Appellant's evidence that she  would
    be vulnerable to exploitation was not taken into account in  accordance
    with Presidential Guidance.

10.  For the Respondent, Mr Clarke submitted  that  there  was  no  material
    error of law.  The judge had given clear reasons and set out  the  oral
    and documentary evidence in the decision. In relation to  each  of  the
    points in paragraph 11 (i) to (v), challenged in the grounds of appeal,
    Mr Clarke made the following comments. The judge had given reasons  for
    why the Appellant had difficulty in explaining the source of the  funds
    she had to use to travel to  the  UK.   The  Appellant  was  unable  to
    confirm how much money she had stolen, how she had stolen  it  and  how
    she was able to survive from July 2012 to 2013.  The  judge's  findings
    were open to him taking into account the Appellant's  evidence  in  the
    witness statement at paragraph  13  and  in  her  asylum  interview  at
    questions 110 and 111.  The judge had accordingly given proper  reasons
    for why he did not accept the Appellant's evidence of the source of her
    funds.

11.  In relation to paragraph 11(ii), the judge's reason for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's evidence was that the whole purpose of  her  story  was  to
    disguise a pre-arranged journey to the UK.  The  reason  given  by  the
    judge was that the Appellant  had  failed  to  answer  questions  which
    naturally arose from her evidence or her answers were not satisfactory.
    Accordingly, the judge had considered all the evidence and was entitled
    to find that it was lacking in detail.

12.  The judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  whether  her
    parents and family knew of her relationship with her partner  contained
    material inconsistencies which were put to her in cross-examination and
    which she had failed to explain satisfactorily.  It was clear that  the
    judge had relied on the oral evidence and the inconsistencies  set  out
    at paragraph 11 of the decision and there was no need to duplicate  his
    reasons at paragraph 11.

13.  The Appellant had failed to rebut the allegation in the refusal  letter
    that she had failed to provide evidence of how she met her partner  and
    there was no corroborating evidence before the judge.  Her  answers  in
    her interview when asked to provide details of those who had  undergone
    forced marriages were incoherent. It is clear when reading questions 35
    and 36 together that the Appellant was being asked to identify those in
    her family who had been forced into marriage. The Appellant's response,
    that many girls had been forced into marriage, was not specific and she
    had avoided answering the question. Accordingly the judge's  conclusion
    that the Appellant had failed to show that she was at risk of a  forced
    marriage was open to him because the Appellant was unable to give  such
    details in her interview.  It was equally open to him that she had pre-
    arranged her trip to the UK because her  evidence  on  this  point  was
    inconsistent and implausible.

14.  Therefore, if the judge did not accept that the Appellant was  at  risk
    of a forced marriage, she would not be at risk on return. There was  no
    reason why she could not return to her family.  The  incident  of  rape
    was not relevant because of the passage of time. The Appellant  had  no
    problems prior to  leaving  Albania.   The  judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for why the Appellant could return to her family  and  why  her
    claim was not credible.  The case had not been put on  the  basis  that
    the Appellant could not return  because  her  child  was  born  out  of
    wedlock but in any event this would not pose a risk of  persecution  on
    return given the judge's finding that the  Appellant  was  someone  who
    could return to her family.  She was not returning as a lone female who
    had been trafficked or who was at risk of being trafficked.

15.   Although  it  was  accepted  that  those  of  Gorani  ethnicity   were
    discriminated  against  the  background  evidence   did   not   support
    persecution of Gorani per se.  There was insufficient  evidence  before
    the judge to demonstrate that someone who returns to her Gorani  family
    would be at risk of harm.

16.  In response Mr Howard submitted that the Appellant had a low  level  of
    literacy, therefore it was not implausible that she did  not  know  the
    amount of money that she stole and she had explained in  her  statement
    at paragraph 12 why she had not told  her  partner  that  she  did  not
    intend to return to Albania. The judge had failed to make findings on a
    material fact, namely the consequences of having a child out of wedlock
    and how the Appellant would be able to return to her family.  There was
    a total lack of reasoning in the judge's decision. The Appellant was at
    enhanced risk and the judge had failed to apply paragraphs 158 and  159
    of AM and BM.  Since the Appellant was in fear of being trafficked  the
    same features would apply to her case.

17.  The particular features of the Appellant's  case  when  taken  together
    were not considered by the judge in their totality.  These  would  have
    established that the Appellant was at risk on return.

Discussion and Conclusions

18.  The Appellant claims that she is at risk on return:

    (i)  from attackers who raped her three years before she  came  to  the
    UK;

    (ii) from her parents, who had arranged a marriage for her; and

    (iii)    as a lone woman returning with a child out of wedlock who  was
    therefore vulnerable to trafficking.

19.  The judge found that the Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  from  her
    attackers on the basis that she had lived in her home  in  Albania  for
    three years after the rape without encountering the  men  who  attacked
    her. This finding was open to the judge on the evidence  and  therefore
    the Appellant would not be of adverse interest some five  years  later.
    The judge did not fail  to  apply  country  guidance  or  consider  the
    background material in respect of this finding.

20.  The judge found that the Appellant was not a credible witness  for  the
    reasons given at paragraph 11(i) to (v). He found that her account  was
    inconsistent, lacking in detail and not supported by evidence which she
    ought to have been able to produce  if  her  account  was  true.  These
    findings were open to the judge on the evidence before him and, reading
    the decision as a whole, he gave adequate reasons for his  conclusions.
    The judge was entitled to rely on the Appellant's answers in  interview
    and in oral evidence to support his reasoning.

21.  The judge found that the Appellant had come to the UK with her  partner
    and fabricated her asylum claim.  He  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim
    that she had fled an arranged marriage.  The Appellant could  therefore
    return to her family without risk of harm and/or trafficking.

22.  Having rejected the Appellant's claim the judge was  entitled  to  find
    that she could return to her family in Albania and therefore she  would
    not be returning as a lone female with a child.  There was  no  failure
    on the part of the judge to  apply  country  guidance  or  to  consider
    background material.  His finding that the Appellant would  not  be  at
    risk on return was open to him on the evidence.

23.  The Appellant had come to the UK with her partner and was  not  fleeing
    Albania as she claimed. Applying the country guidance and  taking  into
    account the background material, the Appellant would not be at risk  on
    return because she could return to her family. The  Appellant  had  not
    shown on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that she would not
    be able to return because she had a child out of wedlock.

24.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed. The decision promulgated on 11th May shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 31st July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 31st July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
