
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02427/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2014                           |On 15 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                MR SORAN ESSA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty (Counsel instructed by BHT Immigration
                    Legal Services)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Del Fabbro) in which he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds but allowed it on Article  8
    ECHR grounds.  The Decision was promulgated on 28 October 2014.

2.   For ease of reference I have referred  to  the  parties  following  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  proceedings.   However  the  appellant  and   the
    respondent have both applied in time for leave to appeal on  the  basis
    that there are arguable errors  of  law  and  both  have  been  granted
    permission.

3.   The appellant whose date of birth is  25  January  1989  and  he  is  a
    citizen of Iran.

Background

4.   The appellant claimed to have arrived in the UK in  February  2005  and
    first claimed asylum on 29 March 2005.  This was refused  on  28  April
    2005 and no appeal was lodged against the decision.  The appellant  was
    granted discretionary leave until 24  January  2007.   He  subsequently
    made an application for further leave on  12  January  2007  which  was
    withdrawn when he left the UK for Belgium  in  October  2012.   He  was
    returned to the UK from Belgium on 9 November 2012 when he made further
    submissions at port and cited the same reasons from his original asylum
    claim in 2005.  Further information was provided on 21 January 2013 and
    12 September 2013 which was subsequently considered by the  respondent.



5.   The Secretary of State in a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated  31  March
    2014 refused the appellant's claim for asylum.  The respondent did  not
    find the appellant's  account  of  persecution  to  be  credible.   The
    respondent considered  that  the  appellant  had  provided  no  further
    material evidence to add any weight to his original claim in 2005 which
    was refused.

6.   The respondent refused the claim with reference to the  Articles  2,  3
    and 8 ECHR.  With regard to Article 8 the respondent  applied  Appendix
    FM and Rule 276ADE which was refused.

7.   The appellant's claim was that  he  was  a  single  male  unaccompanied
    minor seeking asylum in the UK in 2005 when he was aged 14  years.   He
    claimed that he had been involved in illegal smuggling between the Iran
    and Iraq border.  His family were farmers.  In 2004, he was  approached
    by two men who offered him work smuggling.  During the course  of  this
    work he became acquainted with a  teacher  who  asked  him  to  deliver
    packages to a person named Mr R in Iraq.  He agreed to do  so.   In  or
    about February 2005  he  learned  that  Mr  R  had  been  arrested  and
    documents seized from his house.  It was  discovered  that  the  papers
    delivered were from  the  Kurdish  Democratic  Party  of  Iran  (KDPI).
    Because he was a Kurd the appellant was in fear and did not return home
    but travelled to a neighbouring village  where  he  remained  with  his
    cousin until he was able to travel to Turkey and then on to the UK.

First-tier Tribunal Determination

8.   In a Decision the Tribunal refused the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum
    because it found it to be lacking in credibility.  The Tribunal had  in
    mind the appellant's age (15 or 16 years) on arrival in the UK and that
    he was not formally interviewed in any detail because of his  age.   It
    was accepted that he may have been involved in  cross-border  smuggling
    of goods which was well-documented in background evidence.  However  in
    light of the fact that  neither  the  appellant  nor  his  family  were
    involved in the KDPI the Tribunal found it unlikely he would have  been
    entrusted to smuggle KDPI literature and found his account implausible.
     The Tribunal found that "any political activist conducting a  campaign
    against the authorities as the KDPI were involved in at the time  would
    have selected and indeed trusted a youth who was not a member  or  even
    affiliated through his family to the movement"  was  implausible  [29].
    The Tribunal considered the appellant's claim in light of the fact that
    he was a child and  as  a  consequence  had  in  particular  considered
    objective indications of risk.

9.   The Tribunal considered risk on return [31] and took into  account  the
    expert  report  of  Sherry  Laizer  whose  evidence  it  found  to   be
    insignificant.  The Tribunal found no basis that the appellant would be
    of interest to  the  authorities  or  as  an  ethnic  Kurd  of  Iranian
    nationality.  It was accepted that returning  from  the  UK  after  ten
    years may result in questions being asked of him  at  the  airport  but
    that in itself was unlikely to lead  to  a  risk  of  serious  harm  of
    detention at the airport.

10.  In considering Article 8 the Tribunal acknowledged that (as was  common
    ground) the appellant did not  qualify  under  Appendix  FM  nor  under
    paragraph 276ADE.  Exceptional  circumstances  were  found  to  justify
    consideration outside of the Rules in accordance with the human  rights
    jurisprudence.  The exceptional circumstances were  that  a  "decision"
    dated 26 August 2010 was made by the respondent to grant the  appellant
    indefinite leave to remain.  This was in line with guidance at the time
    applying paragraph 395C on the basis that  the  appellant  had  accrued
    over five years' residency in the UK and that there had been a delay of
    three years and seven months in considering his application  for  leave
    to remain.  The Tribunal found that  the  appellant  was  not  formally
    notified of the decision because the respondent was unable  to  confirm
    his address or that of his legal representatives.

11.  In considering Article 8 the Tribunal relied on  the  reasoning  behind
    the respondent's decision in September 2010  that  there  would  be  no
    significant adverse effect on the need to maintain immigration  control
    since the appellant fell within the respondent's then policy and  there
    were no countervailing circumstances.   The  Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant established a private life having regard to this  unique  set
    of circumstances together with the length of residence in the  UK,  the
    fact that he had grown into adult from his teens, had the benefit of  a
    UK education and matured into a young  man  who  had  strong  emotional
    support from friends and  former  foster  parents.   Consideration  was
    given also to public interest factors  under  Section  117B(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("NIAA  2002").   It  was
    accepted by the Tribunal that the appellant's decision to leave the  UK
    for Belgium in October 2012  and  subsequent  return  one  month  later
    rendered his immigration  status  precarious.   However,  the  Tribunal
    found reasons in the form of a strong Article 8 interest established by
    the appellant such that it was not necessary to ascribe  little  weight
    to the private life established during a period where  his  status  was
    precarious.   The  Tribunal   considered   the   step-by-step   process
    propounded in the judgment of Razgar and concluded that there would  be
    disproportionate interference to remove the appellant from  the  United
    Kingdom.

Grounds of Application

The Appellant's Grounds

Ground 1

12.  The Tribunal failed to take into  account/give  reasons  for  rejecting
    the background evidence for the purposes of assessing credibility.   In
    particular the Tribunal failed to assess  the  expert  report  for  the
    purposes of assessing the credibility of his claim and only  considered
    the report for the purposes of assessing risk.

Ground 2

13.  The Tribunal made contradictory findings  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant would be stopped at the airport on return at [31]  and  [32].
    Further the Tribunal failed to take into account relevant  factors  and
    failed to give adequate reasons in conducting a risk  assessment.   The
    Tribunal did not take into account the fact that the  appellant  was  a
    failed asylum seeker who came from a Kurdish area and was a Kurd.

Respondent's Grounds

Ground 1

14.  The Tribunal made a material  misdirection  of  law  having  regard  to
    public interest considerations outlined in Section  117B  of  the  2002
    Act.  It is submitted that the requirements outlined in Section 117 are
    mandatory and that the Tribunal erred by deciding what weight was to be
    attached to the appellant's  private  life  having  regard  to  Section
    117B(4).  In addition the Tribunal failed to take  into  account  other
    factors listed in Sections 117A and 117B.

Ground 2

15.  The Tribunal failed to take into account that the  appellant  left  the
    UK in 2012 of his own volition and travelled to  Belgium.   Accordingly
    his previous application was abandoned when he left the UK and  further
    the appellant was never provided with any documentation confirming  his
    status in the UK in 2010.

Ground 3

16.  The Tribunal made a mistake of fact in [33 - 36]  in  relation  to  the
    perceived grant of leave.  The  Tribunal  relied  on  a  case  worker's
    internal note and treated it as a grant of leave when the decision  was
    never  implemented  and  the  appellant  not  served  with  any  papers
    confirming that leave.   The  Tribunal  was  wrong  to  find  that  the
    appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain at paragraph 36 of the
    determination and as a result led to incorrect findings assessed  under
    the Article 8 claim that impacted on the outcome of the decision.

Permission

17.  Permission to appeal was granted to  both  parties  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Renton on 13 November 2014.  The terms were as follows;

         Appellant's application


         "The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
         protection  grounds  because  he  found  the  appellant's   account
         incredible and implausible, and that therefore  the  appellant  was
         not at risk of return to Iran.   In  particular,  the  judge  found
         implausible that a person of only 15  years  of  age  such  as  the
         appellant would be used  to  smuggle  KDPI  literature  across  the
         border.  However, the judge failed to deal with the contents of  an
         expert report from Sherry Laizer stating that it  was  practice  of
         the KDPI to use underage Kurds as runners or couriers.   The  judge
         did refer  to  Sherry  Laizer's  report  at  paragraph  31  of  the
         determination but only in the context of a general risk on  return.
         The failure is an arguable error of law.  The remaining grounds may
         be argued."

         Respondent's Application

         "The judge allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds because he
         found that there were exceptional  circumstances  allowing  him  to
         consider the appellant's Article 8 rights outside  the  Immigration
         Rules, and that the  respondent's  decision  was  disproportionate.
         This was because little weight was to be  attached  to  the  public
         interest as inter alia the respondent had earlier decided to  grant
         the appellant indefinite leave to return (sic) remain.  However the
         respondent had not made such a grant.  This amounts to an error  of
         fact resulting in an arguable error of law.  The other grounds  may
         be argued."

Appellant's Rule 24 Response

18.  The appellant's representatives  relied  on  a  written  response.   In
    summary the response submitted that provisions in Section 117B were not
    mandatory factors but matters to be taken into account  in  determining
    the public interest question.

19.  There was no error in the quantification  of  the  appellant's  private
    life which was  continuous  and  lawful  from  February/April  2005  to
    October/November 2012 when he left for Belgium and following his return
    he remained in the UK unlawfully.  The Tribunal  did  acknowledge  that
    the appellant's status was precarious since that date [35].

20.  The Tribunal's  finding  attaching  little  weight  to  the  period  of
    unlawful leave was open to it given that the appellant had  established
    nine and a half years' residence in total seven and a half of years  of
    which was lawful.

21.  It is submitted that the Tribunal did not find that the  appellant  was
    "granted" any kind of leave.  The Tribunal found  that  the  respondent
    decided to grant indefinite leave to remain but that the  decision  was
    never implemented because the appellant could not  be  contacted.   The
    Tribunal concluded that the unimplemented decision to grant  indefinite
    leave to remain in 2010 diminished the weight to  be  accorded  to  the
    legitimate aim of maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  now.
    The respondent did not deal with this point.

22.  The Tribunal  did  not  fail  to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    departure from the UK in October 2012.   This  was  considered  in  the
    determination and referred to repeatedly.

23.  It was submitted that the Tribunal had taken into account  the  various
    public interest factors set out in Section 117B.  Effective immigration
    control was taken into  account  specifically.   The  question  of  the
    economic impact was taken into account having regard  to  the  previous
    decision in September 2010 and the situation  remained  unchanged.   It
    was acknowledged that the Tribunal did not specifically take account of
    the English language but this is not material given the weight accorded
    to  the  Tribunal's  findings  on  the   significance   of   the   2010
    unimplemented decision to grant indefinite leave to remain.

Submissions

24.  At the hearing before me I heard submissions from Miss Holmes and  Miss
    Easty.  The details of the submissions are set out  in  the  record  of
    proceedings and have been taken into account by me.

Discussion and decision
Expert evidence

25.  It was common ground that the Tribunal's approach to the expert  report
    disclosed an error of law.  It was conceded by  Miss  Holmes  that  the
    Tribunal ought to have engaged with  the  report  of  the  expert  when
    considering the credibility of the claim.  The report was  material  to
    the appellant's claim and indeed  to  the  reasons  given  for  placing
    little weight on the appellant's claim, namely the  plausibility  of  a
    young man being asked to  deliver  KDPI  material  across  the  border.
    Accordingly I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  as  the
    Tribunal did not properly assess the  appellant's  expert  report  when
    considering evidence as to the credibility of his claim.  The  Tribunal
    must consider  all  of  the  evidence  as  a  totality  when  assessing
    credibility. The Tribunal erred therefore  by  considering  the  expert
    report only after having made a  finding  that  the  appellant's  claim
    lacked in credibility and took it into account only as regards risk  on
    return. The appellant's ground of appeal is made out.

Article 8

26.   Section 117B NIAA 2002  was  intended  to  provide  a  focus  for  the
    Tribunal of factors to take into consideration when making decisions as
    to the public interest under Article 8 ECHR.  These are  not  mandatory
    requirements but are phrased as matters which the Tribunal  "must  have
    regard to".  I am  satisfied  that  in  this  detailed  and  considered
    determination the Tribunal  had  appropriate  regard  to  the  relevant
    factors in Section 117B and in particular took into account the  period
    of unlawful residence in the UK from 2012. This was in the context of a
    total period of nine and a half years' residence in  the  UK  of  which
    seven and a half years' residence was lawful.  The question  of  weight
    is a matter for the Tribunal and it is clear  that  the  Tribunal  took
    into account this factor and gave it weight accordingly.

27.  The second ground asserts that the Tribunal proceeded on  an  erroneous
    basis by treating the appellant as if he had  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain.  Again it is clear from this  determination  that  the
    Tribunal proceeded on the basis that the respondent made a decision  in
    August/September 2010 to grant the appellant indefinite leave to remain
    and that the decision was not implemented because the  appellant  could
    not be contacted.  I am satisfied that the Tribunal did  not  make  any
    factual error by dealing with the decision as  a  grant  but  correctly
    referred to it as a decision that was made and  subsequently  confirmed
    in an internal memo and were it not for the  fact  that  the  appellant
    could not  be  contacted  the  decision  would  have  been  served  and
    formalised.  The Tribunal did take into account that the  appellant  of
    his own volition left  the  UK  travelling  to  Belgium  where  he  was
    returned one month later but it was entirely open to it to find that in
    the context of the long lawful residence and delay by the respondent in
    reaching a decision that little weight be  placed  on  the  appellant's
    conduct and responsibility in that regard.  Furthermore  I  am  of  the
    view that the Tribunal's approach  in  considering  the  weight  to  be
    attached to public interest was open to it and to have  regard  to  the
    decision taken by the respondent in 2010 to grant indefinite  leave  to
    remain, is of significance when considering the weight to  be  attached
    to public interest.  Aside from the short  period  when  the  appellant
    went to Belgium and failed to maintain contact with the respondent  and
    period of unlawful leave from 2012 (all of which the Tribunal took into
    account) the Tribunal found that  such  factors  were  insufficient  to
    outweigh the appellant's private life in the UK.  The Tribunal assessed
    private life having regard to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  in
    particular spent his formative years in the UK and had the benefit of a
    UK education and established strong emotional support from friends  and
    former foster parents.  The Tribunal found no real argument to reach  a
    conclusion that the view taken as to public interest in 2010 should  be
    altered.

28.  Accordingly I find no material error of law in the Tribunal's  decision
    having regard to the Article  8  issue  and  I  therefore  dismiss  the
    respondent's appeal against the decision.


Further Proceedings

29.  The upshot of my decisions are that the appellant remains to  have  his
    appeal allowed under Article 8 ECHR. It is a matter for  the  Secretary
    of State to determine the terms of an appropriate period of leave.

30.  However, as I have found a material error of law in  the  determination
    of  the  asylum  appeal,   this   remains   to   be   rectified.   Both
    representatives indicated that in the event that my  decision  resulted
    in the appellant having some form of leave, there  was  no  basis  upon
    which to pursue the outstanding asylum  claim.  I  can  find  no  legal
    provision which accords with this approach and so I conclude  that  the
    asylum appeal must be re heard. In view of the fact that the  error  of
    law made effectively tainted the Tribunal's findings and conclusion  in
    the asylum appeal, I have decided to remit the  asylum  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge O. Del Fabbro)
    for rehearing at Taylor House on 17th June 2015.

31.  Decision
    The determination of Article 8 shall stand.
    The determination of the asylum  appeal  is  set  aside  and  shall  be
    reheard at Taylor House on 17th June 2015.




Signed        Date 13.1.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.



Signed        Date 13.1.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
