
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02082/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 23 September 2014                          |On 13 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     mk
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Paramjorthy, instructed by Fernandes Vaz
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  22  February
    1977.  He claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 5  July  2001
    when he claimed asylum.  On 19 February 2002, his claim for asylum  was
    refused and  an  appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  on  2
    September 2002.  On 19 July 2010, the appellant was encountered working
    illegally and was detained pending removal.  On 20 July  2010,  further
    representations were made on behalf of the  appellant  relying  on  the
    "legacy" scheme.  The appellant's claim was refused on 17 August  2010.
    A judicial review claim was lodged challenging that decision.   Removal
    directions were initially set  on  15  September  2010  but  injunctive
    relief was granted on 30 September 2010.  That order was discharged  on
    17 December 2010 and further removal directions were set on 21  January
    2011.   Subsequently,  on  oral  renewal  the  appellant  was   granted
    permission to bring judicial review proceedings on 2 March  2011.   The
    appellant's claim for judicial review was dismissed on 8 December  2011
    and permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused on 4  April
    2012.

 3. Thereafter, on 6 June  2012,  further  submissions  were  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf but his claim was refused on  6  November  2012  and
    directions for removal  were  set  on  14  November  2012.   A  further
    judicial  review  application  was  lodged  on  19  November  2012  and
    permission granted on 25 March 2013.  Thereafter, on 16 April 2013, the
    judicial review proceedings were withdrawn following  a  consent  order
    allowing for further submissions to be made on the  appellant's  behalf
    which,  if  rejected,  would  attract  a  right   of   appeal.    Those
    representations were made on 6 August 2013 and  the  appellant's  claim
    was refused on 13 March 2014.  On that latter date, a decision was made
    to refuse the appellant leave to  enter  with  directions  that  he  be
    removed to Sri Lanka.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In a determination promulgated on 12 May  2014,  Judge  Troup
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,   under   the
    Immigration Rules and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  solely
    against the decision to dismiss his appeal on  asylum  grounds.   On  6
    June 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge P  J  G  White)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis that the judge had arguably
    erred in law in assessing the  risk  to  the  appellant  on  return  by
    failing to have sufficient regard to the country guidance  decision  in
    GJ and Others (Post-civil war:  returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319
    (IAC).  Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Claim for Asylum

 6. The primary facts relevant to the appellant's claim are not essentially
    disputed.  They were found initially by the Adjudicator  (Ms  Griffith)
    in her determination promulgated on 2 September 2002 in relation to the
    appellant's first appeal and also in the determination of  Judge  Troup
    in the current appeal.

 7. The appellant is a Hindu Tamil who was born in Vavuniya in  Sri  Lanka.
    He is an only child and he lived in Vavuniya until he left Sri Lanka in
    2001.  After he left school at the age of 12, the appellant  worked  in
    his father's shop for eight or nine years.  In 1999 he  was  approached
    by the LTTE and was told to store parcels for them in the shop.  He had
    no option but to comply and parcels were deposited once or twice a week
    and later collected.  The appellant did not know what was in them.

 8. In June or July 1999 the appellant was arrested by the army and accused
    of helping the LTTE.  He was detained for about two months and suffered
    ill-treatment.  He was eventually released when a bribe was paid  by  a
    family friend.

 9. About two months later, the appellant opened a restaurant in  Vavuniya.
    In February 2001, he was arrested after an army truck was ambushed  and
    three soldiers were killed.  He was detained, questioned and beaten and
    released after two weeks upon payment again of a bribe.

10. The appellant feared for his life and left Sri Lanka on  25  June  2001
    when he came to the UK and claimed asylum.

11. Since the appellant has been in the UK he attended  three  protests  in
    London, attended by between 500 and 1,000 people - the last  one  being
    in 2009.  The appellant's evidence before the judge in this appeal  was
    that he did not know if his photograph had been taken.

12. The appellant's evidence was that he does not have a passport and if he
    applies for a travel document from the Sri Lankan authorities  he  will
    be "monitored" thereafter by the Sri Lankan government.  He fears  that
    records will have been kept in Sri Lanka and that he is  likely  to  be
    arrested and tortured on return.

The Judge's Decision

13. The judge's reasoning can be found at paras 26-30 of his determination.



14. At para 26 the judge set out the Adjudicator's factual findings in  her
    2002 determination including that, after  his  arrest  and  release  in
    1999, "the army was no longer interested in  him".   Judge  Troup  then
    continued:

         "It was accepted that the Appellant  was  arrested  again  in  2001
         following the killing of three  soldiers.   It  was  found  by  the
         Adjudicator however that had it been believed  that  the  Appellant
         was instrumental in the killings, he would not have been  released.
         It was concluded that the Appellant was of no  continuing  interest
         to the authorities."

15. At para 27, following Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702, Judge  Troup  stated
    that the Adjudicator's findings were  the  "starting  point"  for  him.
    Judge Troup then set out Counsel for the Appellant's argument, which he
    rejected, that the situation in Sri Lanka was now different:

         "Counsel has urged me to find that the situation in  Sri  Lanka  in
         1999 and 2001 was very different  to  the  situation  that  obtains
         today.  He said that a ceasefire was agreed in 2002 as a result  of
         which emergency powers  were  suspended.   On  both  occasions  the
         Appellant was arrested on suspicion of  being  an  LTTE  member  or
         sympathiser but, as has been found, following periods of  detention
         he obtained his release as he was no longer of any interest to  the
         authorities.  I am not persuaded that  such  changes  as  may  have
         occurred in Sri  Lanka  will  have  any  adverse  effect  upon  the
         Appellant in the event of his return."

16. Judge Troup then summarised paras (7)-(9) of the head note  in  GJ  and
    Others  (which  reflected  the  UT's  determination  at   [356(7)-(9)].
    Applying that guidance Judge Troup concluded that the  appellant  would
    not be at risk on return.

17. First, the appellant did not claim to have any  role  in  post-conflict
    Tamil separatism which was the only relevant risk category in para  (7)
    of the head note.  Secondly, Judge Troup concluded that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk on the basis that he would be perceived as being a
    present risk to  the  Sri  Lankan  state.   At  para  29,  Judge  Troup
    continued as follows:

         "It has been found, however, that the Appellant is  not  and  never
         has been an LTTE member or sympathiser; such role as he had had was
         peripheral and forced upon him under duress and he has  been  found
         to be of no interest to the authorities."

18. Judge Troup then concluded that, applying para (9) of the head note  in
    GJ and Others, in the unlikely event of the appellant's name  appearing
    on a 'watch list', it was  not  reasonably  likely  that  he  would  be
    detained as he had never claimed to be a Tamil activist.  At  para  30,
    Judge Troup said this:

         "This Appellant does not claim to be, or to have ever been a  Tamil
         activist.  He was caught up in the civil war  as  an  innocent  by-
         stander and was forced under duress to assist the  LTTE.   He  does
         not claim to have worked  or  to  be  working  to  destabilise  the
         country or to revive the conflict.  I find that although there is a
         possibility that he will be monitored following his return, he will
         not be engaging in any of  the  activities  that  would  result  in
         detention or ill treatment.  He claims to have engaged in 'diaspora
         activities' in the UK but not since 2009, and there is no  evidence
         before me to suggest that those activities such as they were,  have
         brought  him  to  the  adverse  attention   of   the   Sri   Lankan
         authorities."

The Submissions

19. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Paramjorthy submitted that the judge had
    failed properly to apply the country guidance  in  GJ  and  Others,  in
    particular [356(7)(a)].  He relied upon the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MP and NT  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829,  in
    particular at [50] and the short concurring judgment  of  Underhill  LJ
    that the risk category in [356(7)(a)] of GJ and Others might apply:

         "Where the evidence shows particular grounds  for  concluding  that
         the government might regard  the  applicant  as  posing  a  current
         threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in  the
         absence of evidence that he or she has been  involved  in  diaspora
         activism."

20. Mr Paramjorthy submitted that taking the appellant's  history  together
    with his sur place activities in the UK, he would  be  at  risk  as  he
    would be questioned at the airport  and  his  history  discovered.   Mr
    Paramjorthy, in  particular,  relied  upon  the  appellant's  "unusual"
    history - as he characterised it - namely that the appellant  had  been
    arrested in 1999 as a result of being identified  by  an  informant  as
    being an LTTE member.  Mr  Paramjorthy  also  adopted  the  grounds  of
    appeal  which,  in  addition  to  the  point  elaborated  in  his  oral
    submissions,  sought  to  challenge  Judge  Troup's  finding  that  the
    appellant was of no interest to the authorities when  he  was  released
    after the payment of a bribe on the basis that release in that way  was
    "not indicative of the authorities' insufficient adverse  interest"  in
    the appellant.  He relied upon para 29.10  of  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report on Sri  Lanka  for  February  2010  which  cited  an
    Amnesty International paper which noted reports that, even  those  with
    ties to the LTTE, were able to "buy their  way  out  of  the  camps  by
    bribing army personnel".

21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Parkinson submitted that  even  if  the
    appellant had been of some  interest  when  he  was  arrested  in  2001
    following the attack on an army truck, both the Adjudicator  and  Judge
    Troup had been entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant  was  of  no
    interest to the authorities when he was released.   In  any  event,  Mr
    Parkinson submitted that it was clear from GJ and Others that  the  Sri
    Lankan government was  now  only  concerned  with  past  membership  or
    sympathy to the LTTE to the extent that a person posed a "destabilising
    threat in post-conflict Sri Lanka" citing [311] of GJ and Others.

Discussion

22. I begin with the relevant guidance set out in GJ and Others  at  [356].
    It is appropriate to set it out in its entirety as follows:

         "356.    Having considered and reviewed all the evidence, including
             the latest UNHCR guidance, we consider that the change in  the
             GOSL's approach is so significant that  it  is  preferable  to
             reframe the risk analysis for the present political  situation
             in Sri Lanka.  We give the following country guidance:


             (1)  This determination replaces all existing country guidance
                  on Sri Lanka.


             (2)  The focus of the  Sri  Lankan  government's  concern  has
                  changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.   The  LTTE
                  in Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there  have  been
                  no terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.


             (3)  The government's present objective is to  identify  Tamil
                  activists in  the  diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil
                  separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state
                  enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution
                  in 1983, which prohibits  the  'violation  of  territorial
                  integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing  both
                  (a) the resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil
                  separatist organisation and (b) the revival of  the  civil
                  war within Sri Lanka.


             (4)  If a person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
                  services there remains a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or
                  harm requiring international protection.


             (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for
                  a person at real risk from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,
                  since the government now controls the whole of  Sri  Lanka
                  and Tamils are required to return to a named address after
                  passing through the airport.


             (6)  There are no detention facilities at the  airport.   Only
                  those whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained
                  from the airport.  Any risk for  those  in  whom  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities are or become interested exists not  at
                  the airport, but after arrival in their home  area,  where
                  their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within
                  a few days.


             (7)  The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
                  persecution or  serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
                  whether in detention or otherwise, are:


                  (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                      to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  state
                      because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have   a
                      significant role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil
                      separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal  of
                      hostilities within Sri Lanka.


                  (b)  Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                      human rights activists, who,  in  either  case,  have
                      criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular
                      its human rights record, or who are  associated  with
                      publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.


                  (c)  Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                      Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the
                      Sri Lankan security forces, armed forces or  the  Sri
                      Lankan authorities  in  alleged  war  crimes.   Among
                      those who may have  witness  war  crimes  during  the
                      conflict, particularly in the No-Fire  Zones  in  May
                      2009,  only  those  who   have   already   identified
                      themselves by giving such evidence would be known  to
                      the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore  only  they
                      are at real risk of adverse attention or  persecution
                      on  return  as  potential  or   actual   war   crimes
                      witnesses.


                  (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised  'stop'
                      list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of
                      those against whom there is an extant court order  or
                      arrest warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on  a
                      'stop' list will be stopped at the airport and handed
                      over to the appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
                      pursuance of such order or warrant.


             (8)   The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based   on
                  sophisticated intelligence, both as to  activities  within
                  Sri Lanka and the diaspora.  The  Sri  Lankan  authorities
                  know that many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as
                  economic migrants and also that everyone in  the  Northern
                  Province had some  level  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE
                  during the civil war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
                  individual's past history will be  relevant  only  to  the
                  extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan  authorities
                  as indicating a present risk to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan
                  state or the Sri Lankan Government.


             (9)  The authorities maintain a computerised  intelligence-led
                  [watch] list.  A person whose name appears  on  a  'watch'
                  list is not  reasonably  likely  to  be  detained  at  the
                  airport but will be monitored  by  the  security  services
                  after his or her return.   If  that  monitoring  does  not
                  indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to
                  destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  revive  the
                  internal armed conflict, the  individual  in  question  is
                  not, in general, reasonably likely to be detained  by  the
                  security forces.  That will be a question of fact in  each
                  case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out  by
                  such an individual.


             (10) Consideration must always be given  to  whether,  in  the
                  light of an individual's activities  and  responsibilities
                  during the civil war, the exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
                  (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of
                  the Qualification Directive).  Regard should be had to the
                  categories for  exclusion  set  out  in  the  'Eligibility
                  Guidelines  for  Assessing  the  International  Protection
                  Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka' published by UNHCR
                  on 21 December 2012." (my emphasis)

23. The relevant risk category relied upon by the appellant in this  appeal
    is in [356(7)(a)], namely that he would be perceived as a threat to the
    integrity of the Sri Lankan state because  he  would  be  perceived  as
    having a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism
    within the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

24. The UT makes clear in [356(8)]  that  in  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka  an
    individual's past history is only relevant to the  extent  that  it  is
    perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to
    the state or government.

25. In MP and NT (Sri Lanka), the Court of Appeal, on appeal from the Upper
    Tribunal in GJ and Others, considered a legal challenge to the  country
    guidance set out in [356].  The Court of Appeal rejected  a  number  of
    challenges and upheld the guidance.  In particular, the Court of Appeal
    accepted that the Upper Tribunal was entitled to depart from the  UNHCR
    guidelines, "Eligibility Guidelines  for  Assessing  the  International
    Protection Needs of Asylum Seekers from Sri Lanka" (21  December  2012)
    which set out (at pages 26-27)  risk  categories  of  individuals  with
    "more elaborate links to  the  LTTE"  including  former  combatants  or
    cadres and those sheltering or transporting LTTE personnel or supplying
    or transporting goods for the LTTE.

26. However, the Court of Appeal did so on the basis that the  UT  had  not
    excluded the relevance of the "more elaborate links with the  LTTE"  in
    determining whether an individual fell  within  the  risk  category  in
    [356(7)(a)] as presenting a present threat  to  the  integrity  of  Sri
    Lanka.  At [15] Maurice Kay LJ observed that the  UT's  decision  meant
    that: "[m]erely to have one or more of the features listed in the 'more
    elaborate links' part of the UNHCR Guidelines is not enough".

27. At [16] Maurice Kay LJ concluded:

         "I am unable to escape the conclusion that the  UNHCR's  Guidelines
         are indeed less demanding than the UT's guidance although no  doubt
         it will be easer  to  infer  that  the  paragraph  356(7)  test  is
         satisfied where elaborate links are established than where they are
         not."

28. Underhill LJ at [50] also accepted that the UT was entitled to  exclude
    from a risk category per se those who had "more elaborate  links"  with
    the LTTE.  He also concluded that the UT was entitled to find that  the
    Sri Lankan government's concern was now with "current or future threats
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a unitary state".

29. Underhill LJ concluded that in assessing that risk, whilst  principally
    the Sri Lankan government was focused on actual or perceived  "diaspora
    activism", nevertheless:

         "there may, though  untypically,  be  other  cases  ...  where  the
         evidence  shows  particular  grounds  for   concluding   that   the
         Government might regard the applicant as posing a current threat to
         the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of
         evidence that he or she has been involved in diaspora activism."

30. The issue which I must decide is whether  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    find, in the light of the country guidance, that the appellant did  not
    fall within the risk category in [356(7)(a)] as a person who  would  be
    perceived to be a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single
    state  because  of  their  significant  role  in  post-conflict   Tamil
    separatism within the diaspora or a renewal of hostilities  within  Sri
    Lanka.

31. The appellant's history of detention and ill-treatment in 1999 and 2001
    is accepted, as is accepted that he was released on both occasions by a
    bribe.

32. Mr Paramjorthy, in his grounds, relied upon [308] and [309] of  GJ  and
    Others that the appellant will, as part of  the  documentation  process
    and return to Sri Lanka, be asked  and  expected  to  answer  questions
    about his former LTTE involvement.  Those paragraphs are as follows:

         "308.    During the re-documentation process in the United Kingdom,
             or at the airport on return, a forced returnee can  expect  to
             be asked about his own and his family's LTTE  connections  and
             sympathies.

         309. Those with Sri Lankan passports returning on scheduled flights
             will  be  able  to  walk  through  Colombo   airport   without
             difficulty, unless their names are on a 'stop' list, by reason
             of an outstanding Court order or arrest warrant.  Those  on  a
             'watch' list are not  stopped  at  the  airport  but  will  be
             monitored and if considered to be a destabilisation risk,  may
             be picked up from their home area."

33. In addition, it is important to note what is said in [310]  of  GJ  and
    Others:

         "310.     There  are  no  detention  facilities  at  the   airport.
             Although individuals may be interviewed at the airport by  the
             security forces, the Sri Lankan authorities now  aim  to  move
             returnees relatively quickly out of the airport and  on  their
             way to the their home areas and to verify  whether  they  have
             arrived there soon afterward.   If  the  authorities  have  an
             adverse interest in an individual, he will  be  picked  up  at
             home, not at the airport, unless there is a 'stop'  notice  on
             the airport computer system.  There is no evidence that  strip
             searches  occur  at  the  airport;  the  GOSL's  approach   is
             intelligence-led rather than  being  driven  by  roundups  and
             checkpoints as it was during the civil war."

34. Whilst, therefore, the appellant's history may be identified by the Sri
    Lankan authorities, the guidance makes plain that he would only  be  in
    difficulties at the airport if he was on a "stop" list as a  result  of
    there being an extant court order or arrest warrant (see  [356(7)(d)]).
    There is no evidence that the appellant is subject to  either  a  court
    order or arrest warrant and would, therefore, be on a "stop" list.

35. The judge accepted that the appellant might be on a "watch"  list  (see
    para 30 of the determination), however, as [356(9)] of  GJ  and  Others
    makes plain, such an individual is not reasonably likely to be detained
    at the airport but subject to monitoring by the  security  services  to
    see if he is working as a Tamil activist to destabilise the Sri  Lankan
    state or revive the internal conflict.  Unless that is  the  case,  the
    individual is not likely to be detained.

36. In my judgement, even if the appellant is someone whose history  brings
    him to the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities, that history  taken
    with his sur place activities in the UK does not  create  a  real  risk
    that he will be perceived as someone who has a significant  (or  indeed
    any) role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  or  in  the
    renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

37. The appellant's activities that led to his detention and  ill-treatment
    in 1999 and 2001 were "low level".  The fact that he had, in 1999, been
    arrested as a result of information obtained  from  an  informant  does
    not, in my judgment, alter that fact or lead to a change of  perception
    by the Sri Lankan authorities as to whether he presents a current  risk
    to the integrity of the Sri Lankan state.

38. In addition, although his release in 1999 was as a result of  a  bribe,
    the authorities had no interest in him until  February  2001  following
    the incident in which an army truck was  ambushed  and  three  soldiers
    were killed.  There is no suggestion that he  was  sought  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities because he was released through bribery rather  than
    through due process.

39. As regards his release  following  detention  in  2001,  there  was  no
    evidence that in the four months that  passed  after  his  release  and
    before he came to the UK in June 2001 that the authorities in Sri Lanka
    sought the appellant again  because  of  his  release  through  bribery
    rather than through due process.

40. In my judgment, the background material relied upon by  Mr  Paramjorthy
    in the COI Report for February 2010, which is in any event  nine  years
    after the appellant was released  from  detention  in  2001,  does  not
    undermine the Adjudicator's finding and that of Judge  Troup  that  the
    appellant was of no interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka  following
    his release through bribery.  There is simply no evidence that  he  was
    of any interest to them following his release.

41. In relation to the appellant's sur place  activities  in  the  UK,  his
    evidence was that he attended three protests in  London  where  between
    500 and 1,000 people attended, the last being in 2009 and  he  did  not
    know if a photograph had been taken.  In GJ and Others the UT  accepted
    that the Sri Lankan authorities had "sophisticated intelligence",  both
    within and outside Sri Lanka.  There is, therefore, a  risk  that  they
    will be aware of the appellant's activities in the  UK.   However,  the
    limited involvement of the appellant in attending three protests  where
    a significant number of other people were  in  attendance  -  the  most
    recent being in 2009 - does not create, in my judgement,  a  real  risk
    that he will be perceived as a "diaspora activist" with  a  significant
    role in activities designed to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state
    or to revive the internal armed conflict.   Sophisticated  intelligence
    would not lead to any such conclusion.

42. Even  accepting  the  appellant's  history  and  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities will be aware of it, I see no basis upon which  it  can  be
    said that the judge could not rationally conclude  that  the  appellant
    would not be perceived as a person who, within [356(7)(a)]  of  GJ  and
    others, would be perceived as a present threat to the integrity of  Sri
    Lanka because of his post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora
    or as part of a renewal of hostilities in Sri Lanka.

43. In my judgement, Judge Troup's finding that the appellant would not  be
    at risk on return to Sri Lanka was properly open to him on the evidence
    applying the country guidance in GJ and Others.

Decision

44.  For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds.   That  decision
    stands.

45. The judge's decisions to dismiss the appellant's appeal on humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules are
    not challenged and those decisions also stand.

46.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is,   accordingly,
    dismissed.




                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

