

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02811/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 July 2016                       |On 29 July 2016                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz     (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Khan  (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of State for
the Home Department, hereinafter "the Secretary of State".   The  respondent
before the Upper Tribunal (his being the successful party before the First-
tier Tribunal) is a  person  I  shall  simply  refer  to,  throughout  this
determination, as "the claimant".  I have decided  to  grant  him  anonymity
because,  as  will  be  apparent  from  a  reading  of  the  rest  of   this
determination, the  case  involves  sensitive  and  personal  issues  of  an
uncommon  nature.   The  appeal  concerns  the  claimant's  entitlement   or
otherwise to international protection in the United Kingdom either  on  the
basis that he is a refugee, a person entitled to humanitarian protection  or
a person entitled to the protection afforded by Article 3 of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).  The way in which  this  appeal  has  now
come before the Upper Tribunal (for the second time) and the issues in  the
case are set out in some detail below.

How the appeal comes before me

2.    The claimant is a national of India.  He was born on [ ] 1969 and was
therefore, as at the date of the hearing before me, aged 46 years.  He is a
national of India.  It is  recorded  that  his  asylum  claim  was  made  on
29 February 2012 and that it was refused on 4 March 2013.  The respondent
also took a decision, on  that  date,  to  remove  him  from  the  UK.   The
claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and there was a hearing  which
took place on 30 May 2013 before Judge Hindson at which both parties were
represented.  In a determination promulgated on 17 June 2013 Judge Hindson
allowed the  appeal,  making  several  favourable  findings  which  will  be
referred to specifically below, and deciding that he would  be  at  risk  of
persecution and at risk  of  Article 3  ill-treatment  if  he  were  to  be
returned to India because he is what  has  been  described  as  a  trans-man
(more about that below) and hence a member of a particular social  group  in
India and would be persecuted on that  account.   Judge Hindson's  decision
was not the end of the  matter,  though,  because  the  Secretary  of  State
obtained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and,  in  due  course,
this  led  to  a  decision   of   the   Upper Tribunal,   promulgated   on
22 November 2013, setting  aside  the  decision  of  Judge Hindson.   The
claimant then appealed to the Court of Appeal, with the permission  of  that
Court, and on 17 December 2015 and by  consent,  that  Court  quashed  the
decision of the Upper Tribunal referred to above and  remitted  the  matter
back  to  the  Upper Tribunal  for  reconsideration.   At  a  hearing   of
11 March 2016 which had been intended to be the full  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal but for practical reasons affecting both parties  could  not
be, directions were issued and  it  was  decided  that  the  matters  to  be
considered by the Upper Tribunal would relate  to  risk  upon  return,  the
availability of an internal flight alternative  and  the  relevance  of  the
judgment in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department 2011
1AC 596.  It was also decided, by agreement, that certain  of  the  factual
findings of Judge Hindson would be preserved.

3.    The rest of this determination is concerned with the law  I  have  had
to apply, the evidence which has been placed  before  me,  the  arguments  I
have heard and the way in which I have decided to deal with those  arguments
in the context of my remaking of the decision.

The law I must apply

4.    In order to demonstrate entitlement to  international  protection  the
claimant must show that, upon return to his home country of India, he  would
be at real risk of:

      (a)   being persecuted for one of the five  reasons  set  out  in  the
1951 Refugee Convention;

      (b)   being treated in such a way as to give rise to entitlement to  a
           grant of humanitarian protection;

      (c)   being treated in such a way  as  to  bring  about  a  breach  of
           Article 3 of the ECHR.

5.    I am to assess matters on the basis of how they stood as at  the  date
of the hearing before me.

The claimant's case

6.    The claimant was born in Warangal which is a city in  India.   He  was
born a female but has said that, from a young age, he  had  thought  he  had
been born "in the wrong body".  As a child he would wish to play  with  boys
and he "could not stand" wearing female clothing and would try to wear  what
he has described as "gender ambiguous clothing"  when  he  could.   He  says
that he faced disapproval, discrimination and harassment.   He  changed  his
name, firstly from a female one  to  a  more  ambiguous  one  and  then,  in
February 2012 by deed poll in the UK, to a male  one.   He  has  described
himself as a trans-man (which I understand to be a term  for  a  person  who
has been born female but whose gender identity is that of a man)  though  he
suggests in a witness statement of 5 July 2016 that he is  now  coming  to
simply regard himself as being a man.  He is currently  in  the  process  of
undergoing  hormone  therapy  and  is  awaiting  surgery  to   forward   his
transition.  The next step is to be chest reconstructive surgery.

7.    According to the claimant he was not open about being a trans-man  (in
a witness statement of 20 May 2013 he uses the  term  'trans-sexual')   He
says that in 2001 his parents pressurised him into entering into a  marriage
with a man, a marriage he did not want, and  that  very  shortly  afterwards
they separated.  There  has  subsequently  been  a  divorce.   He  says  his
parents did not understand his objections to marrying  and  had  laughed  at
him when he had raised them.  He does say that he had  a  number  of,  as  I
understand it, quite brief and casual, relationships with females  in  India
before entering into a much more serious relationship with an Indian  female
whom I shall simply refer to as R in 2000.  He said that she treated him  as
if he were a man when they were alone together but that, in front  of  other
people, they just presented as friends.  That relationship continued  for  a
number of years and was ongoing when the claimant came to the  UK,  for  the
purposes of study, in February 2009.  The claimant returned to India  on  a
number of occasions to spend time with R and  he  purchased  a  property  in
Hyderabad which the two of them shared.  In  October 2010,  whilst  he  was
spending time in India, he discovered that R was having a relationship  with
another and this led to disagreement and rows which, in  turn,  led  to  the
relationship  becoming  known  to  their  respective  families  and  to  its
breaking down.  The claimant says that on 17 November 2010  R's  relatives
physically attacked and beat him.  Staff from an Indian TV station known  as
TV9 attended the incident and spoke to him and to R and  subsequently  aired
the footage.  This has also been placed on You Tube.  The claimant suggests
that the way in which the coverage was  presented  "made  me  look  like  an
angry, vicious  lesbian".   He  says  that  the  police  did  not  take  his
complaints about the incident seriously.  He started drinking  heavily.   He
went to the UK on 24 November 2010 but returned to India in January 2011 at
the request of his parents who wanted him to undertake some  health  checks.
However, whilst there, R's relatives beat him once again  and  made  threats
to kill him.  He came back to the UK on 5 March 2011.  He has not returned
to India since.  In September of that year he was attacked, in  the  UK,  by
his  landlord  who  did  not  approve  of  his  gender  identity.   He   has
subsequently developed a network  of  friends  and  professionals  who  have
aided him in fully adapting to his chosen gender identity  and  in  pursuing
appropriate treatment and surgery as referred to above.   He  says  that  he
now lives openly as a male person but would not be accepted as  such  if  he
had to return to India.  If he lived openly as a male in India he  would  be
attacked.  His identity documents and educational qualifications  show  that
he was born a female.  To protect himself he would have to act as  a  female
but he can no longer accept having to do that.

8.    The account set out above is necessarily a summary  but  is  based  on
what the claimant has indicated  when  seeking  asylum,  when  pursuing  the
appeal before Judge Hindson and when pursuing the appeal before me.  It  is
contended, on his behalf, that given his history he would be at risk  if  he
were  to  return  to  Hyderabad  (which  I  think   is   regarded   by   his
representatives as his home area in India) at the hands of R's family,  that
he cannot take advantage of an internal flight alternative because it  would
be unsafe and unduly harsh to expect him to do so given his  current  status
and that he would, in any event, be a refugee on the basis that in order  to
avoid persecution in any part of India he would have to live in a way  which
would represent a denial of his identity (the HJ point).

The respondent's case

9.    The respondent, in a reasons for refusal letter drafted  as  long  ago
as 4 March 2013, disbelieved much of the account which  the  claimant  had
presented when seeking asylum.  Indeed, although  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter seems somewhat inconsistent about  this  (see  paragraphs 15,  17-20
and 38) it does seem the Secretary of State did not believe the claimant to
be a trans-man  at  all.   That,  of  course,  if  right  would  be  utterly
destructive of his claim.  However, the respondent also took the  view  that
even if the  claimant  is  a  trans-man  he  would  have  a  sufficiency  of
protection available to him from  the  Indian  authorities  and  that,  even
failing that, he would be able to relocate from  his  home  area  which  the
Secretary  of  State  also  seemed  to  regard  as  being   Hyderabad   (see
paragraph 53).  Mr Diwnycz's stance, before me, was and had to be somewhat
different given the preserved findings of Judge Hindson  and  Mr Diwnycz's
acceptance that they were to be preserved.   It  was  his  contention  that,
notwithstanding the favourable findings  from  the  claimant's  perspective,
risk on return to India had not been "clearly evidenced".   There  would  be
some support available to him from organisations based in India.  He  had  a
viable relocation alternative in India and, indeed, has  worked  in  various
places in India in the past.

The matter of the appellant's credibility

10.   Judge Hindson accepted that the claimant had been a credible  witness
before him (see paragraph 22 of the determination) and, on that basis, made
some factual findings which all parties have agreed are to be preserved  and
which I now set out:

      "     27.  I make the following findings of fact:

                       (i)   I find that  the  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
                       India and is a trans-man; neither  of  these  are  in
                       issue.

                       (ii)  I find that, prior to leaving India, he  lived,
                       with   difficulty,   as   a   woman   and    suffered
                       discrimination as a  result  of  being  perceived  as
                       'different'.

                       (iii) I find that he was  in  a  secret  relationship
                       with [R] and that that  relationship  broke  down  in
                       2010.

                       (iv)  I find the appellant 'went public'  about  that
                       relationship  and  about  his  own  sexual  alignment
                       issues on television in what he now  accepts  was  an
                       ill-judged outburst in front of the camera.  I accept
                       he sought the assistance of the police to protect him
                       from [R's] family on two occasions but did decline to
                       take him seriously."

11.   Those  findings,  then,  are  a  starting  point  but  of  course  the
favourable credibility finding Judge Hindson made can only  relate  to  the
position as it was at the time he was  considering  the  case.   However,  I
note that Mr Diwnycz has not invited me to  make  any  adverse  credibility
findings with respect to what the claimant has subsequently had  to  say  in
oral evidence before  me  and  in  his  more  recent  witness  statement  of
5 July 2016.  Nor, for that matter, did he invite me to make  any  adverse
credibility findings with respect  to  oral  and  written  evidence  I  have
received from Professor Whittle and the Reverend Randolph-Horn.   I  have,
though, undertaken my own assessment as to credibility.  In so doing I  have
considered all of the evidence as one composite whole.  I  have  noted  that
some of the key claims made by the claimant have been found to be  truthful.
  I  have  noted  Mr Diwnycz  did  not  challenge  credibility  whilst  not
specifically accepting it save for in respect of the preserved findings.   I
have not been able to detect any genuine inconsistencies in the evidence  of
the claimant as presented orally and in written statements.   I  have  noted
there is some corroboration for the claims he has made as to how he  is  now
living life as a man in the UK from evidence provided by  Professor Whittle
and the Reverend Randolph-Horn.  I  have  concluded  that,  to  the  lowest
standard applicable in this sort of case, I am able to accept  the  claimant
as being a credible witness and I accept (as distinct from opinions  he  has
expressed) the truthfulness of facts contained within his evidence.

The other evidence before me

12.   I do  not  simply  have  the  claimant's  evidence.   I  have  already
referred to Professor Whittle who has provided statements of  27 May 2013
and  11 July 2016  and  who  has  given   oral   evidence   before   me.
Professor Whittle is a man who has transitioned, having been  born  female,
and is a Professor of Equalities Law at Manchester  Metropolitan  University
and who holds other positions and other qualifications  and  who  has  other
experience in relation to trans-sexual persons and transgender  health.   He
has known the claimant personally for something in the region of six  years.
 He has sought to make contact with various agencies which the Secretary  of
State had suggested might be able to provide support  for  the  claimant  in
India and he has expressed views based upon his knowledge and experience  as
to what might await the claimant and  what  difficulties  he  will  face  if
returned to India.   The  Reverend Randolph-Horn  has  provided  a  witness
statement and oral evidence regarding his links with  the  claimant  through
their shared Christian faith and contacts he had made  with  the  claimant's
father in  India.   The  credibility  of  neither  of  those  witnesses  was
challenged in submissions by Mr Diwyncz, although he did diligently  cross-
examine each, and I have been able to accept the truth  of  what  they  have
told me with respect to matters of fact.

13.   I also note that there has been other documentary evidence  before  me
all of which I have read and considered including statements of  others  who
know the claimant and the life he leads in the UK, a report by a  Consultant
Psychiatrist Dr. S Lorimer and a report prepared by one M Suresh who is an
advocate in India  with  some  specialisation  in  legal  issues  concerning
gender and sexuality.

My findings of fact

14.   Making factual findings has not been difficult in  this  case  bearing
in mind that a number of key facts have already  been  found  and  preserved
and bearing in mind the lack of specific challenge before me.   However,  it
does seem to me to be appropriate to make a number of  findings  which  will
supplement those preserved ones and  which  will  serve  to  update  matters
bearing in mind that I am basing my decision on the circumstances as at  the
date of the hearing before me.  Accordingly, in addition  to  the  preserved
findings I also find as follows:

      (a)   The claimant was physically  assaulted  and  also  subjected  to
           death threats by members of R's family towards the latter end of
           2010 and then in 2011.

      (b)   The claimant has not subsequently returned to India.

      (c)   The claimant has not subsequently been contacted by  R's  family
           and, indeed, he acknowledges that to be the case.

      (d)   The  claimant's  home  area  in  India  is  to  be  regarded  as
           Hyderabad.  That appears, by implication at  least,  to  be  the
           stance taken by both  parties  and  I  attach  weight,  in  this
           context, to his having set up home with R, with whom on any view
           he had a long-term and serious relationship, in that city.

       (e)    The  claimant's  family  live  in  Warangal  which  is,  as  I
           understand it, something in the region of two hours  drive  from
           Hyderabad.  I am not entirely sure of the distance but they  are
           two different cities.

      (f)   I find that whilst the claimant's parents have  afforded  him  a
           degree of concern and have remained in contact with  him  as  he
           indicates at paragraph 13 of his statement of 5 July 2016, they
           are not accepting of his gender identity and continue to  regard
           him as a female person.  In this context,  I  accept  that  they
           pressurised him, successfully, into entering into a marriage  he
           did not  want  and  that,  in  light  of  the  evidence  of  the
           Reverend Randolph-Horn  which  was  unchallenged  and  which  I
           accept, his father  remains  unwilling  to  discuss  the  sexual
           identity issue.  I also accept the  claimant's  indication  that
           his elder sister and he no longer talk to each other because  of
           her inability to accept him as he  is.   So,  I  find  that  the
           claimant will only be able to obtain tangible support  from  his
           close family members in the event of  him  renouncing  his  male
           identity and adopting a female identity.

      (g)   I find that the claimant does live as a male in the UK and  that
           he  is  in  the  process  of  progressing  to  a  more  complete
           transition (if that is the way to  put  it)  through  virtue  of
           hormone treatment and forthcoming surgery.   I  also  find,  and
           this is what he says, that having progressed as far as he has it
           would be correspondingly more difficult to go back and  adopt  a
           more neutral or female persona.

My consideration of the appeal in light of my findings

15.   Logically, the first point to consider is whether or not the  claimant
will be at real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment if  he  returns
to his home  area  of  India  which  I  have  identified,  for  the  reasons
explained above, as being Hyderabad.   There  is  no  doubt,  on  the  above
findings including the preserved ones that he did  suffer  what  amounts  to
persecution and serious harm in Hyderabad in the past.  That is  because  he
was attacked on two occasions by  R's  family  members  and  received  death
threats.  Further, having found him to be credible, I accept that whilst  he
did seek to make complaints to the authorities they did not afford  him  any
real assistance.  The mere fact that he has been persecuted in the  past  by
these non-State agents (R's family) does not mean, of itself, that  he  will
be so persecuted or ill-treated now.  The first thing to consider,  in  this
respect, is the passage of time.  It is now over five years since  the  most
recent incident occurred.  When the incidents did  occur  the  discovery  of
the claimant's long-term relationship with R would still have been fresh  in
the minds of her family.  Emotions can cool  over  time.   R's  family  have
not, on the claimant's own account, sought to contact him in the UK but,  of
course, they may well not know that he is here.  However,  the  claimant  is
in touch with his family (he says  so  himself)  and  there  is  nothing  to
suggest that they have contacted his family or sought him in  Warangal.   It
is  also  possible,  I  suppose,  that  they  are  no  longer  in  Hyderabad
themselves in which case they would not necessarily know about it if he  did
return and set up home there.  On the other hand, the  relationship  with  R
was a long-term  one  and  that  is  a  matter  which  might  aggravate  the
claimant's perceived  offence  in  the  mind  of  her  family.   It  is  not
implausible to think  that  they  will  have  remained  in  Hyderabad.   The
background country material provided to me does suggest that even  absent  a
specific reason for them to be targeted (such as the relationship) what  are
described in some of the documents as LGBTI persons  are  at  some  risk  of
violence.  Here I have in mind an extract from the US Department  of  State
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices released in 2015 and which  notes
that some members of the Police Force committed crimes against such persons
and  that  such  persons  faced  widespread  societal   discrimination   and
violence.  Further, of course, whilst not seeing a perceived enemy for  some
time  might  cool  emotions  such  as  anger,  suddenly  seeing  them  again
unexpectedly might reignite them.  At least it is not implausible that  that
might happen as a generality.  I must, of course, apply the real  risk  test
which is something less than a balance of  probabilities.   Putting  all  of
that together I have concluded that the claimant will be  at  real  risk  of
persecution at the hands of non-State agents (R's family) if  he  is  to  be
returned to his home area.  The next question that  follows  on  from  that,
though, is whether there will  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  from  the
authorities in that home area.  The respondent, in the reasons  for  refusal
letter, says that there  will.   Reference  is  made,  in  support  of  that
proposition, to background country material which is quoted in  the  reasons
for refusal letter.  I do not have full copies of the various reports  which
the Secretary of State relies upon in this context  because,  whilst  I  had
directed that they should be produced, they have  not  been.   Nevertheless,
it is clear that the Secretary of State takes the  view  that  whilst  there
might be some imperfections there is, in general  terms,  a  sufficiency  of
protection in place.  However, it is a  matter  of  fact  that  despite  the
existence of the law enforcement agencies in Hyderabad the claimant was,  on
two occasions, physically attacked and  was  also  the  recipient  of  death
threats.  I have also accepted that, as the claimant says,  the  police  did
not take his complaints sufficiently seriously to tangibly  act  upon  them.
I  would  conclude,  whatever  the  generality  regarding   sufficiency   of
protection,  there  will  not  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  this
claimant, in all the circumstances of the case, if he  is  attacked  by  R's
family in Hyderabad.  Accordingly, therefore, I conclude, that he  would  be
at real risk of persecution and at real risk of serious harm if he  were  to
return to Hyderabad.

16.   Logically, then, the next point to consider  is  whether  or  not  the
claimant will have available to him an internal flight  alternative  to  any
other part of India.  That is, I think it is  right  to  say,  whilst  there
will be some overlap, a different question to that of whether he will be  at
risk of persecution throughout India  on  the  basis  of  his  status  as  a
transgender person.  In assessing the availability of internal flight  I  am
required to consider whether it would be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
expect the claimant to  relocate  to  another  part  of  India.   I  am  not
permitted to make the assessment by comparing the conditions in the area  of
internal relocation to international  human  rights  law  standards  or  the
conditions in the country of refuge.

17.   The Secretary of State, in the reasons for refusal  letter,  suggested
New Delhi or Kolkata as possible places of relocation but did not appear to
actually rule out other areas.  The claimant's position is, of course,  that
it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate or for him to  be  expected  to
live in any part of India at all and that it would be unsafe for him  to  do
so.

18.   In looking at the safety issue, I  remind  myself  of  the  background
country material to which I have  already  made  reference  indicating  that
even the police, who might be expected to afford protection  to  transgender
persons, have sometimes acted against them by threatening to arrest them  in
order to coerce them not to report incidents.  A Human Rights  Watch  report
refers to a transgender non-Governmental organisation  which  has  indicated
that  in  the  State  where  it  is  based  there  have  been,  on  average,
10 physical attacks every month against transgender  persons.   The  report
has also referred to indications from LGBTI groups that their  members  face
widespread societal discrimination and violence though that is  said  to  be
so, especially, in rural areas.  I do not take that to mean,  however,  that
there is no such problem in urban areas.  Professor Whittle, for  the  most
part, gave evidence about the  difficulties  faced  by  transgender  persons
which were of a general nature, rather than  the  sorts  of  problems  which
specifically arise for transgender persons in  India  and,  indeed,  in  his
oral evidence he acknowledged during cross-examination  that  he  had  never
been to India.  That said, he provided written and  oral  evidence  which  I
was not urged to disbelieve in submissions, to the effect that  the  various
organisations named by the Secretary of State in  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter as being able to assist transgender persons either failed to  respond
to his approaches  or  indicated  that  they  did  not  have  experience  of
assisting or supporting persons who are transitioning from female  to  male.
I conclude in light of that, that any support which the  claimant  would  be
able to access away from his home area in India would be limited.

19.   Turning to matters relating to identity documentation, the  report  of
M Suresh makes reference to identification cards issued in  India.   It  is
noted  that  individuals  may  register  themselves  as  male,   female   or
transgender but that a person who is born female  and  who  is  a  trans-man
would  only  be  able  to  register  himself  as  either  being  female   or
transgender but not male.  Thus, it is said that this  claimant  "would  not
be able to legally identify himself as a man".  It  is  suggested  that  his
choice would be registering himself as a female in order to gain  access  to
such  as  education,  employment,  insurance  and   banking   services,   or
registering himself as a transgender  person  which,  as  I  understand  it,
would also mean he would have access to such services but would  be  denying
his male identity and would mean exposing himself to discrimination  on  the
basis that persons such as,  for  example,  employers  and  landlords  would
became aware of his transgender status.

20.   There would, then, be a range of difficulties which might be faced  by
the claimant upon his taking advantage of an  internal  flight  alternative.
He would, I conclude,  feel  obliged  to  cease  living  openly  as  a  male
because, even if what he would face would  not  amount  to  persecution,  he
would feel unsafe or would not  wish  to  be  discriminated  against.   This
would, I accept, be particularly difficult  for  him  bearing  in  mind  the
progress he has made in recent months towards  greater  transition  to  male
status.  He has documents which identify him as a female and which he  would
be required to produce when engaging with officialdom and the production  of
those would enable him to access such as an employment and various  services
but it would involve him in denying what he now very strongly feels  is  his
male  identity  and  emotional  difficulties   would   result   from   that.
Alternatively, if he registered as  a  transgender  person,  he  would  risk
inviting unwelcome attention.  He would, I find,  lack  significant  support
from any agencies in India my having accepted Professor Whittle's  evidence
regarding the research he  has  conducted  concerning  those  organisations.
His evidence was to the effect that he did not know  any  friends  in  India
who would now be able to help and support him and I accept what he  says  as
to that.

21.      Putting all of that together I would conclude that even  if  it  is
not the case that the claimant would be persecuted solely  as  a  result  of
his being a trans-man, requiring him to relocate in India  would  be  unduly
harsh.

22.   In light of all of the above I would accept that as  a  trans-man  the
claimant is a member of a particular social group. Indeed, the Secretary  of
State accepted (see paragraph 15 of the reasons for refusal letter that,  if
a trans man, he would be. I accept that he would  face  persecution  in  his
home area  for  the  reasons  indicated  and  that  requiring  him  to  take
advantage of an internal flight alternative would  be  unduly  harsh.   This
means that he has succeeded in establishing refugee status.

It also means that he succeeds, on a similar basis, under Article 3 of  the
ECHR.

Decision

The claimant succeeds on asylum grounds and human rights ground  (Article 3
of the ECHR).

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I  make  an
anonymity order (pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed:                           Date: 29 July 2016


M R Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:                           Date: 29 July 2016


M R Hemingway


