
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02504/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th October 2015                 |On 19th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                       Mohamadu Pikash Mohamadu Pysal
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Bhachu of Counsel instructed by Kothala & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Landes (the judge) promulgated on 15th May 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Sri Lankan citizen born 27th November 1973  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on 15th August 2013 and made
    an appointment to claim asylum on 28th December 2013.  The asylum claim
    was based upon his imputed political opinion, in  that  he  claimed  to
    have been accused of supporting the LTTE.

 3. The application was refused on 30th January 2015 and the appeal against
    that decision was heard by the judge on 29th April 2015.

 4. The judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant  had  given  a  credible
    account, and did not find that he would be at risk if returned  to  Sri
    Lanka, and his appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was  refused  by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Zucker on 9th June 2015.

 6. The Appellant renewed his application  and  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 10th  August  2015  in  the
    following terms;

         "(1) The Appellant is a Sri Lankan asylum seeker.

         (2)  This is a renewed application for permission to  appeal.   The
             grounds contend that Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Landes
             erred in law as she firstly materially fails to give  reasons;
             secondly failed to resolve a conflict on material  matters  of
             evidence; and thirdly irrationally rejected the claim although
             key  findings  relating  to  the  core  account  went  in  the
             Appellant's favour.

         (3)  Whilst the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  discloses  a
             generally detailed analysis of the  evidence  it  is  arguable
             that the decision errs in law as it fails to  give  sufficient
             reasons for the negative findings against  the  Appellant  and
             thus, given the matters which broadly are decided to  fall  in
             his favour that  the  decision  might  go  in  favour  of  the
             Appellant if a sufficiency of reasoning were applied to  these
             issues as set out in the grounds."

 7. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me  Mrs  Bhachu  relied  and  expanded  upon  the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal which
    may be summarised as follows;

Ground 1 - Duty to Give Reasons as to Rejecting Evidence

 9. The judge erred  at  paragraph  38  in  finding  implausible  that  the
    Appellant was released from detention after payment of a bribe on  10th
    June 2013, and was able to obtain a passport the next  day,  11th  June
    2013.  The error was that  the  judge  provided  no  reasons  for  this
    finding.  It was contended that oral evidence had been given  that  the
    Appellant's family had  been  involved  with  an  agent  prior  to  his
    release, and the agent  had  been  able  to  obtain  the  passport  and
    organise a visa application within a short timeframe.  The  judge  made
    no findings upon the involvement of the agent, and gave no reasons  for
    her finding of implausibility.

Ground 2 - Resolving Conflict on Material Matters

10. At paragraph 52 of her decision the judge found that the Appellant  had
    been inconsistent about a significant part of his case but at paragraph
    55 recorded that "The most I can say is that he may have been  detained
    from the airport and ill-treated in March 2011.  It was contended  that
    the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  address  the  reasons  for  such
    detention and the length of such detention.  There  was  a  failure  to
    identify whether the detention was due to the  Appellant's  involvement
    with the LTTE or his uncle's connection with the LTTE.

11. It was contended that the finding that  the  Appellant  may  have  been
    detained in 2011 was at odds with the consideration at paragraph 40  of
    the Appellant deceiving the Entry Clearance Officer in his  application
    for a visa.

12. The judge found that the Appellant, on his  own  account,  successfully
    deceived the Entry Clearance Officer and did not make a finding  as  to
    whether at the time of the visa application the Appellant's account was
    genuine.  It was contended that the judge had erred by being  ambiguous
    as to whether she found the Appellant was telling the truth at the time
    of entry clearance and that an agent was not used,  or  found  that  an
    agent was  used  to  deceive  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   It  was
    submitted that if the judge found the Appellant was telling  the  truth
    at the time of entry clearance then her decision is at  odds  with  the
    finding  that  the  Appellant  was  detained  in  March  2011  for   an
    unidentified period.  On the other hand if  it  was  accepted  that  an
    agent was used to assist the Appellant and deceive the Entry  Clearance
    Officer,  such  a  finding  would  support  the  centrepiece   of   the
    Appellant's claim.

Ground 3 - Assessing the Core Aspects of the Claim

13. It was submitted that the judge in making findings on core  aspects  of
    the Appellant's claim, erred by then going on to dismiss the claim.  It
    was submitted that inconsistencies found by the judge do  not  outweigh
    the findings made which  are  either  neutral  or  do  not  affect  the
    Appellant's credibility.  It was noted that at paragraph 34  the  judge
    did not consider that  the  Appellant's  account  of  his  torture  had
    necessarily been inconsistent.   This is a central feature of the case,
    but the judge went on to dismiss the claim.

The Respondent's Submissions

14. Miss Fijiwala submitted that it was open to the judge to make  findings
    that it was implausible that the Appellant would be  released  on  10th
    June 2013 but was able to obtain a passport on 11th June 2013.

15. It was further submitted that the judge was entitled to find,  for  the
    reasons  given,  that  the  Appellant's  general  credibility  was  not
    established.  In making the finding at paragraph 55 that the  Appellant
    may have been detained from the airport and ill-treated in March  2011,
    the judge was considering the claim at its highest, but then  correctly
    went on to find that even if that  detention  occurred,  the  Appellant
    would still not fall within any of the risk categories set  out  in  GJ
    and Others Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

16. It was submitted that it was  unclear  how  the  judge  had  failed  to
    resolve a conflict in relation to her findings at  paragraph  40.   The
    judge had made a finding, that on the Appellant's own account,  he  had
    been able to tell very detailed and  plausible  lies  when  making  his
    application  for  entry  clearance.   The  judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant had deceived the Entry Clearance Officer, but not because  he
    was at risk in Sri Lanka.  Miss Fijiwala submitted that the  judge  had
    summarised her  findings  at  paragraphs  54  and  55,  and  adequately
    explained why the Appellant's account was not accepted.

17. In relation to the contention that the judge had erred in assessing the
    core aspects of the claim, it was submitted that this was not the case.
     The judge had clearly found that the Appellant had not  been  detained
    in prison for more than  two  years.   The  judge  had  considered  the
    Appellant's  evidence  of  scars,  and  found  for  cogent  reasons  at
    paragraph 44, that the photographs of the scars could not be given  any
    weight  independent  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.   The  judge   had
    considered the medical evidence at paragraphs 45 -  47  and  noted  the
    inconsistencies  which  caused  her  to  give  little  weight  to  that
    evidence.  It was not correct to say that the judge  had  accepted  the
    core of the Appellant's account.  There was no error in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal which should stand.

The Appellant's Response

18. Mrs Bhachu argued that the finding that the  Appellant  may  have  been
    detained did not sit well with the finding that the Appellant would not
    be at risk, and submitted that the judge had been inconsistent and  had
    erred by not making findings as to why the Appellant was detained,  and
    how he escaped from prison.

19. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. In relation to the first ground, the duty to give reasons is summarised
    in the headnote to Budhathoki (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT  00341
    (IAC), which I set out below;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

21. I find that the judge erred in not giving reasons for her conclusion at
    paragraph 38 that it was implausible that the  Appellant  was  released
    from detention on 10th June 2013, and was able to obtain a passport the
    following day on 11th June 2013.  There may be cogent reasons for  this
    finding, but they are not set out and therefore this is an error, but I
    find that this does not make the decision unsafe for the reasons that I
    explain below, and therefore the error is not material.

22. I deal with the second and third grounds together and find no error  of
    law for the following reasons.

23. The judge carries out a careful analysis of the evidence at  paragraphs
    32 - 49.  She summarises her findings at paragraph 52 which I  set  out
    below;

         "52.  Taking  everything   together,   the   Appellant   has   been
             inconsistent about a significant part of his case, namely  the
             disappearance of his uncle  (see  paragraph  36  above).   The
             Appellant's explanation about his wife  being  in  hiding  was
             implausible and inconsistent with what was said  in  interview
             (see paragraph 41  above).   It  is  implausible  that  a  new
             passport would have been obtained the day after the  Appellant
             was released from prison  after  more  than  two  years.   The
             police report with its date of 13th June 2011 is  inconsistent
             with the Appellant's case.  The Appellant is not someone whose
             general credibility can be said  to  be  established;  on  his
             account he successfully deceived the Entry  Clearance  Officer
             (who described him as credible and  genuine  after  interview)
             and he did not claim asylum at the earliest possible time (see
             paragraph 49 above)."

24. There has been no specific challenge to the findings made  in  relation
    to the Appellant's uncle, or the Appellant's explanation about his wife
    being in hiding, or the  police  report  being  inconsistent  with  the
    Appellant's case, or the fact that the Appellant did not  claim  asylum
    at the earliest possible time.

25. I do not find that the judge erred at paragraph 40  in  recording  that
    the Appellant on his own account was able to  tell  very  detailed  and
    plausible lies to the Entry Clearance Officer, in relation to his  visa
    application.  This finding was taken from the Appellant's own  case  in
    which he admitting lying to the Entry Clearance Officer.

26. The judge set out at paragraph 54 a further summary  of  her  findings,
    and this is set out below;

         "54. Looking at everything together as I have said, for the reasons
             I have summarised at paragraphs 50 onwards above and described
             more fully in the analysis before that,  I  am  not  satisfied
             even bearing in mind the low standard of proof applicable that
             the Appellant was detained in prison for more than  two  years
             and in 2013 was a person in whom the  authorities  were  still
             actively taking an interest.  I am not satisfied that  he  was
             reporting in the summer of 2013 to the police or that he would
             be in trouble with the authorities on return because he failed
             to report.  I am not satisfied that his uncle  was  anyone  of
             significance  or  who  had  a  significant  role   within   or
             supporting LTTE."

27. At paragraph 55 the judge concludes that because  the  Appellant  is  a
    person whose general credibility has not been established, there is  no
    basis for being satisfied to the applicable standard of any part of his
    account.  Prior to paragraph 55, the judge had explained in detail  her
    reasons for concluding that she could not be satisfied of any  part  of
    the Appellant's account.

28. There was therefore no acceptance that the Appellant had been  detained
    in prison for just over two years, and  the  judge  then  concludes  at
    paragraph 55 by stating that the most that she  can  say  is  that  the
    Appellant may have been detained from the airport  and  ill-treated  in
    March 2011.

29. That is not an acceptance that he was detained in prison for  a  period
    of two years which has specifically been rejected at paragraph 54.

30. In my view the judge was correct at paragraph 56 to state;

         "56. Even if he was detained and ill-treated in March  2011,  given
             the other facts I have found  he  is  not  someone  who  falls
             within the risk categories in GJ.  His declared  role  was  in
             the past and before the war had ended, and  he  has  not  been
             involved in any diaspora activities".

31. The judge summarised the risk categories set out in GJ at paragraph 53.
     I will not set out here the categories of those said to be at risk  in
    GJ, but they are contained in paragraph 7(a) - (d) of the  headnote  to
    that decision.  The judge found that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had a significant role in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil
    separatism within the diaspora, he was not a  journalist,  he  had  not
    given evidence to the Lessons Learned  and  Reconciliation  Commission,
    and there was no evidence that  his  name  appears  on  a  computerised
    "stop" list because the judge did not accept that there  is  an  extant
    court order or arrest warrant in force for him.

32. I therefore do not accept that the judge failed to resolve any conflict
    on material matters.

33. I do not discern any error  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  core
    aspects of the Appellant's claim.  The assessment of  the  evidence  is
    detailed and fair.  At paragraph 50 the  judge  acknowledges  that  the
    case turns on credibility.  There is no irrationality in  the  findings
    made, and in my view the judge considered all the material issues,  and
    did  not  take  into  account  any  immaterial  issues.   Adequate  and
    sustainable reasons are given for concluding that the Appellant is  not
    credible and therefore his account was not accepted, and having applied
    the country guidance case law, the judge did not err  in  finding  that
    the Appellant would not be at risk if removed from the United  Kingdom.
    The failure to give reasons for finding his acquisition of  a  passport
    so quickly implausible, does not, in  view  of  the  other  sustainable
    findings made, make the decision unsafe.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be  set
aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    There  has
been no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and no anonymity  order
is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    15th October 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.  There  is  no
fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    15th October 2015
