
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02168/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 13 January 2016                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     VC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Peterson, instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, VC, was born in 1967 and is  a  female  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.  The appellant had travelled to and from the United  Kingdom  on
    visit visas between 2013-2014 but, on 13  June  2014,  she  arrived  at
    Manchester Airport and claimed asylum.  The  claim  was  refused  by  a
    decision of the respondent dated 20 January 2015 and the  decision  was
    also taken to remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant
    appealed against  that  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Gladstone) which, in a decision promulgated on 20 April 2015, dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There  are  four  grounds  of  appeal.   The  first  ground  of  appeal
    challenges the judge's application of  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) 2004.  At  [141]  the  judge
    recorded that Section 8(2) of the 2004  Act  concerns  behaviour  by  a
    claimant which is designed or  likely  to  conceal  information  or  is
    designed or likely  to  mislead/obstruct  or  delay  the  handling  and
    resolution of a claim for asylum.  At [142] the judge found that it was
    "very clear"  that  there  had  been  "behaviour  to  which  Section  8
    applies."  I should not accept the appellant's explanation for  failing
    to answer questions during her screening  and  asylum  interview.   The
    judge noted at [144] that when the appellant's application was  refused
    in January 2015, the appellant did not disclose the true nature of  her
    claim even at that stage.

 3. The appellant challenges the judge's application  of  Section  8.   The
    appellant asserts that Section 8 relates to matters  that  "should"  be
    taken into account and that Section 8 should not  be  determinative  of
    credibility.  The ground has no merit.  It would,  perhaps,  have  been
    better for the judge to have left Section 8 to a  later  stage  of  her
    analysis but, given that her analysis had to start somewhere,  she  did
    not err in law by starting with the  application  of  Section  8.   The
    judge properly reminded herself that "great care must be  taken  before
    making adverse findings of credibility in  asylum  cases"  [139].   She
    reminded herself that she was obliged to consider the evidence  in  its
    entirety with an open and objective mind.   She  wrote,  "I  have  also
    taken  into  account  as  damaging  a  claimant's  credibility  of  any
    behaviour to which Section 8 of the 2004 Act applies";  the  fact  that
    the judge "also" took Section 8 into account having stated that she was
    required to consider the evidence in its entirety leads me to  conclude
    that she has not given excessive or  improper  emphasis  to  Section  8
    factors in this analysis.  The judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant had sought to obstruct the  proper  progress  of  her  asylum
    claim by withholding information.  Further, the  judge's  analysis  did
    not begin and end with Section 8;  in  a  very  detailed  and  thorough
    decision the judge has proceed to do what she indicated that she  would
    do at [139], that is to consider the evidence in its entirety.

 4. The second Ground of Appeal asserts that the judge has failed  to  give
    clear findings of fact.  At  [146]  the  judge  stated  that  I  should
    consider the appellant's credibility "has been fatally  damaged."   She
    gave detailed reasons for reaching that finding.  The appellant asserts
    that this was inconsistent with the judge's finding at [177]  where  it
    is asserted that the judge accepted that the  appellant  had  had  LTTE
    involvement in the past.  The ground is without merit.   The  appellant
    has entirely misconstrued what the judge has said at [177].  The  judge
    wrote, "for all the  above  reasons,  therefore,  I  do  not  find  the
    appellant's initial or subsequent claim [for asylum]  to  be  credible.
    If she had any LTTE involvement in the  past,  it  is  not  a  relevant
    history with reference to my above findings" [my emphasis].  The  judge
    did not, as the grounds assert [8] that  she  found  "as  credible  the
    appellant's  historical  involvement  with  the  LTTE."   The   judge's
    observation about the appellant's claimed LTTE history  is  conditional
    (see the use of the word "if"); she did not accept that any part of the
    appellant's account was  credible.   Accordingly,  there  has  been  no
    inconsistency in the judge's  analysis.   The  remainder  of  Ground  2
    amounts to nothing more than a  restatement  of  the  appellant's  case
    which the judge rejected.

 5. The third Ground of Appeal accuses the judge of having  approached  the
    evidence with a "closed mind."  The judge recorded at [178] and also at
    [10] that the appellant was in possession of a copy of  GJ  (Post-Civil
    War: Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 IAC.  At [10], the judge
    had expressed surprise that whilst neither representative could produce
    a copy of this country guidance decision, the appellant herself  had  a
    copy.  At [178] the judge implies that the appellant was aware of  risk
    categories detailed in GJ and that she had,  in  effect,  tailored  her
    account to show that she was a member of such categories.

 6. I find that the  ground  is  without  merit.   Mrs  Peterson,  for  the
    appellant, told me at the hearing that she did not accuse the judge  of
    having approached the evidence with  "a  closed  mind".   Further,  the
    judge has made a self-direction [139] to approach the evidence with "an
    open and objective mind."  Having said that, there was  no  reason  why
    the appellant should not have a copy of  a  relevant  country  guidance
    case and the judge's comment at [178] is possibly unhelpful.   However,
    there is no suggestion in this detailed decision  that  the  judge  has
    found the appellant's evidence incredible simply because she had in her
    possession a copy of a country guidance case.  The decision contains  a
    lengthy and very detailed analysis  of  all  the  evidence  and  it  is
    apparent that there were discrepancies in that evidence which  were  so
    serious as to leave the judge to  have  serious  doubts  regarding  the
    appellant's credibility as a witness.  The  relevance  of  the  judge's
    reference to the appellant's possession of a copy of GJ  was  explained
    by the judge's observation that the appellant had produced two entirely
    different accounts in support of  her  claim  for  asylum.   The  first
    stressed that she had had no  connection  with  the  LTTE  whereas  the
    second account suggested otherwise.  It was, in my opinion,  legitimate
    for the judge to observe that the appellant's second account  may  have
    been informed by the appellant's reading of GJ.  However, I repeat that
    I find that the judge has given other, sustainable reasons for  finding
    that the appellant did not tell the truth.

 7. Ground 4 deals with the appellant's alleged sur place activities.   The
    judge found [103] that she could give no  weight  at  all  to  evidence
    concerning the appellant's alleged sur  place  activities.   The  judge
    rejected the letter from  an  organisation  with  which  the  appellant
    claimed to be involved (GGTE) and noted that other photographs produced
    provided no date or place where they claimed to have been  taken.   The
    grounds dispute the judge's rejection of this evidence and  assert  one
    of the photographs is only "a little  blurred"  and  relates  to  other
    items of evidence produced.

 8. The ground is without merit.  The judge  has  properly  considered  the
    evidence,  such  as  it  was,  regarding  the  appellant's  sur   place
    activities in the context of all the evidence.   She  was  entitled  to
    attach little weight to evidence which was undated, badly copied and of
    which the relevance to the  appellant  or  to  her  claimed  sur  place
    activities was entirely unclear.  No submission was made at  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing that the appellant's sur place activities alone  would
    expose her to real risk  upon  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   There  was  no
    evidence to show that the Sri Lankan authorities would be aware of  the
    appellant's activities in the United Kingdom or, if  they  were  aware,
    that the appellant would be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  on  return  in
    consequence.

 9. For the reasons given above, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 11 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.


Signed   Date 11 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
