

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02340/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination sent           |
|On 4 February 2014                            |On 5 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     SA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Parker instructed by Seraphus Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 22 October 1988.
       She arrived in the United Kingdom on 31  December  2012  and  claimed
      asylum.  She claimed to be a member of the minority  Reer  Hamar  sub-
      clan of the Ashraf.  She claimed that she and her family had  suffered
      at the hands of Al-Shabab who had burned down her brother's  kiosk  in
      the local market in Beledweyne after they had accused him  of  serving
      the Ethiopian forces in the area.  She claimed that  her  brother  had
      died in the fire and that the following day, after  receiving  threats
      from Al-Shabab over the telephone, she and her family left to live  in
      Ethiopia.  She claimed that if returned to Somalia, she  would  suffer
      the same consequences from Al-Shabab as had her brother.

   3. On 26 February 2013, the Secretary of State rejected  the  appellant's
      claim for asylum and refused to grant her leave to enter proposing  to
      make directions for her removal to Somalia.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 3 June 2013, Judge Devittie dismissed the appellant's appeal.

   5. Judge Devittie accepted that  the  appellant  was  from  the  minority
      Ashraf  clan  as  she  claimed,  however,  the  Judge   rejected   the
      appellant's evidence that her family had been persecuted by Al-Shabab;
      that Al-Shabab killed her brother; and  that  the  appellant  and  her
      family had fled to Ethiopia because of threats from Al-Shabab.   As  a
      consequence, the Judge found that the appellant would not be  at  risk
      on return to her home area.  Additionally, the Judge  found  that,  in
      any event, the appellant would receive a sufficiency of protection  in
      her home area.

   6. Further, the Judge found that it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant to relocate to Mogadishu.  On the basis of evidence obtained
      by the Judge from the internet subsequent to the hearing, he concluded
      that the position in Mogadishu had improved since the country guidance
      decision in AMM and Others (Conflict; Humanitarian Crisis;  Returnees;
      FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) in which  the  Upper  Tribunal
      had concluded that, as a generality those returned to Mogadishu  faced
      a risk of indiscriminate violence falling within Article 15(c) of  the
      Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC).

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that the  Judge
      had erred in law in relying upon evidence  obtained  post-hearing  and
      upon which the parties had not had an opportunity to make submissions.
       On 24 June 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davidge) granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on that ground.



Error of Law

   8. The appeal initially came before me on 22 October 2013.  In a decision
      dated 25 October 2013, I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      had erred in law in reaching his adverse findings in relation  to  the
      risk, if any, to the appellant in Mogadishu.  My reasons are  set  out
      in full in that decision and it is not necessary to repeat them  here.



   9.  Consequently  I  set  aside  the  Judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal and directed that at a resumed hearing in the Upper
      Tribunal I would remake the decision.

  10. It was accepted by both representatives at that initial  hearing  that
      the Judge's findings in paragraphs 6-11 of  his  determination  stood.
      Those findings were  that the appellant had failed to establish:

           i) That she and her family had been attacked by the Al-Shabab in
              Beledweyne;

          ii) That her brother's kiosk in the local market had been  burned
              down and her brother had died in the fire;

         iii) That as a consequence she and her family had left to live  in
              Ethiopia.

  11. However, the Judge's finding that the appellant is  a  member  of  the
      Reer Hamar sub-clan of the minority Ashraf clan stood.

  12. The two issues to be determined at the resumed hearing were:

           i) The risk, if any, to the appellant on  return  to  Mogadishu;
              and

          ii) The risk, if any, to the appellant en-route to  her  home  in
              Beledweyne.

  13. The appeal was again listed before me on 2 December 2013 but adjourned
      in order that the appellant could obtain an  expert's  report  dealing
      with the current situation in Somalia.  The appeal  was  again  listed
      before me on 4 February 2014.

The Submissions

  14. Ms Parker who represented  the  appellant  relied  upon  her  skeleton
      argument which she expanded upon in her oral submissions.  She  relied
      upon the country guidance case of AMM and an expert report prepared by
      Dr Markus Hoehne dated 27 January 2014.

  15. Ms Parker submitted that the appellant would be  at  risk  of  serious
      harm contrary to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  if  she
      were returned to Mogadishu.  She submitted that that was the  position
      recognised, as a generality, by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AMM  and  Dr
      Hoehne's report whilst recognising that there had been a sharp decline
      in security related incidents between the end of 2012 and  early  2013
      (following the withdrawal of Al-Shabab from  Mogadishu),  nevertheless
      recognised that there had been a sharp rise in incidents in the  first
      half of 2013.  She submitted relying upon his report at paras 11,  16,
      17, 30, 33 and 34 that  the  risk  from  Al-Shabab  of  indiscriminate
      violence affecting civilians remained.  She also submitted that  there
      was a risk from undisciplined government soldiers (see para 20  of  Dr
      Hoehne's report) and a risk to lone women returning (in paras 27-29 of
      Dr Hoehne's report).   Ms  Parker  submitted  that  the  risk  to  the
      appellant, recognised in AMM, did not  require  the  appellant  to  be
      "living" in Mogadishu.  The risk arose even if she was only  there  in
      transit for a single day.

  16. Further, Ms Parker submitted that the appellant would be  at  risk  on
      travelling to Beledweyne.  She relied upon  paras  48  and  49  of  Dr
      Hoehne's report although she accepted that in  para  49  part  of  his
      reasoning had to be discounted as it was based on an acceptance of the
      appellant's claimed persecution in Beledweyne which had been  rejected
      by  Judge  Devittie.   Nevertheless,  she  submitted  that  Dr  Hoehne
      supported the appellant's claim that the 300  kilometre  road  between
      Mogadishu and Beledweyne passed largely through areas  not  controlled
      by the Somali government or AMISOM forces and there was a risk of  Al-
      Shabab checkpoints at which, because she was  returning  from  abroad,
      she would be at risk of being questioned by Al-Shabab fighters and ill-
      treatment as they tried to "defend" Somalia against western influences
      including spies.

  17. Ms Parker relied principally on  paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration
      Rules reflecting Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive.   She
      also relied on the Refugee Convention but made no separate  submission
      in respect of it.

  18. On behalf of the respondent, first  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
      appellant could not establish a real risk of persecution  contrary  to
      the Refugee Convention or of indiscriminate  violence  falling  within
      Article 15(c) in Mogadishu.  He acknowledged that,  if  the  appellant
      had to live in Mogadishu, then she might be  able  to  succeed.    But
      that, he submitted, was not her case.  She had family who  could  come
      to Mogadishu, meet her and take her back to her home area  Beledweyne.



  19. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that the appellant could not establish
      that she would be at risk if she reached Beledweyne.  In  relation  to
      Dr Hoehne's report at paras 36-37, dealing with the security situation
      in Beledweyne, Mr Richards submitted that the incidents referred to by
      Dr Hoehne were, in fact, the same incidents  described  in  three  new
      reports which occurred on 9 December 2013.  The  report,  Mr  Richards
      submitted, showed that the AMISOM forces were conducting operations in
      the town to protect the inhabitants against Al-Shabab.

  20. Thirdly, Mr Richards submitted that the appellant could not show  that
      she would be at risk in travelling from Mogadishu to Beledweyne.   She
      would be accompanied by her family.  Mr Richards submitted  that  much
      of Dr Hoehne's reasoning in para 49 of his report that she would be at
      risk was based upon the false premise that  she  and  her  family  had
      publicly spoken out against Al-Shabab which had been rejected  by  the
      Judge.  Mr Richards submitted that there was insufficient evidence  to
      show that the appellant would be at risk en-route  if  accompanied  by
      her family.  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  there  was  no  reason  to
      believe, as Dr Hoehne hypothesised, that the appellant or  her  family
      would  inform  any  Al-Shabab  fighters,  if  stopped,  that  she  was
      returning from abroad.  There was no reason to believe that she  would
      not  be  seen  as  part  of  a  family  returning  from  Mogadishu  to
      Beledweyne.

The Law

  21. In order to establish  that  she  is  a  refugee,  the  Claimant  must
      establish that she has a well-founded fear  (namely  a  real  risk  or
      reasonable likelihood) of persecution for a Convention reason  (namely
      for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular
      social group or political opinion).

  22. In relation to humanitarian  protection  the  Qualification  Directive
      requires the Claimant to establish that on return there is a real risk
      she will suffer "serious harm". Art 15 of the Qualification Directive,
      so far as relevant, defines "serious harm" as follows:

           "Serious harm consists of:

           ....

           (b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment...;
           or

           (c) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person
           by   reason   of    indiscriminate   violence   in    situations
           of...internal armed conflict."

  23. The terms of Art 15(c) are reflected in para 339C of  the  Immigration
      Rules.

  24. The CJEU set out the scope of Art 15(c) in Elgafaji v Staatssecretaris
      van Justitie (Case C-465/07) [2009] 1 WLR 2100 at [35].  It covers:

           "harm to civilians irrespective of  their  identity,  where  the
           degree  of  indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed
           conflict  taking  place  assessed  by  the  competent   national
           authorities  before  which   an   application   for   subsidiary
           protection is made, or by the courts of a Member State to  which
           a decision refusing such an application is referred reaches such
           a high level that substantial grounds are  shown  for  believing
           that a civilian, returned to the relevant  country  or,  as  the
           case may be, to the relevant region, would, solely on account of
           his presence on the territory of that country or region, face  a
           real risk of being subject to the  serious  threat  referred  in
           Article 15(c) of the Directive."

  25. At [39], the CJEU added this:

           "the more the applicant is able to show that he is  specifically
           affected  by  reason  of  factors  particular  to  his  personal
           circumstances, the lower the level  of  indiscriminate  violence
           required for him to be eligible for subsidiary protection."

  26. In the case of risk emanating from non-state actors or agents, it must
      also be established that the state or international organisations  are
      unable or unwilling to provide a sufficiency of  protection  (see  Art
      6(c)  and  Horvath  v  SSHD  [2001]  1  AC  489).   Art  7.2  of   the
      Qualification Directive sets out the standard of  protection  required
      as follows:

           "Protection  is  generally   provided   when   [the   state   or
           international organisations] take reasonable  steps  to  prevent
           the persecution or suffering of serious harm,  inter  alia,   by
           operating  an  effective  legal  system   for   the   detection,
           prosecution and punishment of acts constituting  persecution  or
           serious harm, and the applicant has access to such protection."

Discussion

  27. I deal first with the risk to the appellant in Mogadishu.

  28. In AMM the Upper Tribunal was considering the situation  in  Mogadishu
      around the time of the withdrawal of Al-Shabab in early  August  2011.
      Despite that withdrawal, the Upper Tribunal concluded that there was a
      real risk of Article 15(c) harm arising  in  Mogadishu  at  least  for
      some, if not all, individuals.

  29. At [594], the Upper Tribunal said this:

           "594. There remains in general a real risk of Article 15(c) harm
                 for the majority of those returning to [Mogadishu] after  a
                 significant period of time abroad.  Such a  risk  does  not
                 arise in the case  of  a  person  connected  with  powerful
                 actors or belonging  to  a  category  of  middle  class  or
                 professional persons, who can live to a reasonable standard
                 in circumstances where the Article 15(c), which exists  for
                 the great majority of the population, does not apply.   The
                 significance of  this  category  should  not,  however,  be
                 overstated and, in particular, is not automatically  to  be
                 assumed to exist, merely because a person has told lies."

  30. In [594], the Upper Tribunal went on to find that the  armed  conflict
      in Mogadishu did not pose a real risk of Article 3 harm in respect  of
      any person in Mogadishu.

  31. Whilst the Upper Tribunal expressed the risk as being to "the majority
      of those returning to [Mogadishu] after a significant period  of  time
      abroad", it is clear from [339] of AMM that  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
      concerned with those who were "living" or  who  had  to  "stay  for  a
      significant period of time" in Mogadishu.  At [339] the Upper Tribunal
      said this:

           "339. On the state of the evidence  as  it  was  in  July  2011,
                 before  Al-Shabab's  withdrawal  from  Mogadishu,  we  have
                 concluded that, for most returnees from the United Kingdom,
                 having to live or stay for a significant period of time  in
                 Mogadishu would have exposed them to Article  15(c)  risk."
                 (my emphasis)

  32. At [350], the Upper Tribunal confirmed the position  had  not  changed
      post the Al-Shabab withdrawal:

           "...we conclude that, as at the present time, an  Article  15(c)
           risk exists, as a general matter, in respect of the majority  of
           those in Mogadishu  and,  as  a  general  matter,  as  to  those
           returning there from the United Kingdom."

  33. The risk, of course, refers back to the risk of those living there  or
      who have to stay there for a significant period of time.

  34. So far as Mogadishu is  concerned,  therefore,  I  do  not  accept  Ms
      Parker's submission that the Upper Tribunal in AMM  concluded  that  a
      person arriving in Mogadishu (for example from the  UK)  and  who  was
      only in Mogadishu in transit to their home area was at  real  risk  of
      harm falling within Article 15(c).   That  is  abundantly  clear  from
      [339].  Although that is not specifically referred to in [594] and the
      relevant paragraph in the head note, those paragraphs have to be  seen
      in  the  light  of  [339]  and  the  wording  of  [594]  itself  which
      contemplates exceptions to the risk to  the  "majority"  of  returnees
      where, for example, a person has a connection with powerful actors  or
      belongs to a category of persons who can live to a reasonable standard
      in circumstances when the Article 15(c) risk does not apply.

  35. At [371] the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AMM  also  concluded  that  it  was
      "unlikely that a proposed return to Mogadishu at the present time will
      raise Refugee Convention issues."

  36. The crucial issue is, therefore, whether the report  of  Dr  Hoehne  -
      which was the  only  additional  evidence  post-AMM  to  which  I  was
      referred, provides an evidential basis for identifying a real risk  to
      a transient individual such as the appellant  not  recognised  in  AMM
      whether  of  harm  falling  within  Article  15(c)  as  a  result   of
      indiscriminate violence or, as I understood Ms  Parker's  submissions,
      targeted violence whether from  government  soldiers  or  as  a  "lone
      female"?

  37. Dr Hoehne deals at some length with  the  situation  in  Mogadishu  at
      paras 11-35 and 50-52 of his report.

  38. At para 11, Dr Hoehne deals with the situation in Mogadishu since  the
      withdrawal of Al-Shabab in August 2011 as follows:

           "11.  While the situation in Mogadishu was volatile for much  of
                 the past two decades, of course with changes in the  extent
                 to instability and intensity of violence, there was a sharp
                 decline in security related incidents between end  of  2012
                 and  early  2013,  and  an  equally  sharp  rise  of  these
                 incidents again in  the  first  half  of  2013.   Only  the
                 intensity of 'conventional' armed clashes inside  Mogadishu
                 between Al Shabaab and its enemy  forces  durably  declined
                 since May 2012.  This  shows  of  course  that  indeed,  Al
                 Shabaab had lost ground in the city since it had  withdrawn
                 in  August  2011.   However,  the  fact  that  hand-grenade
                 attacks, attacks with Improvised Explosive  Devices  (IEDs)
                 and  assassinations/assassination  attempts  are   on   the
                 increase again since April or May 2013 (see table 1  below)
                 shows that Al Shabaab retained a  clandestine  presence  in
                 Mogadishu and actually reorganised its  operations  in  the
                 city."

  39. At paras 12-15, Dr Hoehne cited an example  of  an  attack  on  AMISOM
      forces and Somali government forces which also  resulted  in  civilian
      casualties:

           "12.  Somali news reports from December 2012  and  January  2013
                 show that government and army officials in  Mogadishu  were
                 the main targets of assassinations  and  bomb  attacks  and
                 occasionally shoot outs.  But since around  May  2013  many
                 civilians are again falling victim to Al  Shabaab  attacks.
                 Particularly damaging in  this  regard  were  larger  scale
                 (suicide) bombings that are on the  increase  in  Mogadishu
                 over the past months (For references, see below, paragraphs
                 13-25).

             13. In this report on the situation in  Somalia  dated  31  May
                 2013, the Secretary General found in paragraphs 11 and 12:

                        11. The security situation remained fragile  during
                            the    reporting    period.     Despite    some
                            improvements in Mogadishu, Al-Shabaab continued
                            to launch asymmetrical attacks on soft  targets
                            using terrorist tactics that often resulted  in
                            civilian  casualties.   Targeted  killings  and
                            attacks were routinely reported.  The number of
                            incidents   involving   improvised    explosive
                            devices rose in 2013 in comparison  with  2012.
                            On 24 January, for  example,  a  device  hit  a
                            convoy carrying two United  Nations  personnel,
                            who  were  unharmed.   Incidents  such  as  the
                            suicide  bombings  targeting   Prime   Minister
                            Shirdon in Villa Somalia on 29 January and  the
                            head  of  the  National  Security  Intelligence
                            Agency for Banadir, which killed 10  people  on
                            18 March, showed Al-Shabaab's continued  intent
                            and capability to attack  government  and  soft
                            targets.

                        12. On 14 April, more than  30  people  died  in  a
                            complex attack perpetrated by Al-Shabaab  on  a
                            regional  court  house.    The  attack,   which
                            involved multiple gunmen  and  bombs,  was  the
                            deadliest to date in Mogadishu in 2013.  On the
                            same day, a vehicle likely  to  be  that  of  a
                            suicide bomber hit a Turkish aid agency convoy.
                             On 25  April,  a  Deputy  State  Attorney  was
                            murdered in  Mogadishu,  while,  on  5  May,  a
                            suicide  vehicle   that   targeted   a   Qatari
                            delegation travelling in a  ministerial  convoy
                            killed over 10 people.

             14. On 19  June  2013,  armed  men  including  suicide  bombers
                 reportedly  belonging  to  Al  Shabaab  attacked  the  UNDP
                 compound in Mogadishu.  At least 14 people were  killed  in
                 the attack.  The intensification of Al Shabaab attacks from
                 June onward led to many civilian casualties in Mogadishu in
                 recent months.  The UN Secretary General confirmed  in  his
                 report on the situation in Somalia, dated 3 September 2013,
                 in paragraph 12:

                       Security remained extremely volatile.  The  reporting
                       period saw a  direct  attack  by  Al-Shabaab  on  the
                       United  Nations  in  Mogadishu,  and   a   surge   of
                       asymmetric attacks during the  month  of  Ramadan  (9
                       July to 7 August).  This followed reports of upheaval
                       in  the   leadership   of   Al-Shabaab.    Meanwhile,
                       international forces undertook some  reconfiguration:
                       Ethiopian forces withdrew from  Baidoa  on  15  July,
                       handing over security responsibilities to AMISOM  and
                       the  Somali  security   forces.     AMISOM   deployed
                       additional  forces  to  Kismaayo,  but  continue   to
                       emphasize that it lacks the capacity to  support  new
                       military advances.

                 In paragraph 14 of the same report the UN Secretary General
                 added:

                       There was a surge in violent attacks in the  capital.
                       In May and June, hand grenade  attacks  in  Mogadishu
                       doubled compared to the start  of  the  year.   There
                       were three times as  many  bombings  in  June  as  in
                       January.  Targeted killings  occurred  almost  daily.
                       There were at least four  mortar  attacks,  including
                       two against Villa Somalia on 20 May and 17 June.   On
                       12  July,  an  improvised  explosive  device   attack
                       against an AMISOM  convoy  on  the  airport  road  in
                       Mogadishu  resulted  in   more   than   17   civilian
                       casualties.  On 27 July,  a  complex  attack  by  Al-
                       Shabaab against a facility adjacent  to  the  Turkish
                       Embassy resulted in the death of one Turkish security
                       officer and one civilian, and injured at least  eight
                       others.

          15. Insecurity in Mogadishu continued on a  high  level.   Anyone
              playing  a  (even  only  subordinate)  official  role  was  a
              potential target for  Al  Shabaab  still  holding  sway  over
              around  six  of  the  sixteen  districts  of  Mogadishu.   In
              November 2013 alone, a good number  of  government  employees
              such as soldiers, commanders and judges were assassinated  in
              Mogadishu.   The  UN  Secretary  General  reported   in   the
              paragraphs 10 and 11 of his most  recent  report  on  Somalia
              dated 2 December 2013:

                   10.  The  security  situation   in   Mogadishu   remained
                       relatively unstable during the reporting period.  The
                       African Union Mission in  Somalia  (AMISOM)  and  the
                       Somali national security forces continued  to  thwart
                       Al-Shabaab  attacks  almost  daily  in  and   outside
                       Mogadishu.  In a significant incident on 3 September,
                       Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for an attack on  a
                       convoy of the Federal Government  that  was  carrying
                       security personnel in connection with  the  visit  by
                       the President of Somalia to the southern port city of
                       Marka.

                   11. On 4 September, a string  of  coordinated  explosions
                       occurred in all districts  of  Mogadishu  and,  on  7
                       September, a suicide bombing attack against a popular
                       restaurant near Villa Somalia killed  15  people  and
                       injured more than 20 others.  Small-scale attacks and
                       targeted  assassinations  also   continued.    On   8
                       November, two bombs exploded at the Maka Al Mukaramma
                       Hotel in Mogadishu, killing at least four people  and
                       wounding more than a dozen,  including  a  member  of
                       parliament.  Al Shabaab  claimed  responsibility  for
                       the attack."

  40. At paragraph 17 Dr Hoehne concluded that:

           "Against this background, it becomes clear  the  Al  Shabaab  at
           present (early December 2013) has  a  considerable  capacity  to
           operate in Mogadishu and since as late as June 2013, the attacks
           of the group on government and military officials, but  also  on
           civilians who fall victim to suicide and other bomb attacks, are
           on the increase."

  41. At para 21, under the heading "Civilian costs", Dr Hoehne said this:

           "21.  Scores of civilians have  been  killed  between  September
                 2012 and January 2013 by gunmen, through indiscriminate use
                 of force by armed groups, or in bomb attacks.  The dramatic
                 situation of civilians in Mogadishu has  been  reported  by
                 Midnimo.com,  a  Somali  website,  which  reported  on   23
                 September 2012 that  'Mogadishu's  security  situation  has
                 deteriorated and more than 30 people  were  killed  in  the
                 capital in the last three days only.  Al Shabaab  continued
                 assassinations and terror attacks in  Mogadishu  and  other
                 places in south-central Somalia."

  42. At paragraph 23, Dr Heohne referred to  a  report  of  a  joint  fact-
      finding mission by the Danish Immigration Service  conducted  from  16
      April to 7 May 2013 that:

           "The improvement of the general security situation was  reported
           since Al Shabaab left the city.  However, threats emanating from
           improvised explosives and assassinations still exist  and  cause
           fear among people in Mogadishu.  Many also still are  afraid  to
           talk about Al Shabaab and stressed that the  organisation  still
           has a sizable but clandestine presence in Mogadishu."

  43. At paras 27-29, Dr Heohne  cited  a  number  of  background  documents
      concerning "sexual violence" as follows:

           "27.  In paragraph 53 of his most recent report on the situation
                 in Somalia dated 2 December 2013, the UN Secretary  General
                 found:  "Government efforts and capacity  to  end  violence
                 against  women  and   girls   remain   extremely   limited.
                 Documented  cases  of  rape  continued  to  be   widespread
                 throughout the country." Amnesty International stressed  in
                 a report published in August 2013:

                       Rape and other forms of  sexual  violence  have  long
                       been part of the multitude  of  human  rights  abuses
                       committed by different actors in Somalia, during more
                       than  two  decades  of  conflict.   [...]  Women  and
                       children remain at risk of  sexual  violence  and  in
                       this context of lawlessness the avenues for  them  to
                       get justice are extremely limited.

                 A central issue with  sexual  and  gender  based  violence,
                 which makes it easy for perpetrators to hide  their  claim,
                 is the stigmatisation involved with rape.  Fortuun Adan,  a
                 Somali human rights activist who is co-founder  of  'Sister
                 Somalia', a Mogadishu-based organisation protecting women's
                 rights, stressed:  "A lot of people know what is  going  on
                 but they are denying.  [...] Even the family, they deny  if
                 their girl gets raped because they don't  want  her  to  be
                 stigmatized and shamed and that makes it hard."

             28. The  sexual  violence  is  perpetrated  by  various  groups
                 including those supposed to protect Somali civilians,  such
                 as Somali government forces and even AMISOM forces.   Human
                 Rights Watch summarised in a statement in November 2013:

                       AMISOM forces have previously  faced  allegations  of
                       sexual violence in Somalia.  The UN Security  Council
                       in a March 2013 resolution called on AMISOM  to  take
                       measures to prevent sexual abuse and exploitation and
                       address allegations of abuse.  In July, the  Security
                       Council  Monitoring  Group  on  Somalia  and  Eritrea
                       reported that allegations of sexual exploitation  and
                       abuse are regularly levelled against AMISOM but  that
                       the  mission  lacks  procedures  to   address   these
                       allegations systematically.

                 Amnesty International reported in August 2013:

                       There have also  been  allegations  of  rape  against
                       members of the peacekeeping Africa Union  Mission  in
                       Somalia (AMISOM).  On  8  August  2013  a  woman  was
                       reportedly abducted in Mogadishu by  four  people  in
                       government uniforms  and  taken  to  AMISOM  barracks
                       where she  alleges  she  was  drugged  and  raped  on
                       multiple occasions.  She was released two days later.
                        There are allegations that there were other women in
                       the barracks who were  subjected  to  similar  brutal
                       treatment.

             29. This is an ongoing issue.  In  paragraph  54  of  his  most
                 recent report on Somalia dated  2  December  2013,  the  UN
                 Secretary General confirmed that

                       UNSOM continued to follow up on the case  of  alleged
                       gang rape of a 19-year old woman by  AMISOM  soldiers
                       at Maslah Camp in Mogadishu.  Serious  concerns  have
                       been raised about the  way  in  which  investigations
                       were conducted and it has been reported that attempts
                       have been made to intimidate people connected to  the
                       case."

  44. At paragraph 34, Dr Heohne reached the following conclusion:

           "34.  Regarding the general insecurity in Mogadishu, in my  view
                 an important turn can be observed.  Between the second half
                 of 2012 and early 2013, the security situation in Mogadishu
                 started to  improve.    This  was  related  mainly  to  the
                 continued weakening of Al Shabaab  and  the  enthusiasm  of
                 many Somalis for the new government under President  Hassan
                 Sheikh Mahmoud.  But Al Shabaab reorganised itself  in  the
                 first half of 2013, while the government was  not  able  to
                 intensify its control over much  of  southern  and  central
                 Somalia substantially.  Al Shabaab turned into  a  smaller,
                 internally more coherent and therefore  more  potent  group
                 that specialised on operating  clandestinely  in  Mogadishu
                 and  elsewhere.   The  West-Gate  attacks  in  Nairobi   in
                 September 2013 showed its new  face  even  internationally.
                 Also in Mogadishu and parts of southern Somalia  the  group
                 stepped up its operations from late June 2013 onward.  This
                 trend is continuing, as outlined in the paragraphs above."

  45. At paragraph 35, Dr Heohne dealt with Article 15(c) and  the  decision
      in AMM as follows:

           "35.  Against this background, it is in my view probable that an
                 Article 15(c) risk exists, as described by the tribunal  in
                 the case of AMM & Others (Somalia) v SSHD [UKUT (IAC)  445,
                 2011] (22 November 2011) 'as a general matter,  in  respect
                 of the majority of those in Mogadishu' and those  returning
                 from  the  diaspora  without   special   arrangements   and
                 protection  in  place.   Article  15(c)  is,  according  to
                 Paragraph 328 of the Tribunal's decision  in  the  case  of
                 AMM, concerned 'with "threat [...] to a civilian's life  or
                 person" rather to  specific  acts  of  violence  [...]  the
                 threat  is  inherent  in  a  general  situation  of   armed
                 conflict.  [...] The violence that gives rise to the threat
                 is  described  as  indiscriminate'.   In  my   view,   this
                 assessment in the case of AMM & Ors is still -  or  better:
                 again - valid  regarding  the  situation  in  Mogadishu  in
                 January 2014. "

  46. At para 50, Dr Heohne dealing partly with the risk,  if  any,  to  the
      appellant in Mogadishu but also the risk, if any, to her  having  left
      Mogadishu concluded that:

           "50.  {The appellant]... runs a specific and high  risk  to  her
                 life upon return to Somalia"







  47. Dr Heohne then set out three reasons as follows:

                 "...First, as a young woman  of  about  25  years,  she  is
                 highly vulnerable to sexual abuse.  Rape and sexual slavery
                 are still widely spread in Somalia and women;  particularly
                 women belonging to  minority  groups  or  IDPs  (Internally
                 Displaced Persons) fall frequently victim to these kinds of
                 abuse and violence and have little to no chance to  address
                 such matters with clan or state authorities (see paragraphs
                 26 to 28 above).   Second, [the appellant] and  her  family
                 have, according to her own account, spoken out  against  Al
                 Shabaab on the occasion of the killing of her  brother.   I
                 agree with  the  statements  of  [the  appellant]  that  Al
                 Shabaab continue to operate  clandestinely  and  one  often
                 does not realise who among the  'civilians'  in  one  area,
                 e.g.  Beledweyne or parts of  Mogadishu,  is  a  hidden  Al
                 Shabaab member or supporter.  The 'hidden  members'  of  Al
                 Shabaab in fact spy  for  the  organisation  and  seek  out
                 dissenters.   Therefore,  upon  return  to  Somalia,   [the
                 appellant] runs a  serious  risk  of  being  identified  as
                 someone who  spoke  out  against  Al  Shabaab.  This  would
                 certainly lead to persecution by Al Shabaab.  In  Mogadishu
                 this risk is lower since [the  appellant]  originates  from
                 Beledweyne and there the conflict between her family and Al
                 Shabaab happened.  Still, Al Shabaab members are mobile and
                 it cannot be excluded that by chance [the  appellant]  runs
                 into a (secret) member of Al Shabaab who knows her and  her
                 family also in Mogadishu.  Third, as someone returning from
                 the diaspora, particularly from the 'West' (i.e., UK), [the
                 appellant] is very likely to  arise  suspicion  by  locals,
                 including local Al Shabaab  members  and  supporters.   The
                 head of a  Mogadishu-based  research  institution,  whom  I
                 asked for his  assessment  of  the  security  situation  in
                 Mogadishu, with particular focus  on  the  situation  of  a
                 returnee to the city from abroad (without privileged access
                 to security, like government officials or  well-established
                 businessmen), wrote me in a mail dated 2, November 2013:

                       [...]I can tell you that the notion that security has
                       improved for ordinary Somalis that European countries
                       can now deport to Somalia is deeply  worrying.   Even
                       if they're Hawiye, the nature  of  the  threats  they
                       face are not clan warfare and can't be  protected  by
                       other clans; people face  serious  threats  from  al-
                       Shabaab.  And individuals returned from the  diaspora
                       are particularly in jeopardy as  they  become  target
                       both for al-Shabaab and Somali  security  forces  who
                       suspect that they might be rejected from  Europe  due
                       to their extremist  views.   In  short,  this  is  no
                       country for returned diaspora.  The threats are grave
                       and the price people pay could be ultimate.  Even  if
                       people have and can afford bodyguards,  like  me,  my
                       colleagues and I face great dangers  because  of  the
                       work we are doing."

  48. At para 51 Dr Heohne set out a news report in  which  it  is  reported
      that an Al-Shabab  commander  had  warned  diaspora  Somalis  in  late
      December 2013 that they would be targeted specifically  for  "bringing
      indecency" to Somalia.  The news report is in the following terms:

           "30/12/2013 Al-Shabab threaten to target Somali diaspora, accuse
           them of indecency

           Text of report by privately-owned Somali news website Alldhacdo

           Al-Shabab Commander for Banaadir Region,  Ali  Muhammad  Husayn,
           has said they will be targeting Somali diaspora  returning  from
           abroad with attacks.

           The Al-Shabab commander said Somalis from diaspora have  brought
           indecency into  the  country  and  are  even  working  with  the
           unbelievers and they would therefore target them as they  target
           government  forces  and  AMISOM  [African  Union's  Mission   in
           Somalia].  He also urged Mogadishu residents to stay  away  from
           areas populated by Somalis from diaspora as well  as  government
           and AMISOM troops.

           Ali Husayn urged Mogadishu residents to stay away from 'enemies'
           as they would target them.

           Source: Alldhacdo in Somali 0000gmt 30 Dec 13."

  49. For the present, I am concerned with this latter material in  relation
      to the risk, if any, to the appellant in  Mogadishu  rather  than  her
      journey to Beledweyne.

  50. Whilst Dr Heohne's report recognises that the  security  situation  in
      Mogadishu improved  in  the  second  half  of  2012  and  early  2013.
      However, since that time there has been a further deterioration in the
      security  situation.   The  main  targets  of  Al-Shabab   have   been
      government forces or AMISOM  forces  rather  than  civilians  directly
      although, as a result of the terrorist attacks by Al-Shabab there have
      been civilian casualties.  This led Dr Heohne in paragraph 35  of  his
      report to conclude that  the  risk  recognised  in  AMM  continued  in
      January 2014.  The evidence, and Dr Heohne's  report  read  as  whole,
      does not however, in my judgement, establish  that  any  risk  existed
      beyond that recognised by the Upper Tribunal in AMM.  That risk was to
      the majority of the population of Mogadishu who lived in Mogadishu  or
      spent a significant period of time there.  That,  as  I  have  already
      indicated, is not the appellant's situation.  The  appellant,  on  the
      findings of the Judge which stand, has male family members  living  in
      Beledweyne including a brother and uncles.  There  is  no  reason  why
      they cannot come to Mogadishu to accompany  her  back  to  Beledweyne.
      The appellant does not have to live or spend a significant  period  of
      time in Mogadishu.

  51. Consequently, on the basis of AMM and the report of Dr  Heohne,  I  am
      not satisfied that there is a real risk falling within  Article  15(c)
      to her by transiting from  Mogadishu  airport,  if  necessary  through
      Mogadishu, to return to her home area.

  52. The Upper Tribunal in AMM did not consider that  there  was  any  real
      risk of persecution engaging the Refugee Convention (apart  from  FGM)
      in Mogadishu.  Whilst I accept that there is evidence of  some  sexual
      violence directed against women and girls in  Mogadishu,  despite  the
      report set out  in  paragraphs  27-29  of  Dr  Heohne's  report,  that
      evidence does not establish a real risk to this appellant  accompanied
      by her male family members at the beginning of her journey to her home
      area.

  53. I do not accept Ms Parker's submission, based upon paragraph 50 of  Dr
      Heohne's report, that the  appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  as  a
      returned member of the Somali diaspora in Mogadishu.  Mogadishu is  no
      longer controlled by Al-Shabab and there is, in my judgement, no  real
      risk that she would be apprehended to be and, therefore identified as,
      such a person simply passing through the City.  The basis of the  risk
      set out in paras 50-51 of Dr Heohne's report is clearly premised  upon
      the appellant living in Mogadishu where he states that:

           "As someone returning from the diaspora, particularly  from  the
           'West' (i.e., UK), [the appellant] is very likely to arise (sic)
           suspicion by locals,  including  local  Al-Shabaab  members  and
           supporters."

  54. The real risk of harm is to residents not transient individuals.

  55. For these reasons, I reject Ms Parker's submissions that the appellant
      has established a real risk of serious  harm  falling  within  Article
      15(c) or of persecution for a Convention reason in Mogadishu.

  56. I now turn to the second basis upon which the appellant puts her case,
      namely that she is at risk en-route to her home  area  of  Beledweyne.
      Dr Heohne deals with this is paras 48-49 of his report as follows:

           "48.  The distance between Mogadishu and  Beledweyne  is  around
                 300 kilometers. There is one road leading there.  There are
                 no  commercial  flights  operating  between  Mogadishu  and
                 Beledweyne.  The road from the capital to Beledweyne  leads
                 largely through areas  which  are  not  controlled  by  the
                 Somali  government  or  AMISOM  or  Ethiopian  forces.   As
                 indicated in the paragraphs 38 to 41 above, the control the
                 government  exerts  in  southern  and  central  Somalia  is
                 extremely limited, and also  AMISOM  and  Ethiopian  troops
                 focus on strategic spots and do not  control  much  of  the
                 hinterland.  In September  2013,  the  Council  of  Foreign
                 Relations wrote about Al Shabaab:

                       Despite strategic setbacks inflicted by AMISOM forces
                       over the past several  years,  al-Shabab  remains  in
                       control of most of southern and central Somalia.  The
                       group's  military  strength  is  approximately  5,000
                       fighters, as  it  has  "preserved  the  core  of  its
                       fighting force," according to  the  July  UN  report.
                       Analysts say the group's  resilience  is  likely  the
                       result of significant support from  local  clans  and
                       the  perception  among  elders  that  it  remains   a
                       plausible  alternative  to  corrupt  institutions  in
                       Mogadishu.

      This situation has not changed dramatically in early 2014. Al  Shabaab
                 has still many positions  in  rural  southern  and  central
                 Somalia, is in a position to  erect  road  blocks  and,  as
                 outlined  above  (paragraph  37)  operates  in  and  around
                 Beledweyne.

           49.   On her way from Mogadishu to Beledweyne,  [the  appellant]
                 is  very  likely  to  encounter  Al  Shabaab  who   control
                 roadblocks in the hinterland  and  operate  hold  positions
                 around  Beledweyne.  Upon  encountering  Al  Shabaab,  [the
                 appellant] will face a very high risk of  being  questioned
                 as someone who returned from abroad  (the  UK),  if  anyone
                 around her (e.g., in the care in which she  is  travelling)
                 would have heard  about  her  stay  abroad.   Somalis  from
                 abroad, particularly the West, arise the  suspicion  of  Al
                 Shabaab fighters who try to 'defend'  Somalia  against  any
                 Western influence and try to seek out spies  of  the  enemy
                 (including western  counter-terrorism  forces).   Moreover,
                 the closer [the appellant] would come  to  Beledweyne,  the
                 higher the risk would be that she is being controlled by an
                 Al  Shabaab  member  who  knows  her  from  her   time   in
                 Beledweyne, when in 2012 she and her family publicly  spoke
                 out against the group after the brother of [the  appellant]
                 had been killed.  If she would be identified by a local  Al
                 Shabaab member or supporter, she almost certainly would  be
                 severely punished, possibly even executed,  by  Al  Shabaab
                 forces in the vicinity of Beledweyne."

  57. Ms Parker accepted that the second half  of  paragraph  49  could  not
      assist the appellant as it was based upon a  risk  deriving  from  the
      fact that her family had spoken out against Al-Shabab and her  brother
      had been killed.   She  accepted  that  that  was  contrary  to  Judge
      Devittie's findings which were  preserved.   Nevertheless,  Ms  Parker
      submitted that Dr Heohne's reasoning in paras 48 and the first half of
      para 49 supported the appellant's claim.

  58. In AMM, the Upper Tribunal dealt with the risk to a person  having  to
      traverse an Al-Shabab area.  At [462] the Upper Tribunal said this:


           "...the appellants drew particular  attention  to  the  evidence
           regarding  Al-Shabab's  generally  paranoid  behaviour  and,  in
           particular, its apparent fear of spies.  There is sufficient  of
           this evidence, often of  a  harrowing  nature,  to  support  the
           appellants' contention that one of the ways in  which  a  person
           may most seriously fall foul of Al-Shabab is by being  suspected
           of being a spy, whether for TFG/AMISOM, the Ethiopians, the  USA
           or other western interests."

  59. At [464] the Upper Tribunal continued:

           "...given the fact of Al-Shabab's paranoia, its violently  anti-
           Western stance and its (perhaps justified) feeling of insecurity
           in recent times,  as  funding  has  become  more  difficult  and
           military reverses more common (including what  appears  to  have
           been a forced withdrawal from positions in Mogadishu), we do not
           consider that it is engaging in speculation to conclude that the
           fact of having come from the United Kingdom  is,  as  a  general
           matter, likely to elevate the risk to a person of being  branded
           a spy, which carries the very real risk of serious ill-treatment
           or death.  The  only  exception  we  would  make  is  where  the
           returnee is seeking out Al-Shabab in order to join its ranks  as
           a fighter for international jihad."

  60. However, at [466] the Upper Tribunal limited the scope of this risk:

           "We very much doubt whether persons  who  have  been  away  from
           Somalia for only a short period  of  time,  and  certainly  only
           since the emergence of Al-Shabab as a major  actor  in  southern
           and central Somalia, would have undergone linguistic changes and
           changes in his or her deportment, such as  to  draw  Al-Shabab's
           attention to them.  We are, however, prepared to accept,  having
           regard to the lower standard of proof, that  a  person  who  has
           been outside Somalia for a longer period  could  have  undergone
           such changes.  It is also plainly the case that an overweight or
           even well-nourished man or woman is likely in  the  present  sad
           state of affairs  to  be  noticeable  in  southern  and  central
           Somalia."

  61. At [473] the Upper Tribunal dealt with the situation of those who have
      to pass through Al-Shabab areas:

           "We consider  that  the  general  findings  we  have  just  made
           encompass those who  are  reasonably  likely  to  have  to  pass
           through  Al-Shabab  areas.   Although  the  evidence   regarding
           behaviour at checkpoints was mixed, and we accept that  in  some
           areas, such as the Afgoye Corridor, there  has  been  (at  least
           until very recently) considerable traffic to and  from  the  Al-
           Shabab-controlled  area,  the  unpredictability   of   Al-Shabab
           behaviour, the extremely grave and immediate likely consequences
           of being categorised as a spy and the assumption that one of the
           functions of checkpoints is to serve what Al-Shabab  regards  as
           its  security  concerns,   point   clearly   towards   including
           travellers within the general finding, just as the ECtHR did  at
           [277] of Sufi & Elmi."

  62. At [516] the Upper Tribunal added this:

           "So far as Al-Shabab is concerned, as is  already  evident  from
           our findings, a distinction needs to  be  drawn  between  people
           passing through the checkpoints, who are long-term residents  of
           Somalia, and those who have been living  in  the  West  for  any
           significant period of time."

  63. At [517]-[518] the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  the  risk  to  travellers,
      particularly women even if accompanied by, for example, a male  driver
      as follows:

           "517.  We  do  not  consider  that  the  risks  to   travellers,
                 particularly women, are likely to be materially  alleviated
                 by travelling in a minibus  or  other  form  of  transport,
                 operated by a person who has never been away and "knows the
                 ropes".  Using such a form of transport may, we accept,  be
                 of assistance; but the combination of the  unpredictability
                 of Al-Shabab behaviour and the evidence of their brutality,
                 when they  take  against  an  individual,  is  such  as  to
                 constitute a real risk.

           518.  Whilst being in the presence of a male minibus driver,  or
                 similar, might facilitate travel by a single woman, it does
                 not significantly alter either the  general  risk  we  have
                 just described or the  specific  risk  of  sexual  violence
                 towards women."

  64. I accept on the basis of Dr Heohne's report, which was not  challenged
      on this issue, that the appellant would have to pass through Al-Shabab
      controlled areas or, at least, areas not  under  the  control  of  the
      Somali government or AMISOM forces and  is  likely  to  encounter  Al-
      Shabab checkpoints along the 300 kilometre road.

  65. I do not, however, accept on the basis of AMM that the appellant is at
      risk. First, she will only have been away from Somalia since  December
      2012.  She does not fall into the category in AMM of a person who  has
      been away from Somalia for a significant period  such  that  she  will
      readily identify herself to  Al-Shabab  as  a  member  of  the  Somali
      diaspora (see [466]).  Dr Hoehne's  assessment  of  the  risk  to  the
      appellant is, in part, based upon someone with her 'giving  away'  she
      has been to the UK. I accept Mr Richards' submission that there is  no
      reason for her or her family members (who can  come  to  Mogadishu  to
      accompany her home) to disclose this information.  No specific feature
      of the appellant now was identified to me or in Dr Hoehne's report  to
      suggest that she would be self-evidently anyone other than a returning
      resident of Beledweyne who, of course, on Judge  Devittie's  findings,
      had no previous problems with Al-Shabab.  The latter judicial  finding
      removes much  of  the  substance  of  the  remainder  of  Dr  Hoehne's
      reasoning why she would be at risk.  Consequently,  I  do  not  accept
      that in one of  these  encounters  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
      appellant would be identified as someone who  had  returned  from  the
      "West".

  66. Secondly, the risk to 'lone women' of sexual  violence  recognised  in
      AMM does not apply.  She will have family members  to  accompany  her.
      Clan violence is now less important and, despite her family being from
      a minority clan, she cannot, in my judgment, be  considered  to  be  a
      'loan woman' without protection.  This is not a case, as postulated by
      the Upper Tribunal in AMM, of a 'lone woman' who would not be able  to
      seek the protection of unconnected men, for example driving the bus on
      which she was travelling.  I am not satisfied that  there  is  a  real
      risk of sexual violence to the appellant en route to her home area.

  67. Taking into account all the evidence, I am not satisfied that there is
      a real risk of serious harm or persecution to the appellant during her
      journey to Beledweyne entitling the appellant  to  refugee  status  or
      humanitarian protection.

  68. Judge Devittie's findings were that the appellant had not  established
      a risk of persecution for a Convention reason  in  her  home  area  of
      Beledweyne and she would provided with  a  sufficiency  of  protection
      there.  Ms Parker did not seek to argue that she would be otherwise at
      risk in Beledweyne.  For the avoidance of doubt, I accept Mr Richards'
      submission that Dr Hoehne's report at paras 36-37 repeats an  incident
      that occurred in Beledweyne and does  show  a  continued  presence  by
      AMISOM forces to provide a  reasonable  level  of  protection  to  the
      inhabitants of Beledweyne.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant
      would be exposed to a real risk of harm in her home area.   And,  like
      Judge Devitte whose finding stands unchallenged, there  would  in  any
      event be a sufficiency of protection.

  69. The reality is that, as Mr Richards accepted in his  submissions,  the
      appellant cannot be expected to  live  in  Mogadishu  because  of  the
      Article 15(c) risk  to  residents  in  general.   She  is,  therefore,
      required to return to her home area.   For the reasons I  have  given,
      however, I am not satisfied that there is a real risk of serious  harm
      or persecution to the appellant  travelling  to  her  home  area.   No
      separate argument was made that the appellant could succeed under  Art
      3 of the ECHR on any basis.

  70. For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

Decision

  71. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That decision  is  set
      aside.

  72. I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum  and
      humanitarian protection grounds and, to the extent relied upon, Art  3
      of the ECHR.


                               Signed
                               [pic]
                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               28 February 2014
