
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02934/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 May 2016                                 |On 7 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                              Shirzad Walizada

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
                    Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  appeals  with  permission
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrews, who  in
    a  determination  promulgated  on  15  December  2015   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on
    15 February to refuse him asylum in Britain.

2.   The appellant had claimed asylum in October 2009 asserting that he  was
    15 years of age.  His application was refused.  His appeal was heard by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parker who found that because  of  his
    relationship with a young woman in his  local  area  in  Kabul  he  was
    likely to be at risk but that he would be able to relocate to avoid any
    further  difficulties.   However,  as   the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been born as he had claimed on 16 January 1995  he  found
    the decision was not in accordance with the law and remitted it to  the
    Secretary of State to consider her statutory duties under Section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009:  in  particular  the
    appeal was remitted on the basis that the Secretary of  State  had  not
    considered whether or not there were  suitable  reception  arrangements
    for the appellant in Afghanistan  or  made  any  enquiries  as  to  the
    whereabouts of his family members.

3.   The respondent then  made  a  fresh  decision  granting  the  appellant
    limited leave to remain as an unaccompanied child.  That  decision  was
    again appealed and considered  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Walters and dismissed.  Judge Walters  also  accepted  the  appellant's
    evidence but again considered that internal relocation was open to  the
    appellant.  An application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was made and granted and in April 2011  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic found a material error of law  in  Judge  Walters'  determination
    because the respondent had still not discharged her duty under  Section
    55 of the 2009 Act.   The  appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kekic  to  the  extent  that  it  was  remitted  to  the
    respondent to consider her obligations under Section 55.  The Court  of
    Appeal  refused  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Kekic'  decision.    An
    application by the appellant was then made for further leave to remain.
     That again was refused and in  these  circumstances  the  appeal  came
    before Judge Andrews.  What is of note however is that  in  July  2012,
    after the hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic a judge in the High
    Court found that the appellant was an adult whose date of birth was  16
    July 1990 and he was therefore not a minor.  In  refusing  the  further
    application the Secretary  of  State  relied  on  that  fact  and  also
    emphasised that internal relocation  to  Mazar-e-Sharif  was  a  viable
    option for the appellant to avoid any risk of persecution and  that  he
    would be able to find a job and support himself there.   Reference  was
    further made to the Assisted Voluntary Return Scheme to help  with  the
    appellant's re-integration into Afghanistan.

4.     In his witness statement which was considered by  Judge  Andrews  the
    appellant had said  that  his  only  family  was  his  mother  and  two
    maternal uncles, one of whom lived in Kabul and the other  in  Mazar-e-
    Sharif and that he feared return to Afghanistan because he had  entered
    into a  relationship  with  a  young  woman,  Farzana  which  had  been
    discovered by her father who was a powerful,  well-connected  commander
    in the Afghan Army and that had led to the  appellant  and  his  mother
    fleeing to the appellant's uncle's house in Mazar-e-Sharif.   Farzana's
    father had beat her and the appellant's uncle  in  Kabul  to  find  out
    where the appellant was: his uncle had then also relocated to  Mazar-e-
    Sharif.  Farzana's father had been told that the  appellant  was  there
    but not exactly where.  The appellant's assertion was that  he  was  in
    danger, even in Mazar-e-Sharif from Farzana's father. The appellant had
    claimed that he had no contact with any of  his  family  since  leaving
    Afghanistan and the family had planned to leave Afghanistan and he  had
    unsuccessfully tried to contact them.

5.   Judge Andrews heard evidence from a Mr  S  Krieger  of  the  Children's
    Society and a friend of the  appellant,  Mr  Hamidi.   Mr  Krieger  had
    asserted that the appellant was a vulnerable young man who was homeless
    and jobless but that he had referred him to a  hostel.   The  appellant
    had told Mr Krieger that  he  had  nightmares  relating  to  events  in
    Afghanistan and that he  experienced  severe  anxiety  and  Mr  Kreiger
    asserted that the appellant had genuine fear that he would be harmed if
    he returned to Afghanistan.  The appellant had been referred to Freedom
    From Torture for counselling and an appointment was awaited.  It was Mr
    Krieger's view that the appellant had  been  traumatised  by  what  had
    happened in Afghanistan.

6.   Mr Hamidi had become a close friend  of  the  appellant  since  meeting
    here.  He said that the appellant had been trying to trace  his  family
    through the Red Cross.

7.   Judge Andrews considered a report from Ms Kralj, a psychotherapy  nurse
    specialising in complex trauma, regarding the appellant's mental health
    and  considered  considerable  background  evidence  including  country
    expert reports from Dr Guistozzi and  Dr  Van  Engeland.   She  applied
    relevant case law and noted that Ms Robinson who also  appeared  before
    her, had argued that she should not follow the country guidance case of
    AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163  (IAC)  because  of
    the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan.   She  noted  that  Dr  Van
    Engeland referred to events which had taken  place  in  Mazar-e-Sharif.
    Judge Andrews considered the various reports before her in  detail  and
    then in paragraphs 42 onwards set out her findings of  credibility  and
    fact.  She felt bound by the findings of Judge Parker and Judge Walters
    and therefore accepted that the  appellant  had  become  involved  with
    Farzana in  Kabul  and  that  there  would  be  repercussions  for  the
    appellant if he returned to Kabul.  She  therefore  accepted  that  the
    appellant was reasonably likely to be at risk in  his  local  area  and
    took the view that relocation was open to the appellant.

8.   With regard to the appellant's health  she  stated  that  she  accepted
    that the appellant suffered from a major depressive disorder.

9.   She made general credibility findings and placed  weight  on  the  fact
    the appellant had not claimed international protection before  arriving
    in Britain and also reached the conclusion that the  appellant's  claim
    that Farzana's father had found out that he had relocated  to  Mazar-e-
    Sharif was an embellishment and that that damaged his credibility.

10.  She considered in detail the fact that the appellant had told her  that
    he had given his uncle's name to somebody called Hafiz  asking  him  to
    find his family but that they had been unable to do  so.   However  she
    placed weight on the fact that Mr Hafiz had not attended  the  hearing.
    There was no evidence why that was the case.

11.  She also referred to the issue of the appellant's  age  accepting  that
    there had been a finding that the  appellant  had  been  born  in  1990
    rather than in 1995 as he had claimed and  therefore  he  had  been  an
    adult when he sought asylum here.  She placed weight on  a  finding  by
    Judges Walters and Parker that the appellant's claim not to  have  been
    in contact with anyone in Afghanistan since leaving lacked  credibility
    and she did not accept the appellant's evidence that he had not been in
    touch with his family since leaving Afghanistan.  Indeed she found that
    the appellant was someone who was willing to tell untruths in the  hope
    of improving his immigration status.   Having  reached  the  conclusion
    that the appellant's family were in Mazar-e-Sharif in 2010 where one of
    his uncles already lived she adopted Judge Walters' conclusion that  he
    had been satisfied that the appellant  had  family  to  whom  he  could
    return in Afghanistan.  She found moreover that he would not  be  found
    by Farzana's family in Mazar-e-Sharif reaching  that  conclusion  after
    having  considered  in  some  detail  the  reports  before  her.    She
    considered that internal relocation was open  to  the  appellant.   She
    concluded therefore that the appellant  was  not  entitled  to  refugee
    status.  Moreover having considered the  background  evidence  and  the
    relevant country guidance she considered that he was  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.  For the  same  reasons  she  found  that  the
    appellant was not entitled to protection under Article 3 of  the  ECHR.
    In considering the issue of the appellant's rights under Article  8  of
    the  ECHR  she  applied  relevant  case   law   and   concluded   that,
    notwithstanding  the  appellant's  mental  health  problems,  that  his
    removal to Afghanistan where he had  family  members  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his rights under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

12.  The rather lengthy grounds of appeal asserted that the judge had  erred
    in her approach to the appellant's credibility: they  referred  to  the
    fact that Mr Krieger and Ms Kralj had found him to be  credible.   They
    argued that the judge should not have placed weight on  the  fact  that
    the appellant had not claimed asylum earlier and that she was wrong  to
    place weight on the fact that Mr Hafiz had not  attended  the  hearing.
    They stated that she had  erred  in  not  departing  from  the  country
    guidance case of AK and that her approach to Article 8 of the ECHR  was
    flawed.

13.  In her submissions Ms Robinson relied firstly on the skeleton  argument
    which largely repeated the terms of the grounds of  appeal  emphasising
    that  there  was  evidence  from  Mr  Hafiz  regarding  his  travel  to
    Afghanistan and his lack of success in tracing the appellant's  family.



14.  Ms Robinson emphasised the positive findings made by Judges Parker  and
    Walters but stated that it was relevant that the judge had not  made  a
    finding as to when the appellant had fled to Mazar-e-Sharif and that in
    any event the finding that the appellant's family  were  there  was  an
    historic finding.  She stated that it was wrong to apply the  terms  of
    Section 8 and to place weight on the appellant's delay in not  claiming
    asylum en route  to  Britain  and  referred  to  the  further  evidence
    regarding the situation in Afghanistan as  well  as  the  psychological
    evidence put forward by Mr Krieger.   She  stated  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to internally relocate to Mazar-e-Sharif and that  he
    would be found there  and  therefore  the  decision  of  Judge  Andrews
    regarding internal relocation was flawed.  She  referred  to  a  report
    dated 4 May 2016 from a Mr Tim Foxley which asserted that the appellant
    would have difficulty reintegrating into life in Afghanistan because of
    his youth and lack of experience of living there and the extensive time
    he had now spent in Britain.  She stated that there was clear  evidence
    the appellant could be tracked down to Mazar-e-Sharif.  She stated that
    the fact that there  were  assisted  voluntary  returns  was  not  when
    relevant considering the appellant's case.

15.  Mr Tarlow relied on a Rule 24 statement  arguing  that  the  judge  had
    reached conclusions  which  were  fully  open  to  her.   The  Rule  24
    statement emphasised that even if it were accepted that  Mr  Hafiz  had
    been unable to trace  the  appellant's  family  when  he  was  last  in
    Afghanistan that was not capable of changing the reasons  made  by  the
    First-tier Judge regarding the credibility of  the  appellant's  claim.
    It was argued that she had reached conclusions which were fully open to
    her.

16.  In reply Ms  Robinson  argued  that  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable
    individual and that this increased the difficulties he  might  face  in
    relocating.

Discussion

17.  What is of note in this case is that  when  the  appellant  arrived  in
    Britain he asserted that was aged 13.  If it were the  case  that  that
    were correct then  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  particular  weight
    Farzana's father would  have  placed  on  the  friendship  between  his
    daughter and the appellant.  Clearly I would accept that it would  have
    angered him and he might well have wished to find the appellant but the
    offence would clearly be a less serious one than if the appellant  were
    older.  However, the appellant has been found to have been born in 1990
    and therefore to have been 19 when he claimed asylum.   The  difference
    in age is not  one  that  can  be  accounted  for  merely  because  the
    appellant was uncertain about his age.  It  is  clear  that  there  was
    deliberate deception by the appellant when he arrived and claimed  that
    he was much younger than he was.  There  are,  of  course,  very  clear
    benefits in seeking to be considered as a minor on arrival.

18.  I consider therefore that Judge Andrews was entitled to  consider  that
    the appellant lacked credibility in his story of what had  happened  in
    Afghanistan although  she  did  accept,  following  the  principles  in
    Devaseelan, that the  appellant  had,  as  he  had  claimed,  formed  a
    friendship with Farzana of which her father  had  disapproved.   Indeed
    she accepted that the appellant might be at  risk  in  his  home  area.
    Taking into account the effluxion of time, of almost seven  years  that
    might well be considered to be a generous conclusion.

19.  Nevertheless Judge Andrews considered that the appellant would be  able
    to relocate to Mazar-e-Sharif.  That was, I consider, a conclusion that
    was entirely open to her.  Certainly in 2010 the appellant had an uncle
    who was living there - not someone who had merely  relocated  with  the
    appellant from Kabul.  At that age the appellant would  have  been  20.
    Moreover,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  there  would  be  any
    likelihood of the appellant being traced there let alone  any  evidence
    to indicate that Farzana's father would still wish to trace him or even
    know that he had returned.

20.  This is not the case of an Afghan who entered Britain as a young  child
    who had spent all his teenage years here and would be  returning  to  a
    country of which he  had  little  memory.   The  reality  is  that  the
    appellant was already an adult when he arrived in Britain  and  claimed
    asylum and, on his own evidence had worked in Kabul.

21.  The judge's conclusions  on  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  were
    conclusions which were  I  consider  entirely  open  to  her  and  were
    properly reasoned.

22.  I note the further evidence from Mr Hafiz but I do  not  consider  that
    that would have influenced the decision of the judge.  The  reality  is
    that the appellant would be returning to Mazar-e-Sharif, a place  where
    he had lived in the past and where, even if he could not find relatives
    would be likely to be able to make contact with people  who  had  known
    his uncle there.

23.  The judge did  properly  consider  the  various  reports  both  on  the
    internal situation in Afghanistan from Dr Giustozzi and Dr Van Engeland
    and on the appellant's mental health from  Mr  Kralz  as  well  as  the
    evidence of Mr Kreiger.  She applied relevant case law on both of these
    issues and again her conclusions were fully open to her.

24.  I therefore find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and therefore her
    decision dismissing this appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    human rights grounds shall stand.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy                7 June 2016
