

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02961/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd February 2015                          |On 3rd March 2015            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                               KUSHAL AHMADZAI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms G Patel, counsel, instructed by Greater
Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwynycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, arrived in the UK and claimed
      asylum. He was initially granted discretionary leave to  remain  until
      6th June 2011 as an unaccompanied child. He applied for further  leave
      to remain on asylum and human rights grounds, such  application  being
      refused on 13th March 2013, almost two  years  later.  A  decision  to
      remove him under s47 Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act  2006  was
      made at the same time. The  appellant  appealed  both  decisions.  His
      appeal against the variation appeal was dismissed  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal but the s47 decision was found to be unlawful. There has been
      no challenge by the respondent to that latter determination  and  thus
      the only appeal before the Tribunal now  is  the  appeal  against  the
      variation refusal. The Upper Tribunal found an error  of  law  in  the
      determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  in  a  determination
      promulgated after a hearing on 16th  September  2013  his  appeal  was
      again dismissed. The Court of Appeal, in an order by consent,  allowed
      the appeal without determining the merits and remitted it back to  the
      Upper Tribunal for re-hearing with no findings retained.


   2.  The appellant had been 'age disputed' and Kent County Council had age
      assessed the appellant as having been born in 1991 and not 1994 as the
      appellant claimed. The appellant had been granted discretionary  leave
      to remain as an unaccompanied minor with a date of birth of 19th April
      1994 and not 19th October 1991 as age assessed.

   3. The basis of the appellant's claim is set out in the first reasons for
      refusal letter (RFRL1) dated 6th June 2008 and the second reasons  for
      refusal letter (RFRL2)  dated  13th  March  2013.  RFRL1  states  that
      appellant's date of birth is 19th April 1994; RFRL2 states that it  is
      19th October 1991. RFRL2 adopts RFRL1 and also (in [43]) states that

             "It  is  also  considered  that  you  no  longer  qualify  for
             Discretionary Leave as you are now aged  over  17.5  years  of
             age."

   4. The basis of the appellant's claim, which is set out in  both  letters
      and the account of which is not challenged, is as follows:
   a) His father worked for Hesbi Islami when the appellant was young.  When
      the Taliban came to  power  his  father  joined  them.  When  the  new
      government came to power his father left the Taliban and  remained  at
      home for a few years.
   b) His father joined the ISI
   c) Four or five months after  his  father  joined  the  ISI,  his  father
      started to hide because he had  found  out  that  the  US  forces  had
      arrested some people who also belonged to ISI.  Whilst he was visiting
      a maternal uncle in Kabul, the uncle received a  telephone  call  from
      his friend Zahir Khan from the appellant's village who told his  uncle
      that the appellant's father had been  killed  by  the  Americans.  The
      appellant claimed that Zahir Khan also told the uncle of a man who  he
      believed had reported the appellant's father  to  the  Americans.  The
      appellant's maternal uncle took him to his father's  home  to  arrange
      the funeral.
   d) During the week of the funeral, the man  who  allegedly  reported  the
      appellant's father to the US forces came to the family home twice; the
      first time at night and the family hid in the basement whilst the  man
      entered the home and searched it. The second visit was during the  day
      with a group of armed men and the family again hid in the basement for
      3-4 hours.
   e) The man who came was  head  of  the  local  security  for  the  Afghan
      authorities and ran a military base outside the village.
   f) A week after his father's death the appellant and his family  returned
      to Kabul with his maternal uncle and a week later the  appellant  left
      Kabul.
   g) The appellant asserts that the man who reported his father to  the  US
      forces is seeking to kill him because he believes that  in  accordance
      with local cultural traditions, the appellant would look to  kill  the
      man whose actions led to the appellant's father's death.


   5. In so far as the age of the appellant is concerned, there was no  copy
      of the age assessment on the file and neither the respondent  nor  the
      appellant had a  copy.  The  only  document  referring  to  the  local
      authority age assessment  was  the  cover  sheet  of  the  report.  Mr
      Diwynycz confirmed that  the  age  assessment,  in  so  far  as  these
      proceedings  was  concerned,  was  not  'Merton  compliant'  and  that
      although not conceding that the appellant had a  1994  birth,  he  was
      unable to submit that he was a 1991 birth. The appellant had  produced
      his birth certificate to the Tribunal at an earlier hearing which gave
      his claimed year of birth as 1994. (I returned that birth  certificate
      to the appellant's representatives.) I stated, to  no  objection  from
      either party, that I would determine the appeal before me on the basis
      that the appellant had been born in 1994 as he claimed.


   6. The appellant and Masto Khan gave oral evidence with the assistance of
      an interpreter. A number of issues arose during oral evidence:

   a) Hiding in the basement. The  appellant  said  that  he  did  not  know
      whether the houses in his village were of common  design  and  whether
      they had basements similar to the one he hid in. He  described  it  as
      being at the side of the kitchen and covered with a carpet which would
      be lifted when the trapdoor was raised and then, when the trapdoor was
      pulled down, the carpet (which was partially attached to the trapdoor)
      would fall back into place. The appellant said that when the man  came
      searching for him on the first occasion at night he, his  mother,  his
      brother and his sister were there and they  all  went  down  into  the
      basement. He was unable to say how long they were in the basement  but
      it was for what seemed a long time. On the  second  occasion  he  said
      that his uncle and his uncle's family were at the house because of his
      father's funeral and he told the man that the appellant and his family
      were not there; they still however hid in the basement but the man and
      his armed companions did not enter the house. The description given by
      the appellant of a trapdoor covered in a  rug  is  different  to  that
      which he gave in other evidence and  which  was  relied  upon  in  the
      application to the Court of Appeal namely that access  was  through  a
      hole in the clay oven room covered up with laundry and other household
      clothes.
   b) Contact with other children/their homes in the village. The  appellant
      said that although he had friends in the village they did not go  into
      each other's houses. He used to travel down paths with friends to  the
      Madrassa but generally he was not allowed out to play because  of  the
      number of booby traps around. He would walk home with friends from the
      Madrassa but during his time there the teacher would not  permit  them
      to speak to each other. He was unaware of how many houses  there  were
      in the village.
   c) Contact with family. The appellant said he had  no  contact  with  the
      uncle who had arranged his passage to the UK; the only contact he  had
      was with his mother and the last time he spoke with her  was  in  2011
      when she called his number from a public call box. He says  he  didn't
      ask where she was.
   d) Uncle. The appellant, in his second witness statement dated 11th April
      2013, had named the uncle who  assisted  his  passage  to  the  UK  as
      Khayesta Khan. But Khayesta Khan had died in 2002. The appellant  said
      that the uncle who had helped him come to the UK was  in  fact  called
      Ajab. The appellant said that when his uncle Khayesta Khan  had  died,
      his wife had married her husband's brother and they lived in the  same
      house. It was her oldest son (Masto Khan) who was in the UK  and  with
      whom the appellant had been living after he ceased to be in  the  care
      of Kent Social Services on 23rd June 2008. He said  in  oral  evidence
      that as a child  his  cousins  had  said  they  were  Khayesta  Khan's
      children and so he thought that Ajab was Khayesta Khan. He  said  that
      his mother called the man brother and he called him uncle. Masto  Khan
      and the appellant claim to have no contact with Ajab Khan. Masto  Khan
      left Afghanistan in 2002 after his father had been killed.

   7. In submissions the respondent relied on claimed discrepancies  in  the
      appellant's  account  to  undermine  his   overall   credibility.   In
      particular he referred to it being inconceivable that if  the  unnamed
      man who wanted to kill the appellant had wanted to find  him  then  he
      would have found the trapdoor; he was able  to  search  the  house  at
      night unchallenged. Mr Diwynycz  submitted  that  at  the  very  least
      basements would have been common place and in  any  event  the  carpet
      would have shown some wear such that it would  have  been  clear  that
      there was a trap door. It was also inconceivable that the uncle  would
      have been able to prevent him from entering the house on  the  claimed
      second visit. He also relied  on  the  appellant's  misnaming  of  his
      uncle; the mis-description of the cousin as  an  uncle;  that  it  was
      inconceivable that the appellant would not have visited  other  houses
      in the village or played with other children in the village.  Although
      Mr Diwynycz acknowledged there had been delay  by  the  respondent  in
      dealing with the application that  delay  did  not  vitiate  that  the
      appellant had not been telling the truth in his accounts.  He  finally
      submitted that there was no credible reason why, even if  his  account
      was true, he could not, as a young man over the age of 18, relocate to
      Kabul.


   8. Ms Patel submitted that the appellant's  account  had,  broadly,  been
      consistent throughout; that he had been a minor when he arrived  (aged
      13/4) and that the detail he had given in his oral  evidence  enhanced
      overall credibility.  She  relied  upon  the  background  material  to
      support her submission that as a Pashtun and the  eldest  son  he  was
      expected to honour the culture and traditions and was  thus  at  risk;
      this further enhanced the credibility of his account and  the  reasons
      why he had to flee.  She  relied  upon  the  background  material  and
      country guidance cases in so far as internal relocation was  concerned
      and in particular that he would have  no  support  network  on  return
      because he had no contact with his uncle and in any event it  was  too
      close to his home area.

   9. Ms Patel asserted that had a decision on his asylum claim  been  taken
      within a reasonable time period he would have  been  recognised  as  a
      refugee: there were no adequate reception facilities if  he  had  been
      returned as a minor and the respondent  acknowledged  that  they  were
      unable to undertake adequate tracing arrangements. She submitted  that
      as such  he  should,  independently  of  the  rest  of  his  claim  be
      recognised as a refugee now.

  10. Her further submission as regards Article 8 also relied upon delay and
      that Home Office policy was such that in the light of  the  policy  in
      force he would and should have been granted settlement. She relied  in
      addition upon the emotional ties he has with  his  cousin  which  have
      continued even though he is now aged over 18 - he speaks  English,  is
      integrated into society and  supported  independently  of  any  public
      funds.

    Discussion


  11. The appellant in his second witness statement dated  11th  April  2013
      states that it was his uncle Khayesta Khan who arranged for his travel
      from Afghanistan in 2008. He also describes Masto Khan as the  son  of
      the uncle who arranged his passage out of Afghanistan.  On  23rd  June
      2008 the appellant was  transferred  from  the  care  of  Kent  Social
      Services  to  Masto  Khan,  who  describes  himself  on   the   family
      authorisation form as the appellant's maternal  uncle.  That  form  is
      certified as having been  accurately  translated  to  Masto  Khan  and
      signed by him. The appellant had not, from  the  evidence,  spent  any
      time with Masto Khan until he came to the UK -  Masto  Khan  had  left
      Afghanistan shortly after his  father's  death.  It  is  difficult  to
      understand how, some five years  after  his  arrival  in  the  UK  the
      appellant can describe his deceased uncle not only as the  person  who
      arranged his travel to the UK but also as the  father  of  his  cousin
      with whom he had been living for the past five  years.  There  was  no
      satisfactory explanation why Masto Khan had described himself  as  the
      appellant's uncle when he was his cousin.

  12. The fundamental basis of the appellant's claim is that  he  was  being
      sought by the person who notified  the  authorities  of  his  father's
      involvement with ISI who in order to pre-empt a  revenge  attack  from
      the appellant was looking to  kill  him.  Although  this  has  been  a
      consistent theme in his accounts, the mere fact  of  consistency  does
      not render an untrue account true. Although the respondent  relied  in
      submissions upon the lack of contact  the  appellant  had  with  other
      children and families  as  an  element  pointing  towards  a  lack  of
      credibility when considered along with the evidence I am not satisfied
      that this indicates or contributes to a lack of credibility.  The  way
      in which children interact in other countries and cultures  cannot  be
      analysed through our eyes. Similarly the  lack  of  knowledge  of  the
      appellant of the structure of other houses and that he claims  he  did
      not go into  other  houses.  However  of  considerable  importance  in
      assessing  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  are  three
      factors: firstly that the person who it is claimed came to  the  house
      looking for him to kill him did not search for and find the  trapdoor;
      secondly the possible  prevalence  of  such  pre-emptive  strikes  and
      thirdly the appellant's inability to give  the  correct  name  of  the
      uncle who helped him to the UK. Even if not all houses have  basements
      with  trapdoors,  it  is  inconceivable  that  none   did   and   thus
      inconceivable that a person looking for a family during the night with
      a view to killing one of them would not have searched  for  and  found
      such a basement. Had the basement been hidden in the manner  described
      initially by the appellant then the whole family  descending  into  it
      would have been apparent because the  entrance  would  not  have  been
      covered. The second description of the trap door and entrance  to  the
      basement is likely to be more  accurate.  But  the  man's  search  was
      unhindered. The family were there and although the house may have been
      sparse it would not present as uninhabited.


  13. Although I  was  directed  to  sections  of  the  background  material
      identifying  and  describing  blood  feuds  and  honour,  particularly
      amongst the Pashtun, (and of course I accept that these occur) it  was
      evident from that material that the majority of such feuds spring from
      land or water disputes, or as a result of  the  claimed  behaviour  of
      women bringing dishonour.   The COI February  2013  report  refers  in
      paragraph 9.17 to a report from Landinfo (Norwegian Country of  Origin
      Information Centre) which commented on pre-emptive revenge and states:


             Landinfo is not aware of any  sources  presenting  information
             indicating the prevalence of pre-emptive revenge (ie murdering
             the male relatives of a victim in  order  to  make  the  other
             group unable to avenge  the  initial  murder).  In  Landinfo's
             experience, such  scenarios  are  unlikely,  as  they  violate
             Pashtunwali and most possibly will be considered  unacceptable
             by local communities. It is likely that  the  local  community
             would intervene and  impose  serious  sanctions,  for  example
             expulsion from the area. Moreover in  the  Afghan  context  it
             would be extremely difficult to kill all male  family  members
             in a family who could be given responsibility for carrying out
             revenge. This would normally involve a large number of men.


  14. I was not directed to any information that contradicted this statement
      and I have been unable to find anything in the documents presented  to
      me to cast doubt on that information.


  15. The appellant's explanation that he did not know that  his  uncle  was
      called Ajab was, quite simply, incredible. His  explanation  may  have
      been sufficient for a young child but not for a 14 year old which  was
      how old he was in 2008 when he came to the UK;  and  by  the  time  he
      wrote his witness statement in 2013 he had been living with his cousin
      for some five years. I  cannot  speculate  on  the  reasons  for  this
      attempt to explain why he did not know his uncle's name or why he  got
      his  uncle's  name  wrong  but  whatever  the  reasons  that  lack  of
      transparency damages his credibility.

  16. I am not satisfied to the lower standard of proof that the appellant's
      account that he was sought by the  (unnamed)  man  who  had  allegedly
      disclosed his father's name to the Americans  thus  resulting  in  his
      father's death is credible. I am not satisfied that this man  came  to
      his home and tried to find him or that he was being sought in  a  pre-
      emptive revenge attack.

  17. I have serious doubts whether the appellant's father  (or  indeed  his
      uncle Khayesta Khan) is dead but even if he  or  they  are  I  am  not
      satisfied that his father died in the circumstances claimed. I am  not
      satisfied that the appellant was at risk of being persecuted by an un-
      named man or that  he  had  to  flee  Afghanistan.  I  find  that  the
      appellant did  not  require  international  protection  when  he  left
      Afghanistan for the reasons he claimed.

  18. Turning now to the submission that  had  the  respondent  not  delayed
      taking a decision then, because of his age, the appellant  would  have
      been recognised as a refugee. I do not accept that submission. Between
      his arrival in the UK in 2008 and about April or so in 2011 he was  in
      contact with his mother. Although the respondent did not undertake any
      tracing arrangements, at that time it was not necessary because of the
      contact the appellant had. Although the appellant says he did not  ask
      his mother where she was it would have been  perfectly  in  order  for
      arrangements to have been made that during the next  contact  he  made
      such enquiries. His evidence, and that of Masto  Khan,  was  that  the
      appellant's mother used to visit the uncle in Kabul (they were brother
      and sister). Again there is no reason to suppose that such contact did
      not continue  after  the  appellant  had  left  Afghanistan  and  that
      arrangements could not have been made for his return accordingly. I do
      not therefore accept the submission that had the  respondent  made  an
      earlier decision then the appellant would have been  recognised  as  a
      refugee.

  19. In so far as the submission that if the  appellant  should  have  been
      recognised as a refugee on or shortly after arrival then he should  be
      recognised as a refugee now is concerned, this submissions misses  the
      point that recognition as a refugee is recognition  of  the  need  for
      international  protection.  This  appellant,  now,  has  no  need   of
      international protection. That submission fails.

  20. Ms Patel  submitted  that  because  the  appellant  had  been  granted
      discretionary leave under the policy in force prior to 9  April  2012,
      then in accordance with the transitional arrangements  in  force,  his
      application for further 3 years discretionary leave to  remain  should
      have been considered in accordance with  that  policy.  The  appellant
      sought asylum in 2008. On 10th  June  2008  he  was  granted  3  years
      discretionary leave to remain until 6th June 2011. On 6th June 2011 he
      submitted an application for  further  leave  to  remain.  It  is  the
      refusal of that application on 13th March 2013 that  has  resulted  in
      this appeal.

  21. According to the transitional arrangements on discretionary  leave  to
      remain:

             . All decision made on Discretionary Leave on or after 9  July
               2012 will be  subject  to  the  criteria  set  out  in  this
               guidance.
             . Where the decision was taken  before  9  July  2012  but  an
               appeal allowed on or after 9 July on Article 8  family  life
               or private life grounds, staff must refer to IDI CH8 (Family
               Members transitional cases).
             . Individuals granted DL on a date prior to  and  including  8
               July 2012 may apply to extend that leave when  their  period
               of DL expires. Decision  makers  must  apply  the  following
               guidance:


            Applicants granted Discretionary Leave before 9 July 2012
             . Those who, before 9 July 2012, have been granted leave under
               the Discretionary Leave policy in force  at  the  time  will
               continue to be dealt  with  under  that  policy  through  to
               settlement if they qualify for it (normally after accruing 6
               years Discretionary Leave).
             . Consideration of all applications  for  further  periods  of
               leave will  be  subject  to  a  criminality  check  and  the
               application of criminality thresholds, including in  respect
               of  cases  awaiting  a  decision  on  a  further  period  of
               Discretionary Leave on that date.
             . Applications for further leave from an individual granted up
               to 3 years Discretionary Leave before 9 July  2012  must  be
               subject to an Active Review.
             . Decision makers  must  consider  whether  the  circumstances
               prevailing at the  time  of  the  original  grant  of  leave
               continue at the  date  of  decision.  If  the  circumstances
               remain the same and the criminality thresholds do not apply,
               a further period of 3 years Discretionary  leave  should  be
               granted.
             . If there have been  significant  changes  or  the  applicant
               fails to meet the criminality  thresholds,  the  application
               for further leave should be refused.
             . ...

  22. On 9th June 2014 the applicant submitted an application for indefinite
      leave to remain on the grounds that his earlier Discretionary Leave to
      remain had been extended by operation of s3C Immigration Act 1971.  No
      decision appears to have been taken on that application.


  23. I was not provided with a copy of the Discretionary  Leave  policy  in
      force prior to 9 July 2012. Ms Patel submitted that I should take this
      into account in terms of Article 8: he would but for the delay by  the
      respondent in processing his application, have been granted a  further
      period of Discretionary Leave to remain and would by  June  2014  have
      accrued at least 6 years DL and thus be entitled to  indefinite  leave
      to remain.

  24. The reasons for refusal letter dated 13th March 2013 states

   1. You have made an application for Further Leave to remain in the United
      Kingdom which has been  considered  in  accordance  with  the  "Active
      Review" procedures set out in the Home Office  Asylum  Instruction  on
      Discretionary Leave. This replaced Exceptional Leave to Remain on  1st
      April 2003. The purpose of this review of your case  is  to  determine
      whether you qualify for Further Leave to Remain in the UK.
   2. Consideration has been given to whether you continue  to  be  eligible
      for Limited Leave to Remain in the UK  in  accordance  with  the  Home
      Office Instruction on Discretionary Leave
                     ....
                     24....It has also been concluded that  you  no  longer
                     qualify for       Discretionary Leave as you  are  now
                     aged  over  18  and  no  longer  qualify   under   the
                     Discretionary Leave policy.
                     .....
                     43....It is also considered that you no longer qualify
                     for Discretionary Leave as you are now aged over  17.5
                     years of age.


  25. On 6th June 2011 the appellant was aged 17 and a couple of months. The
      skeleton argument submitted on behalf of the appellant for his hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal, which was relied on  before  me,  does
      not set out any sections of the policy under which it is claimed  that
      the appellant would have been given a further  three  year  period  of
      Discretionary Leave to remain. I was not  provided  with  anything  to
      show that an appellant in the applicant's position namely a minor  who
      had been given 3 years DL who then sought to  vary  that  leave  would
      inevitably have been granted a further  period  of  three  years.  The
      skeleton and Ms Patel did not draw my attention to any document before
      me which supported her submission. The submissions do not  take  issue
      with the reasons for refusal letter dated 13th March2 2013 in  so  far
      as the Active Review is concerned other than to refer to the extensive
      delay by the respondent in reaching a decision and that the respondent
      in considering the application under Article 8 has applied  the  Rules
      which  came  into  force  from  9th  July  2012  and  had  incorrectly
      considered Article 8  because  of  the  transitional  provisions.  The
      reasons for refusal letter refer to "Active Review" and  reference  is
      made to the appellant no longer qualifying because he is now an adult.
      If a decision had been taken by the respondent within say 6 months  of
      submission of the application, the appellant would have been under  18
      years old. I have nothing before me to say that  he  would  have  been
      granted 3 years Discretionary leave to remain as oppose to  a  further
      short period of DL.   Although  the  transitional  provisions  clearly
      state that the application for  further  leave  to  remain  is  to  be
      considered under the previous policy, I am unable to conclude  on  the
      basis of the information before me that the  decision  to  refuse  the
      appellant further Discretionary Leave to Remain was not in  accordance
      with that policy and thus not in accordance with the law.


  26. Ms Patel submitted that the consideration by the respondent of Article
      8 was flawed not only because she had approached her assessment purely
      through the "new" Rules but also because she had failed to  take  full
      account of the close and emotional ties that the  appellant  had  with
      his cousin upon whom he was dependant and  had  failed  to  take  full
      account of all the factors relevant for assessment of the  appellant's
      circumstances. She submitted that although the application  should  be
      considered under the "old" Rules, any removal of the  appellant  would
      in any event be disproportionate because of the nature and  extent  of
      his close ties and circumstances in the UK.

  27. The  appellant  relies  upon  his  relationship  with  his  cousin  as
      amounting to a relationship over and above that existing  between  two
      adults who are related. He draws upon his age when he arrived  in  the
      UK and his ensuing dependency. Whilst it is correct that the appellant
      has been looked after by his cousin, it does appear  that  the  cousin
      has spent varying periods of  time  in  Pakistan  with  his  wife  and
      family. There was no detail of the amount of time he  spent  there  or
      for what periods of time. Although there was no evidence  about  Masto
      Kahn's income or how he  supported  the  appellant  financially  I  do
      accept that there is financial support because the appellant does  not
      appear to be drawing any benefits and lives with Mr Khan. Nevertheless
      there was no evidence before me of a particularly close emotional bond
      or that, now the appellant is aged  nearly  22  that  relationship  is
      anything more than a family relationship as would be expected  between
      adults. There was  no  evidence  before  me  of  particular  emotional
      dependency although I accept that he is more likely to be  emotionally
      dependant upon his cousin than many 22 years olds would be because  of
      the nature of his background and that Mr Khan is his only relative  in
      the UK. But I do not accept that this is sufficient to  conclude  that
      the relationship between the appellant and his cousin is  such  as  to
      engage  Article  8  as  family  members.  However  that   relationship
      obviously is a matter to be factored in as part of his  private  life.
      It is plain that the appellant has established private  life  for  the
      purposes of Article 8.


  28. The appellant has now been in the UK for almost 7  years.  He  is  now
      nearly 22 years old. He claimed asylum on arrival and was  granted  DL
      almost immediately. He has remained in the  UK  lawfully  since  then,
      initially pending a response to an application to vary his  leave  and
      then pursuing his appeal rights. He speaks English  fluently  and  has
      clearly made good progress with his education, obtaining a  number  of
      creditable qualifications. He has no criminal convictions. He came  to
      the UK as a young teenager and although he had the  support  from  his
      cousin when he first arrived in the UK he lost contact with his mother
      after only a few years when he was still a minor and his cousin  could
      not, particularly as they had not known each other in  any  meaningful
      way in Afghanistan, replace that relationship. Although there  was  no
      evidence of Mr Khan's financial  position  it  is  clear  that  he  is
      providing at least a minimum of financial support for  the  appellant.
      The appellant is well integrated in the UK as evidenced by his English
      language fluency and educational achievements.

  29. No explanation has been forthcoming from  the  respondent  as  to  the
      reasons for the delay in reaching a decision  on  the  application  to
      extend leave to remain. Had the decision been made within a reasonable
      time the appellant would still have been a minor albeit possibly  over
      17 � years old. Ms Patel did not identify any particular  harm  caused
      to the appellant by the delay in terms of his  physical  or  emotional
      well being although it is obviously reasonable  to  conclude  that  he
      would have suffered at  least  some  anxiety.  Although  the  skeleton
      argument  refers  to  the  appellant's  ties  in   Afghanistan   being
      significantly reduced it was not clear on what basis this  was  argued
      from the evidence before me. The appellant lives with his  cousin,  an
      Afghan national, and it seems clear that he retains  some  links  with
      the Afghan community here in the UK if only because  his  cousin  does
      (his cousin does  not  appear  to  speak  English  at  all  fluently).
      Although the skeleton  submits  that  the  respondent  has  failed  to
      identify any legitimate aim this was, quite properly, not  pursued  by
      Ms Patel.

  30. The applicant has established  his  private  life  in  the  UK  whilst
      lawfully present.  Precarious  means  "dependant  on  chance"  (Oxford
      dictionary); "dangerously lacking  in  security  or  stability"  (Free
      dictionary). According to the Collins dictionary: "precarious If  your
      situation is precarious, you are not in complete control of events and
      might fail in  what  you  are  doing  at  any  moment.  ADJECTIVE  Our
      financial situation had become precarious." The appellant's  situation
      plainly does not fall within  the  definition  of  precarious  in  its
      ordinary use. Although his leave was of limited  duration  he  plainly
      was not likely to fail  at  any  given  moment;  his  status  was  not
      dangerously lacking in security or stability and he was not  dependant
      on chance. To find otherwise makes no distinction  between  those  who
      have lawful leave to remain in the UK and those who are either illegal
      entrants or overstayers. His status was not precarious.

  31. The respondent has set out in s117B that  in  considering  the  public
      interest question the Tribunal must in particular have regard  to  the
      considerations set out in s117B of the 2002 Act. Taking those  factors
      particularly into account and the totality  of  the  matters  set  out
      above (including the outcome of his asylum claim), I am satisfied that
      to remove the appellant would be a  disproportionate  interference  in
      his right to respect for his private life  and  would  result  in  the
      respondent being in breach of her responsibilities under Article 8.


Conclusions:

     I dismiss the appeal on asylum, Article 3 and  humanitarian  protection
grounds.

     I allow the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.




                                    Date 2nd March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
