
Self-typed
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 October 2014                        |On 15 December 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               MS (Sri Lanka)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Palmer, Counsel instructed by CK Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has successfully appealed on error of law grounds to  the
    Upper Tribunal from the determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Barker  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  12  May  2014)  dismissing  the
    appellant' appeal against the decision of the  respondent  refusing  to
    recognise him as a refugee, or  as  otherwise  requiring  international
    protection.  This decision relates to the forum  in  which  the  appeal
    should be reheard.



The Error of Law Decision

 2. On 4 September 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge  Peter  Lane  found  that  the
    decision of the FTT was legally flawed and required to  be  set  aside,
    with the result that a fresh hearing was required on all issues:

         The respondent's rule 24 notice dated 18th July makes it plain that
         she conceded that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
         wrong in law for the reasons set out in the appellant's grounds  of
         application  for  permission  to  appeal;  namely,  giving  legally
         insufficient or otherwise flawed reasons for finding the  appellant
         not credible and acting in a procedurally unfair way as regards the
         assessment of the medical evidence.

The Decision on Forum

 3. Judge Lane directed that the appeal should be  re-heard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal with a time estimate of 2 hours. Hence it came  to  be  listed
    before me. However the parties were in  agreement  that  it  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard de novo by  any  FTT
    judge apart Judge Barker with a time estimate of 3 hours.

 4. Having looked into the  matter,  I  was  satisfied  that  Judge  Lane's
    direction was engendered by  an  ambiguous  Rule  24  response  and  by
    confusion on the part of the appellant's solicitors; and that the  more
    appropriate  forum  for  remaking  the  decision  was  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Duffy  explained  that  the  Rule  24
    response inviting the Tribunal "to determine the appeal  with  a  fresh
    oral (continuance) hearing" was a standard and formulaic response which
    did not distinguish between appeals which were suitable  for  rehearing
    in the  Upper  Tribunal  and  appeals  which  were  more  suitable  for
    rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal, such as an  asylum  appeal  where
    credibility was in issue and none  of  the  findings  of  fact  in  the
    previous determination were going to be preserved.

 6. The directions sent to the appellant's solicitors told them to  prepare
    for an error of law hearing only. Before Judge Lane made his  decision,
    they misguidedly sought an adjournment of the  hearing  on  the  ground
    that a supporting witness would not be available to give oral  evidence
    at the hearing. Judge Lane refers to this  adjournment  application  in
    his directions of 4 September 2014. The implication of the misconceived
    adjournment request was that the appellant's  solicitors  were  content
    for the appeal to be reheard de novo in the  Upper  Tribunal,  when  in
    truth they had not applied their minds to the question of  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal was the more appropriate forum, if the error of law
    challenge resulted in the decision of the FTT being set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

 7. Accordingly, I directed that the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing by any judge apart from Judge Barker,  with
    a time estimate of three hours; and that a Tamil  language  interpreter
    was required. The agreed date, time and venue for the rehearing in  the
    FTT was recorded in the Court file.



Summary

 8. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds was vitiated by material errors  of  law,  and
    accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its
    entirety, and this appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    complete rehearing on all issues and none of the findings  of  fact  of
    the previous Tribunal are preserved.



Signed        Date 15 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

