

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/02088/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                    |
|On 29 September 2015                  |On 30 September 2015           |
|                                      |                               |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel (instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Pooler on 9 July 2015  against  the  decision  of
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Coll made in a  decision  and  reasons
           promulgated on 16 June 2015 dismissing the  Appellant's  asylum,
           humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 11 June  1991.
           She had appealed against her removal from the United Kingdom,  a
           decision taken by  the  Respondent  on  22  January  2015.   The
           Appellant had entered the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  (General)
           Student Migrant on 29 September 2011,  having  applied  for  her
           visa in India where she claimed that she was  then  living  with
           her mother.  The Appellant's application to amend the  terms  of
           her Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  visa  was  refused  on  24
           December 2012.   Further  applications  to  extend  her  Tier  4
           (General) Student Migrant visa followed, the last of  which  was
           refused on 7 April 2014.  The  Appellant  commenced  the  asylum
           claim process on 16 September 2014.   She stated that she feared
           to return to Sri Lanka  because  of  her  LTTE  involvement  and
           family connections.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Pooler considered that it was arguable that Judge Coll had erred
           in finding that the Appellant's  credibility  had  been  damaged
           because there was no explanation for her failure to claim asylum
           at  the  first  opportunity.  The  judge  had  not  sufficiently
           addressed the explanation given.   No encouragement was given to
           the pursuit of the various other grounds raised. (No  Article  8
           ECHR claim had been pursued.)


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
           appeal was  opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
           tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of  whether
           or not there was a material error of law.




      Submissions


      5.    Ms Iqbal for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal earlier submitted, together with the grant of  permission
           to appeal.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
           failing to take into account the  Appellant's  explanations  for
           her admittedly late asylum  claim.   Ms  Iqbal  developed  those
           submissions in dialogue  with  the  tribunal.   There  had  been
           insufficient engagement with the evidence the Appellant had  put
           forward and inadequate reasoning.  Nor had the judge dealt  with
           the evidence given by the Appellant's brother.  The  credibility
           findings were defective because the judge had failed to put  the
           Appellant's claims into their proper context. The  decision  and
           reasons should be set aside and the appeal  reheard  by  another
           judge in the First-tier Tribunal.


      6.    Mr Bramble for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24
           notice.  He submitted that the decision and reasons disclosed no
           error of law.  The Appellant's complaints at most  were  just  a
           disagreement with the judge.  The decision  and  reasons  should
           stand.


      7.    Ms Iqbal indicated that there was nothing she wished to  add  by
           way of reply.




      No material error of law


      8.     The  tribunal  accepts  Mr  Bramble's  submissions.    In   the
           tribunal's view, the grant of permission to appeal was  far  too
           generous a response to what was no more than  a  feeble  reasons
           challenge.  As always, the judge's decision and  reasons  needed
           to be read as a whole, which the Appellant's grounds  of  appeal
           and subsequent submissions conspicuously failed to do.


      9.    The judge examined the case put forward by the Appellant in  the
           round,  with   evident   anxious   scrutiny.    The   background
           circumstances in which the Appellant eventually made her  asylum
           claim were highly relevant, as the summary set out above at  [2]
           of the present determination shows.  As the judge had  noted  at
           [13] onwards of her decision, not only had the Appellant  failed
           to claim asylum  at  the  first  reasonable  opportunity  having
           admitted a "slight fear" on entry to the  United  Kingdom  [14],
           she had made repeated applications as a Tier 4 (General) Student
           Migrant and had gone  as  far  as  threatening  judicial  review
           against the Secretary of State (see [21] and  [60]),  indicating
           as was too obvious for the judge to need to say, abundant access
           to legal advice.  The Appellant also had  two  brothers  in  the
           United Kingdom, one of whom had  been  refused  asylum  but  had
           obtained leave to remain under the "legacy" scheme as the  judge
           had recorded at [55].


      10.   The judge summarised her conclusion on  delay  at  [61]  of  her
           determination, but that was reached in the context described  at
           [59] that the Appellant was not entirely credible, something  of
           an  understatement.   The  judge  found  (among  other  matters)
           substantial inconsistency, vagueness, the submission of a  false
           bank statement with the complicity of  the  Appellant's  mother,
           that the Appellant's mother's claimed arrest  did  not  in  fact
           occur,  and  that  there  was  no  arrest  warrant  despite  the
           Appellant's  claim  to  the  contrary:   see   [64]ff   of   the
           determination.  Thus the Appellant was not  a  reliable  witness
           and the judge's finding on delay was reached on that basis.


      11.   The evidence given by the Appellant's brother  was  set  out  at
           [55]ff of the determination.  Given the weakness of the evidence
           which the Appellant had provided concerning her association with
           the  TGTE,  and  the  reasons  provided  for   discounting   the
           Appellant's  mother's  evidence,   the   Appellant's   brother's
           evidence  was  self  evidently  of  no  value  and  required  no
           additional notice.


      12.   The only material evidence of  the  Appellant  which  the  judge
           accepted was  that  which  had  been  safely  and  independently
           corroborated,  relating  to  the   Appellant's   attendance   at
           demonstrations  in  the  United  Kingdom:  see  [74]ff  of   the
           determination, which  the  judge  found  after  considering  the
           guidance set out in GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)
           Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) was not a  source  of  real
           risk.


      13.    In  the  tribunal's  judgment,  the   multi   layered   adverse
           credibility assessment which the judge reached was open  to  her
           and is sustainable.  Her decision was a comprehensive reflection
           on the various issues  raised  in  the  appeal.   There  was  no
           material error of law.  There is no basis for  interfering  with
           the judge's decision to dismiss the  Appellant's  appeal,  which
           dismissal must stand.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell

