
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02172/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     sz
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania  and  her  date  of  birth  is  9
    October 1988.

2.   In a decision of 22 January 2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for asylum.  The  appellant  appealed  and  her
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Owens in  a  decision
    following a hearing on 9 June 2015.  The decision was promulgated on  3
    July 2015.  Judge Owens dismissed the appellant's asylum claim.

3.   Permission was granted to the appellant by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker
    on 21 September 2015 and thus the matter came before me.

4.   The appellant's case is that she is the  victim  of  trafficking.   Her
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that whilst in Albania  she
    formed a relationship with a male called Arben.   Her  family  did  not
    approve of the relationship and  she  travelled  to  Italy  with  Arben
    against the wishes of her family in  2009.  Whilst  in  Italy,  Arben's
    friend (Nardi) forced her into prostitution. She worked in Italy  as  a
    prostitute between March 2010 and November 2012 when she was  arrested.
    She agreed to return to Albania because she was  frightened  of  Nardi.
    Her parents rejected her because they had found out that she  had  been
    trafficked.  She left Albania after a week because she  was  frightened
    Nardi would return there and that she would be retrafficked.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant.  The judge  observed  that
    the National Referral Mechanism had concluded that  the  appellant  was
    the victim of trafficking and that the decision letter, in which it was
    maintained that the appellant's account of having been  trafficked  was
    not credible, was based on a misunderstanding.  The judge  recorded  at
    [8] that the Presenting Officer conceded that an error  had  been  made
    and indicated that he would not seek to go behind the finding that  the
    appellant had indeed been trafficked.

6.   The judge went on to make  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    credibility at [29] to [40].  The judge found the  appellant's  account
    to be credible  and  recorded  that  the  Presenting  Officer  did  not
    challenge her credibility and he accepted her account as set out in her
    asylum interview.  The judge found that the appellant  had  decided  to
    travel to Italy with Arben in order to seek work.  It was difficult  to
    find work and he became involved with selling drugs which  led  to  his
    arrest.

7.   The judge found that the appellant stayed with Arben's  friend  (Nardi)
    (see [34]) and he coerced her with the use of violence and  threats  to
    work as a prostitute. She was locked in a house from March  2010  until
    November 2012 when the Italian police raided  the  house  and  she  was
    detained and interviewed.  Nardi was arrested by  the  Italian  police.
    The appellant contacted her family on return but they rejected her  and
    the appellant believes that  they  are  aware  that  she  worked  as  a
    prostitute.  The appellant escaped Albania with the help  of  a  friend
    and arrived in the UK on 3 December 2012.  Since that time she has  had
    no contact with anyone in Albania.  The  appellant  is  suffering  from
    depression.

8.   The judge went on to consider risk on return to  the  appellant's  home
    area and she found at [47] that the appellant would not be at risk from
    traffickers in her own village.  The judge found  that  she  had  never
    worked as a prostitute in  Albania  and  the  forced  exploitation  had
    indeed taken place in Italy where she  had  travelled  voluntarily  and
    where she had agreed to go with her boyfriend.

9.   The judge found that she was not coerced by traffickers from  her  home
    area.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  is  not  aware  of  the
    whereabouts of Nardi.  She does not know whether he  is  in  prison  or
    indeed whether he is still in Italy and the judge found that there  was
    no evidence that the trafficker  is  aware  of  where  the  appellant's
    family lives and that there is no evidence that Nardi or his associates
    have tried to locate the appellant or threaten her family over the  two
    and a half years since she was freed from trafficking and  returned  to
    Albania.

10.  The judge did not find it plausible  that  Nardi  would  seek  out  the
    appellant in Albania two and a half years after  these  events,  noting
    that she did not testify against him  or  cooperate  with  the  Italian
    authorities.  The judge found that he would not be  motivated  to  seek
    her out in Albania.  The judge found that Nardi was not  a  part  of  a
    large  criminal  organisation  with  connections  across  Albania   and
    internationally.

11.  The judge went on to find that the appellant's recent evidence was  not
    consistent with the evidence that she gave in her asylum  interview  in
    relation to Nardi and connections that he may have.  The judge attached
    weight to the fact that there was no evidence that Nardi has  attempted
    to trace the appellant or threaten her family or  friends  (see  [51]).
    The judge found that the appellant had not established that should  she
    return to her home area Nardi or his  associates  would  seek  her  and
    attempt to retraffick her.

12.   The  judge  went  on  to  consider  relocation,  concluding  that  the
    appellant had been able to make her way to Tirana in 2012 where she has
    a friend.  The judge took into account that  the  appellant  is  highly
    educated, having a university degree in social sciences, and  that  she
    speaks English and concluded that she  is  employable.   He  took  into
    account the appellant's mental health at [54] and the judge found  that
    there are NGO organisations which would provide support for  trafficked
    women and that she could live independently as a single  female  in  an
    urban centre such as Tirana  where  she  could  obtain  medication  for
    depression.

13.  The judge went on to conclude that  if  indeed  the  traffickers  would
    seek the appellant out she would have sufficiency of protection by  the
    Albanian authorities.  The judge directed himself in relation to AM and
    BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT  80  and  also  took  into
    account more up-to-date country information and guidance in relation to
    trafficking  in  Albania,  noting  that  there  had  been   significant
    developments with  regard  to  the  investigation  and  prosecution  of
    traffickers and protecting victims of trafficking.  The judge  did  not
    accept that protection is not available, having considered  the  latest
    background information,  and  again,  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
    protection the judge took into account that  the  appellant  was  well-
    educated and able to communicate any  concerns  she  may  have  to  the
    police.

14.  The grounds seeking permission are twofold.  First the judge  erred  in
    relation to the assessment of risk on  return  to  the  home  area  and
    secondly that he erred in relation to internal relocation.

15.  I heard oral submissions from both representatives and  I  communicated
    my decision at the hearing.  In my view the judge materially  erred  in
    relation to risk on return to the appellant's  home  area.   The  judge
    accepted at [34] that Nardi was indeed  a  friend  of  the  appellant's
    boyfriend and this cannot be reconciled with  the  judge's  finding  at
    [47] that there was no evidence that the trafficker was aware of  where
    her family lives.

16.  The judge accepted at [39] that the appellant has had no  contact  with
    anyone in  Albania  since  arriving  in  the  UK  and  this  cannot  be
    reconciled with the judge's findings that there was  no  evidence  that
    Nardi or his associates had tried to  locate  the  appellant's  family.
    Both these findings were relied  upon  by  the  judge  to  support  his
    conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk  on  return  to  the
    home area.

17.  I have taken on board Ms Brocklesby-Weller's  submission  that  if  the
    judge made errors in relation to risk on return this  is  not  material
    because  he  went  on  to  consider  relocation  and   sufficiency   of
    protection. The judge made findings in relation to Nardi and whether or
    not he is part of a larger criminal organisation (see [49]  and  [50]).
    In isolation these findings would be  sustainable.   However,  had  the
    judge properly considered risk on return to the home area and concluded
    that the appellant would  be  at  risk,  I  cannot  be  sure  that  the
    conclusion on relocation would be the same as that found by the  judge.
    The error taints the assessment of relocation and thus is  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal.

18.  I am also concerned that the judge made a  distinction  between  having
    been trafficked whilst in Albania and the appellant's  case  of  having
    been trafficked by an Albanian whilst in Italy. In  the  light  of  the
    connection between Nardi and Arben, it is arguable that the distinction
    is meaningless in the context of risk.

19.  I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds.   I  am  aware  that  a  country
    guidance case in relation to  victims  of  trafficking  in  Albania  is
    likely to be promulgated early in 2016. I remitted the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order to rehear the appeal and make findings  in
    relation to risk on return, relocation and sufficiency  of  protection.
    At the hearing before me both parties agreed that the findings  of  the
    judge at paragraphs 29 to paragraph 40 should be maintained.

20.  I note  that  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  is  premised  on  the
    appellant not being a victim of trafficking  whilst  clearly  this,  as
    accepted by the respondent, is not the case and it may be that  in  the
    light of this the respondent wishes to amend the decision.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.  A number  of  findings
are maintained (see above at [20]).


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 14 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

