
                                                 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
                                             AA/02443/2014

                                              THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Decision      and       Reasons
                                             Promulgated
On 12 December 2014                                                   On  26
                                             June 2015


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                  Awais Zia
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms.  S.  Lloyd  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Halliday
                       Reeves.
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Ross promulgated on 28 July 2014, dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
      against a decision dated 28 March 2014 to remove him from the UK.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  8  July  1994.  His
      immigration history is  a  matter  of  record  and  is  summarised  at
      paragraphs 1-4 of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal:  it  is
      unnecessary to repeat that history in detail  here.  In  summary,  the
      Appellant made an application for asylum in November  2010  which  was
      refused in  January  2011;  a  further  application  for  humanitarian
      protection was refused on 28  March  2014.  The  Appellant  lodged  an
      appeal  with  the  IAC.  During  the  pendency  of  the   appeal   his
      representatives  raised  with  the  Tribunal  an   issue   under   the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006: indeed when the
      matter came before the First-tier Tribunal it was only the Regulations
      that were relied upon: see determination  at  paragraph  5,  and  also
      Skeleton Argument before the First-tier Tribunal dated 9 July 2014.


   3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal for reasons set out
      in his determination.


   4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
      was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes,  but
      subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on 17 October 2014.


Consideration

   5. The Appellant's case under  the  EEA  Regulations  was  based  on  his
      relationship with Ms Vera  Silverio,  a  Portuguese  national  with  a
      permanent right of residence in the UK. It was his case that he was in
      a 'durable relationship' with Ms Silverio  such  as  to  make  him  an
      extended family member within the meaning of regulation 8(5).


   6. In written submissions by way of Skeleton Argument before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal the Appellant directed  the  Judge's  attention  to  the
      Respondent's Guidance notes  -  in  which  it  is  stated  "You  would
      generally need  to  show  us  that  you  have  been  in  a  subsisting
      relationship for 2 years or more" - before emphasising that there  was
      no specified time requirement in either the Directive  2004/38/EEC  or
      the Regulations, and making reference to the case of YB (EEA reg 17(4)
      - proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062.


   7. In my judgement it is clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
      regard to this framework, as advanced by the Appellant, in determining
      the appeal. The Judge directed himself under a sub-heading  'The  Law'
      appropriately to a number of matters including in the following  terms
      at paragraph 15: "The term durable relationship is not defined in  the
      regulations.   The   respondent's   guidelines   indicate   that   the
      relationship is considered to be durable  if  the  parties  have  been
      living together for at least two years. However this is not  the  test
      laid out in regulations, which does not define any period of time".


   8.  In  the  premises  the  Judge  accepted  that  Ms  Silverio  was  the
      Appellant's girlfriend, that she was an EEA national, that she  had  a
      permanent right of residence in the UK, and that she was a  'qualified
      person' within the meaning of the Regulations. Accordingly  the  Judge
      identified that the "central issue" was whether the Appellant  and  Ms
      Silverio were in a 'durable relationship'. (See paragraph 16.)


   9. The Judge then gave consideration to the  evidence  and  set  out  his
      findings with reasons. He accepted "that there has been a relationship
      between them going back to September 2012" (paragraph 17).  The  Judge
      did not, however, accept the period of cohabitation to be  as  claimed
      by the Appellant (paragraph 17); moreover he considered the  Appellant
      "not a credible witness" (paragraph 18). (The Judge gave  reasons  for
      these findings in those respective paragraphs.) The Judge set out  his
      conclusions at paragraph 19 in the following terms:

"I consider that the parties  have  not  established  that  they  are  in  a
      durable relationship. I consider that the appellant has only been able
      to prove that they have lived  together  from  23  September  2013,  a
      period of approximately  10  months.  I  do  not  consider  that  this
      constitutes a durable relationship, and the appeal in relation to  the
      2006 regulations is therefore dismissed."


  10. The Judge also dismissed the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the
      ECHR - notwithstanding that no separate submissions were  made  on  it
      and it did not feature in the Appellant's Skeleton Argument.


  11. The Grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal are
      threefold: that the Judge erred in relation to family life;  erred  in
      relation to durability of  relationship;  and  erred  in  relation  to
      credibility. Ms Lloyd indicated at the outset before me that  she  did
      not pursue the ground in respect of credibility. In any event it is to
      be noted that the basis upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted
      was essentially whether or not the Judge had  given  adequate  reasons
      for concluding that the relationship was not  a  durable  relationship
      given his findings of fact. (Whilst Judge Coker did not seek to  limit
      the grant of leave to any particular  ground,  she  nonetheless  noted
      that it was unlikely that the Article 8 ground would  succeed  if  the
      durable relationship ground did not.)


  12. In my judgement the Appellant's challenge to the findings of the First-
      tier Tribunal are essentially a disagreement with the conclusion  that
      the relationship was not a durable relationship as of the date of  the
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Indeed, it seemed to  me  that
      in seeking to make good the challenge Ms Lloyd essentially  reiterated
      the submissions in respect of the absence of any definitive guidelines
      - which, as I have already noted above, the Judge accepted in his self-
      direction - and otherwise rehearsed aspects of the  evidence  relating
      to the relationship - which in my judgement the Judge had full  regard
      to in setting out the evidence that was before (paragraphs  6-11).  As
      such, the challenge was really no more than an attempt to reargue  the
      case and urge a different conclusion.


  13. There is indeed no definition of durable relationship by reference  to
      period of time: some assistance is to be gleaned from the case  of  YB
      as to the approach to be taken, but essentially it  is  an  evaluation
      that  is  fact-sensitive  and  dependent  upon  the  evidence  in  any
      particular case. In my judgement it was entirely open  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge to conclude that a relationship  of  less  than  2
      years, during which cohabitation had taken place only for the last  10
      months, did not amount to a durable relationship. In this  context  it
      is to be noted that  the  Judge,  for  entirely  sustainable  and  now
      unchallenged reasons, found that the Appellant had not  been  truthful
      in his assertions as to the length of the period of cohabitation,  and
      indeed not to be a truthful witness generally.  To  that  end,  in  my
      judgement, there was nothing reliable on the Appellant's part  by  way
      of evidence as to the nature  or  quality  of  his  relationship,  and
      nothing reliable as to his long-term  intentions  in  respect  of  the
      relationship. Accordingly the only objectively reliable aspect of  the
      evidence that might or might not indicate durability was that  of  the
      passage of time. It was entirely open - and  in  my  judgement  indeed
      reasonable - for the Judge to  conclude  that  insufficient  time  had
      passed to demonstrate durability.


  14. In the circumstances I find no error of law or material inadequacy  of
      reasoning.


  15. As  regards  the  Article  8  challenge,  I  essentially  endorse  the
      observations of Judge Coker in granting permission to appeal. Moreover
      I note that the matter  was  not  articulated  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, and it seems to me inappropriate  for  it  now  to  be
      pursued before the Upper Tribunal. The reality is this is a relatively
      brief relationship formed at a time when the Appellant was present  in
      the UK with a precarious immigration status, where the Judge had found
      the Appellant to be untruthful to an extent that there were doubts  as
      to his motivation in forming a relationship with an EEA national,  and
      where there were otherwise no matters of significance that  took  this
      case beyond the yardstick of proportionality set  by  the  Immigration
      Rules.


  16. In all the circumstances I identify no material error  in  respect  of
      the Article 8 assessment undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
      particularly bearing in mind the context of no Article 8  case  having
      been  advanced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant by way of submissions.






Notice of Decision

  17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  no  material
      error of law and stands.


  18. The appeal remains dismissed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     23 June 2015




