
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02704/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th November 2018                          |On 21st November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    I Y B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms M Butler (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State  with
    permission granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  4th  October  2018.   The
    appeal relates to a man from Pakistan born in 1976.  He had arrived  in
    the UK with a visit visa and  overstayed.  It  was  only  when  he  was
    encountered working in the UK and detained for the purposes of  removal
    that he claimed asylum.  His asylum claim was based on the fact that he
    had worked for the police in Pakistan in the anti-terrorist section, as
    a result of which he was targeted and attacked by the LEJ.  He reported
    threats by them that if he did not leave the  police  they  would  kill
    him.  He came to the UK as a result  of  those  threats  and  has  lost
    contact, he said, with his family.  He has  also  been  diagnosed  with
    PTSD and has quite severe symptoms.

 2. Before the First-tier Tribunal there were  medical  reports  concerning
    his mental health and his scars.  There was also an  expert  report  on
    the situation in Pakistan.  The Judge who heard the appeal on 24th  May
    2018 at Harmondsworth wrote a very detailed judgment.  The  Judge  went
    through the evidence and  submissions  and  balanced  the  adverse  and
    positive credibility findings.  It is true to say that  the  Judge  did
    find that it detracted from the Appellant's  credibility  that  he  had
    delayed so long in claiming  asylum.   There  were  one  or  two  other
    adverse factors which he took into account but then,  bearing  in  mind
    what the expert evidence said; the Appellant's mental state;  the  fact
    that the Secretary of State had received confirmation from  the  police
    in Pakistan that the Appellant did in fact work as claimed and  bearing
    in mind the low standard of proof found that the balance came  down  in
    the Appellant's favour.  He accepted  the  Appellant  credible  in  all
    respects.  However, the Judge did not find that he would be at risk  on
    account of that and so was not entitled to  either  refugee  status  or
    humanitarian protection because the risk arose from the  fact  that  he
    was employed by the police. He is no longer employed by the police  and
    has not been for many years.

 3. The Judge went on to consider human rights and in particular Article 3.
    It was the Appellant's case that, although he had written a resignation
    letter and handed in his gun to the police, he  had  not  followed  the
    appropriate procedures for resignation.  The Secretary of  State's  own
    evidence contained in the bundle and email from Pakistan confirmed that
    he was absent without leave.  The Appellant claimed that that would put
    him at risk of prosecution and imprisonment and that was  confirmed  in
    the expert evidence.  The Judge was aware of the guidance  and  country
    information that although prison conditions in Pakistan are  poor  they
    are not so systematically inhuman and life threatening as to  meet  the
    threshold of Article 3.  The Judge quoted that at paragraph 142 of  the
    judgment.

 4. The Judge then went on to note that whilst that was generally the case,
    certain  people,  through  their  own   personal   circumstances,   may
    nevertheless suffer treatment which did breach Article  3.   The  Judge
    found the Appellant, suffering as he  did  from  severe  mental  health
    difficulties and without family support in Pakistan  would  cross  that
    threshold and be at  real  risk  of  suffering  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment.  He was not  a  person  who  would  be  able  to  cope  with
    imprisonment.  The Secretary of State's grounds,  on  which  permission
    was granted, argue that the Judge failed to properly take into  account
    that the Appellant was not absent without leave  from  the  police  but
    rather had resigned.  However, that ignores the  Secretary  of  State's
    own evidence that confirmed he is deemed to be  absent  without  leave.
    Accordingly, the Judge did not make an error  of  law  in  making  that
    finding which was based in no small part on the  Secretary  of  State's
    own evidence.

 5. Secondly, the Secretary of State argued that the prison  conditions  do
    not meet or breach Article 3, but that the  Judge  has  dealt  with  in
    considerable detail and explained why, for this  particular  Appellant,
    those conditions would breach Article 3.

 6. Accordingly, I find that in allowing the appeal on human rights grounds
    the Judge did not make an error of law and therefore the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

 7. I will continue the anonymity direction that was made before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed [pic]                            Date 15th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed [pic]                            Date 15th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
