

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02020/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 18 September 2014                   |On 25 September 2014      |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     MD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Bartram (Migrant Law Partnership)
For the Respondent:     Ms Kelly (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



       1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Turkey.   He  appealed  against  a
          decision dated 19  March  2014  to  remove  him  from  the  United
          Kingdom (UK) on asylum grounds.



       2. I have made an anonymity order because this determination  relates
          to sensitive matters regarding the appellant's asylum claim.



Procedural history


       3. This is a matter that has previously been  considered  by  First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Kelsey in a determination  promulgated  dated
          12 June 2014.   She dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
          grounds.  The appellant appealed against this decision relying on
          one ground of appeal.  Judge Pooler  has  granted  permission  to
          appeal on 18 July 2014 and the matter  now  comes  before  me  to
          decide whether or not the determination contains an error of law.

Hearing

       4. Mr Bartram focused on one ground of appeal -  he  submitted  that
          the Judge had erred in law in requiring the appellant to  provide
          corroborative evidence of his asylum claim.

       5. Ms Kelly reminded me that there were a number of reasons why  the
          Judge found that the appellant's account was not credible to  the
          lower standard to the standard of proof and in the  circumstances
          the findings on credibility were sustainable.

       6. At the end of submissions I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

Findings

       7. I entirely accept that Judge Kelsey has made  numerous  references
          to an absence of supporting evidence / documents.  I  also  accept
          that it is a misdirection of law to imply  that  corroboration  is
          necessary  for  a  positive   credibility   finding   -   see   ST
          (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119.

       8. Although the determination is lengthy (8 pages), the Judge has  in
          effect  provided  very  short  reasons  for  not   accepting   the
          credibility of the appellant's account.   The  Judge  was  clearly
          concerned that having mentioned that  his  friends  were  arrested
          with him in 2011 [19] he made no mention of  them  again  or  what
          happened to them at the time [20].   The  Judge  clearly  regarded
          this evidence as  'sweeping  and  threadbare'.    The  Judge  also
          noted a glaring inconsistency  regarding  the  2012  arrest  [22].
          This  should  be  viewed  in  the  context  of  the   respondent's
          submissions, which highlighted inconsistencies  and  the  possible
          reasons for these [13].  The Judge was of the clear view that  the
          appellant's  evidence  was  'extremely  threadbare'  /  'extremely
          vague' [23].  The Judge heard evidence from the appellant and  has
          set out a summary of his evidence [11  and  12].   The  Judge  was
          entitled  to  find  that  evidence  extremely  vague  as  well  as
          containing inconsistencies.

       9. The Judge has commented that as a matter of fact there  is  little
          to support the  appellant's  account,  and  this  is  repeated  at
          various  points  throughout  the  determination.   The  Judge  was
          entitled to take into account the absence of  supporting  evidence
          and to comment that such  evidence  would  have  been  'relatively
          easy' to obtain [20].  These were issues of fact for the Judge  to
          assess.  When the determination is  read  as  a  whole  I  do  not
          consider that the Judge required corroboration in order to make  a
          positive credibility finding.  The Judge's credibility finding  is
          influenced by a number of factors  including  inconsistencies  and
          extreme vagueness.  In such circumstances the Judge  was  entitled
          to comment on the  absence  of  supporting  evidence.   Whilst  it
          would have been more helpful for the Judge to give  more  detailed
          reasons  for  disbelieving  the  appellant's  account,  sufficient
          reasons  have  been  provided  and  the  Judge  has  not  required
          corroboration in order to reach a  positive  credibility  finding.
          The Judge has commented on the absence of supporting  evidence  in
          the context  of  evidence  he  regarded  to  be  inconsistent  and
          extremely vague.

Decision

      10. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has not committed an error  of
          law and I do not set aside the decision.

      11. I dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
19 September 2014

