
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02570/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 June and 1 July 2016                |On 03 August 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                                     DS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

|                                     |                                     |


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Becket Bedford, Counsel, instructed by Paragon
                    Law, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (10 June) and Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (1 July)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as a contempt of court.


1.   The appellant claims to be  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 10 October 2005 using a Malawian passport,  to  which
    (he now says) he was not entitled. He was granted temporary  admission,
    appealed unsuccessfully, then absconded. He was arrested  in  2007  and
    made a claim for asylum which was refused in a refusal letter, dated  4
    February 2010, and further removal directions were made. This has given
    rise to the present appeal.

2.   Article 8 is now no longer in issue in this appeal. It was conceded  by
    the respondent that the appellant is entitled to succeed on  Article  8
    grounds as he meets the  relevant  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.  The
    outstanding issues for determination are:

     i.  is the appellant  a  national  of  Malawi,  or  was  he  ordinarily
         resident there?
     ii. if not, is there  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  were  the
         appellant to be returned to Zimbabwe?

    The appellant concedes that there would be no protection claim  in  the
    event of a return to Malawi.

     Procedural history

3.   The main points in the refusal letter were:

     a.  that the appellant was a Malawian  national,  albeit  one  who  had
         been resident in Zimbabwe for much of his life;
     b.  that the appellant had failed to establish a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution upon return to Malawi or Zimbabwe;
     c.  that, accordingly, the appellant did  not  qualify  for  asylum  or
         humanitarian protection;
     d.  that the appellant did  not  qualify  for  discretionary  leave  to
         remain under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights,
         on  the  basis,  inter  alia,   that   any   establishment   of   a
         private/family life in the United Kingdom had been in circumstances
         when he knew that he had no legal right to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

    Item (d) above has now been overtaken by the  respondent's  concession,
    and is no longer in issue.

4.   The appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hobbs, on  6  April  2010.  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Sommerville
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on 30 November 2010.

5.   By way of a consent order, approved by Sullivan LJ on 9 November  2011,
    the Court of Appeal remitted the appellant's appeal to be re-determined
    afresh by a differently constituted Upper Tribunal.  The  Statement  of
    Reasons records that it is arguable that  there  had  been  a  material
    error of law in the light of RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]  UKIAT
    00083 and RT (Zimbabwe) & Others [2010] EWCA  Civ  1285,  in  that  the
    tribunal may not have adequately addressed the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant might be required to show loyalty to Zanu-PF and  whether  he
    might have to lie in order to avoid persecution.  (In  the  intervening
    period, the Court of Appeal's decision in RT (Zimbabwe) the subject  of
    a further appeal to the Supreme Court, [2012] UKSC 38.)

6.   The matter was then re-heard in the Upper Tribunal, whose decision  was
    promulgated on 26 November 2012. It found no material error of law  and
    affirmed  the   original   decision   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal.
    Significantly, paragraph 8 of the determination records that those then
    acting for the appellant could see no objection to a return to  Malawi.
    That concession was subsequently withdrawn.

7.   On 2 July 2014, Underhill LJ  approved  a  consent  order  whereby  the
    Court of Appeal allowed a second appeal, and set aside the  2012  Upper
    Tribunal decision, remitting the matter for a  further  rehearing.  The
    respondent consented because she accepted that in  the  2012  decision,
    the Upper Tribunal had not adequately addressed the  issue  of  whether
    the appellant would be at risk on return to Zimbabwe.

8.   At a Case Management Hearing held on 30 September 2014 it is  recorded:
    'By agreement, this appeal will  be  re-decided  entirely  afresh  with
    findings of fact required on all issues, including (i) credibility  and
    (ii) nationality'. This is the basis upon which the matter comes before
    me to re-make the original determination of Judge Hobbs from six  years
    ago.

     The appellant's evidence

9.   I heard evidence from the appellant who adopted three separate  witness
    statements as his evidence-in-chief: two dated 22 January 2015, and one
    20 April 2016. He supplemented the content of these witness  statements
    with oral testimony. He was briefly  cross-examined  by  Mr  Tarlow  on
    behalf of the respondent and he answered some from me. Many significant
    assertions made by the appellant were not  challenged.  During  closing
    submissions, I afforded Mr Tarlow  the  opportunity  of  recalling  the
    appellant so that these matters could  be  put  to  the  appellant:  he
    declined my invitation.

10.  The oral testimony of the appellant affirmed and enlarged  his  witness
    statements. The appellant referred to the  colonial  past  of  Southern
    Rhodesia  (present-day  Zimbabwe),  Northern  Rhodesia   (Zambia)   and
    Nyasaland (Malawi). He stated that his paternal grandfather was born in
    Southern Rhodesia and, working as a church missionary, found himself in
    Nyasaland where the appellant's father was born  in  1939.  The  family
    returned to Southern Rhodesia when  the  appellant's  father  was  aged
    seven or eight. He spent the rest of his life  living  in  what  became
    Zimbabwe, marrying the appellant's mother who  was  born  in  Salisbury
    (now Harare). The appellant  does  not  purport  to  be  an  expert  in
    nationality issues in the post-colonial era, but was able to attest  to
    his father carrying a Zimbabwean National Registration  Card  from  the
    time they were introduced in  the  early  1980s  and  to  him  being  a
    Zimbabwean citizen at the time of his death in  1988.  The  appellant's
    understanding  is  that  the  letters  'CIT'  appearing  on  Zimbabwean
    National Registration Cards denote that the  holder  is  a  citizen  of
    Zimbabwe.

11.  The appellant stated that he was born in Bulawayo  in  1967  and  spent
    his entire life in Zimbabwe before entering the United Kingdom in 2005,
    save for brief military engagements in countries  such  as  Angola  and
    Mozambique and a sightseeing visit to Zambia. His parents and  siblings
    were all Zimbabwean nationals, as are his wife and children. He is  not
    aware of any of his relatives having lived in Malawi since its creation
    as an independent sovereign state. He believes that he could  not  have
    joined the Zimbabwean national army (where he served for some seventeen
    years, mostly in a medical unit) had he not been a Zimbabwean  citizen.
    He produced a copy of his Zimbabwean passport issued on 8  March  1994.
    The authenticity of the Zimbabwean passport was not challenged  by  the
    respondent, nor was the appellant's entitlement to it.

12.  The appellant explained how two Malawian passports had  come  into  his
    possession. The first (issued on 27 November 1991) was applied  for  by
    the appellant's father prior to his death in 1988 and collected in 1991
    by a distant cousin (whom he named). The appellant had a  vague  memory
    of his father getting him to sign a form. The appellant  believes  that
    his father was trying to do him a favour mindful that travel in  Africa
    was considerably easier with a Malawian passport  than  with  one  from
    Zimbabwe. However he was not able to explain why his father did not  do
    the same favour for any of his siblings. The appellant's  evidence  was
    that serving members of the Zimbabwe army require a special  permit  to
    travel abroad, and that he therefore made use of the Malawian  passport
    to make a brief trip into Zambia with friends for some  sightseeing  at
    the Victoria Falls, as this avoided the need for obtaining  a  military
    permit. There are stamps in the passport evidencing  several  crossings
    and re-crossings at Victoria  Falls  in  November  and  December  1993,
    consistent with use for tourism.

13.  The appellant was unable to explain how his father  managed  to  secure
    the passport but surmises it was due to  the  system  then  current  in
    Malawi being 'lax and corrupt'. He does not  believe  that  he  had  an
    entitlement to a Malawian passport. He was doubtful whether his  father
    ever had Malawian citizenship, notwithstanding his place of birth.  But
    he was  adamant  that  even  if  his  father  did  once  have  Malawian
    citizenship, he renounced it by operation  of  law  when  he  became  a
    national of Zimbabwe.

14.  The second Malawian passport was  brought  to  him,  so  the  appellant
    says, while he was in hiding in Zimbabwe. The issue date  is  21  April
    2005. The appellant says that it was obtained by a cousin (whom he also
    names) who worked for Air Zimbabwe and would visit Malawi on occasions.
    He took forms and photographs to Malawi and returned with the passport.
    The appellant says that the stamps in the passport do not relate travel
    which he undertook save for the exit stamp dated 9 October 2005 when he
    used the passport to fly from Harare. The appellant asserts that it was
    a fraudulent passport, made to look genuine. He used  it  to  make  his
    escape from Zimbabwe.

15.  Turning to evidence concerning  the  protection  issue,  the  appellant
    took as his starting point an occasion in 2002 when one of his brothers
    (whom I shall refer to hereafter as brother C) stayed at his  home  for
    about a  month.  Shortly  thereafter,  the  appellant  was  visited  at
    midnight by members of the Central Intelligence Organisation (CIO)  who
    searched his house. They  returned  on  several  occasions,  each  time
    searching for brother C.  On  their  fourth  visit  the  CIO  took  the
    appellant to Brady Barracks and tortured him. He was  handcuffed  to  a
    bed and interrogated. They  asked  whether  he  was  a  member  of  the
    Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) which would have been contrary  to
    army regulations. They also questioned him about derogatory comments it
    was claimed he had made concerning President Mugabe and about  avoiding
    having to disperse demonstrators which  formed  part  of  his  military
    duties notwithstanding his attachment to a medical unit.

16.  The appellant stated that the CIO beat  the  soles  of  his  feet  with
    wooden batons and rubber truncheons. He  was  held  down  while  others
    struck, punched and slapped him. His  body  was  exposed  and  the  CIO
    burned him with cigarettes. This lasted for 1-2 hours  at  the  end  of
    which he lost consciousness. He was awoken by being doused in water. He
    was released from detention after fourteen days, but told he  would  be
    rearrested and beaten if he spoke of what had happened. Thereafter  the
    appellant  was  frequently  summoned  to  the  army  headquarters   and
    questioned about his brother, his loyalty to Zanu-PF, and  his  alleged
    membership of the MDC. He was forced to sign a form resigning from  the
    army.

17.  In September 2005, the appellant stated, several CIO officers in  plain
    clothes called at his home saying they were to take him to  the  police
    station but did not explain why. In fact he was taken  again  to  Brady
    Barracks and placed in the same cell as before. Early the next  day  he
    was removed, blindfolded and placed in the rear seat a car. The vehicle
    stopped after driving for some hours and the  appellant  found  himself
    alone in the rear of the car with just one guard. The  guard  told  him
    that he was being taken to Harare to be 'sorted out' which he  took  to
    mean killed. The guard took off his blindfold, placed the appellant  in
    the seat next to the left-hand door and said that if he was  clever  he
    should escape. The driver and other  guards  returned.  They  had  been
    drinking.

18.  The appellant stated that the journey resumed  and  when  they  reached
    the suburbs of Harare, the sympathetic guard nudged him which  he  took
    to be a signal to make his move. The  appellant  opened  the  door  and
    jumped from the moving car. Though injured, he ran as fast as he  could
    and hid in a garden next to the agricultural  showground.  He  went  to
    hospital, checking in at a police post where he told a false story that
    he had been robbed. He sought treatment from a doctor whom he knew (and
    in whom he confided the truthful cause of his injuries) and rather then
    being admitted he left the hospital for a rural area where his mother's
    family came from. He stayed there for about a month during  which  time
    the second Malawian passport  was  obtained  in  circumstances  I  have
    already described, and duly left Zimbabwe. United  Kingdom.  He  stated
    that he joined the organisation Restoration of Human Rights (ROHR)  and
    produced a bundle  of  documents  evidencing  his  involvement  in  its
    activities.

     Documentary evidence

19.  The appellant put in evidence an expert  report  from  Professor  Mario
    Aguilar dated 26 April 2016. The respondent agreed to the admission  of
    this report and did not  challenge  any  of  its  content.  The  report
    includes a summary of the emergence of Malawi and Zimbabwe  from  their
    colonial past and  records,  amongst  other  things,  that  in  neither
    country is dual nationality permitted.

20.  The appellant also adduced medical evidence in the form of  psychiatric
    reports from Dr Francis E Winton, dated respectively  13  January  2015
    and 7 April 2016; and a medico-legal report from Dr Francis J Gilmurray
    dated 14 July 2008 concerning the scarring to appellant's body and  the
    likelihood of this being causally linked to  torture.  The  conclusions
    from Dr Gilmurray's report read as follows:

         31.  [The appellant] has  key  features  of  depression,  insomnia,
         fatigue, nightmares and intrusive thoughts related to his  torture.
         [...] It was clear from his affect  and  the  way  he  related  his
         history that the harassment  and  intimidation  by  the  Zimbabwean
         authorities because of his brother's political activities  and  the
         abrupt termination of his army career after almost twenty years  of
         service have greatly contributed to his low mental state.
         32.  There is clear evidence of torture from the  number  of  scars
         noted in this report/ Of the three areas of  cigarette  burns,  S2,
         the inner aspect of the right upper arm S4,  over  the  right  hip,
         and S4, on  the  inner  left  thigh:  none  are  common  areas  for
         accidental burns.
         33.  It would be  difficult  to  attribute  the  scarring  of  both
         wrists to anything other than handcuffs  or  ligatures.  Self  harm
         wounds or attempts at suicide might appear around the left wrist in
         a right-handed person like [the appellant] but there was nothing in
         his  history  or  experiences  to  suggest  suicidal  or  self-harm
         tendencies.

     The respondent did not challenge the content of Dr Gilmurray's  report,
    nor was any expert evidence tendered on her behalf.

21.   The  documentation  submitted  on  behalf  of   the   appellant   (the
    genuineness  or  authenticity  of  which  was  not  challenged  by  the
    respondent), included  the  appellant's  Zimbabwean  national  identity
    card. It bears the letters CIT which, the  appellant  asserts,  denotes
    that he is a citizen of Zimbabwe. The same also appears on the identify
    cards of the appellant's parents and one of  his  brothers,  copies  of
    which were provided in the appellant's bundle.

22.  Also included in the bundle were  the  appellant's  birth  certificate,
    his Zimbabwean passport (properly   cross-referenced  to  his  national
    identity card) issued in 8 March 1994, his Certificate of  Registration
    as a citizen of Zimbabwe (22 March 2005), his Zimbabwe driving licence,
    an affidavit from the appellant's mother dated 5 March 2010,  attesting
    to the fact that the appellant and his eight siblings and  citizens  of
    Zimbabwe, his Zimbabwe army ID card, his Certificate of Service in  the
    Regular  Army   of   Zimbabwe,   various   certificates   and   related
    documentation concerning educational achievements and qualifications as
    a health professional in Zimbabwe. I was shown a copy of the Zimbabwean
    passports of the appellant's ex-wife and his  children,  together  with
    their birth certificates.  His  father's  death  certificate  was  also
    included.

23.   The  appellant's  documents  also  included  copies  from  the   Irish
    Naturalisation and Immigration Service (INIS) indicating  that  two  of
    the appellant's brothers  were  independently  investigated  and  given
    protection in the Irish  Republic  on  the  basis  that  they  were  of
    Zimbabwean nationality. Brother C was  declared  to  be  a  refugee  in
    accordance with section 17(1)(a) of the Refugee Act 1996  (as  amended)
    (see letter dated 30 October 2002). The Report  and  Recommendation  of
    the Refugee Application Commissioner records that brother C's house was
    attacked forcing him to move to stay with his brother in 2002.  Finding
    2.1.2 of the Commissioner reads;

         [Brother  C's]  account  was  generally  plausible  and   coherent.
         [Brother C] appears to have been targeted  more  for  his  apparent
         opposition to the government by his appearance in court rather than
         his membership of the MDC.  Given  the  exceptional  and  sensitive
         nature of the political situation in Zimbabwe  at  present  I  feel
         that [brother C] must be given the  benefit  of  the  doubt  [...].
         Therefore it is my recommendation that the applicant be  declare  a
         refugee.

24.  Similarly, by letter from INIS  dated  7  March  2014,  brother  V  was
    declared 'a person eligible for  Subsidiary  Protection  in  accordance
    with Regulation  20  of  the  European  Union  (Subsidiary  Protection)
    Regulations  2013'.  Reference  is  made  in  the  determination  which
    accompanied this letter to brother V being personally non-political and
    'it is accepted as credible that [brother C's] political opinions  were
    imputed to him during his detention and questioning'.

     The respondent's submissions

25.  Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the  Malawian  passport  deployed  by  the
    appellant was authentic. The respondent adduced no direct  evidence  to
    prove the validity of the passport, even though it was open to  her  to
    do so, but relied instead on inferences which, it was submitted  by  Mr
    Tarlow,  might  be  drawn  from  the  surrounding  circumstances.   The
    appellant had appealed the refusal of entry clearance on the basis that
    he was a citizen of  Malawi,  and  that  he  had  a  previous  Malawian
    passport issued in 1996. Both, correctly it was submitted,  record  his
    true date of birth and his place of birth as Bulawayo. The respondent's
    refusal letter noted the lack of  any  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant had renounced Malawian citizenship.

26.  In his port  interview  (10  October  2005),  screening  interview  (19
    December 2007), asylum interview (5 February  2008),  and  continuation
    interview (8 February 2008), the  appellant  claimed  either  to  be  a
    national of Malawi, born and resident  in  Zimbabwe,  or  a  Zimbabwean
    national who had acquired one (or more) false Malawian  passports.  The
    respondent considers that the appellant's lengthy  delay  in  producing
    additional evidence supporting his claimed nationality  undermines  his
    claim to be a Zimbabwean national. The respondent further suggested  in
    the refusal letter that the  appellant  had  renounced  any  Zimbabwean
    nationality which he might have had by obtaining a  Malawian  passport,
    and exiting Zimbabwe using such passport.

27.  With regard to the claim for  asylum,  Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the
    appellant's  evidence  was  not  credible,  although  he  declined   my
    invitation for the appellant  to  be  recalled  so  that  any  specific
    matters might be put to him. He said that the appellant would not  have
    used his own name when attending the hospital for treatment in  respect
    of the injuries suffered when  escaping  the  car,  and  that  had  the
    appellant been a source of concern to the CIO, they would readily  have
    found him hiding out at his grandmother's home. He suggested  that  the
    injuries identified by Dr Gilmurray as  being  the  result  of  torture
    could have been sustained  falling  from  the  car.  Mr  Tarlow  placed
    reliance on a 'Personal Statement' signed by the appellant and dated 13
    October 2005, which included the statement 'I wish to state  that  this
    not a claim for asylum'.

28.  In his skeleton argument, Mr Tarlow relied on the following  additional
    matters: that the appellant lived without incident in Zimbabwe for  two
    years following his resignation from  the  army  shows  he  was  of  no
    interest to the authorities; that the respondent does not  accept  that
    brother C was actively involved with  the  MDC;  that  the  appellant's
    evidence of escaping from a moving car is  'contrived';  and  that  the
    version he gave to the police (namely that he was  robbed  then  pushed
    from a car) is in fact the truth. It was  further  submitted  that  the
    evidence by the appellant as to sur place activities 'is  nothing  more
    than an attempt to bolster a weak asylum claim'.

29.  Mr Tarlow made reference to  the  case  of  CM  (EM  country  guidance;
    disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  0059  (IAC),  but  not  to  any
    particular section nor did he state how the Country Guidance should  be
    applied in the particular circumstances of the appellant. The  lack  of
    any positive case under  CM  was,  I  suspect,  because  the  principal
    contention of the respondent was that the appellant was a  national  of
    Malawi and therefore the assessment of risk in  Zimbabwe  was  at  best
    only a peripheral issue.

     The appellant's submissions

30.  Mr Bedford's primary submission on the issue of  citizenship  was  that
    the burden of proving that the appellant was a Malawian national was on
    the respondent and she had not adduced  any  evidence  to  support  her
    assertion. He submitted that the passport was  not  'self-proving'  and
    was critical of the respondent  for  not  making  any  enquiry  of  the
    Malawian Embassy, notwithstanding that she had had the passport in  her
    possession for many years.

31.  In any event, it was submitted,  that  the  appellant's  own  evidence,
    coupled with the voluminous documentation and  the  expert  opinion  on
    dual nationality, were more  than  adequate  to  demonstrate  that  the
    appellant was a Zimbabwean national and not  a  citizen  of  Malawi,  a
    country which he had never even visited. He  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    accept the appellant's evidence that the Malawian passport was acquired
    in  order  that  he  might  leave  Zimbabwe,  and   that   there   were
    understandable reasons why he lied about this on and after his  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.

32.  Mr Bedford submitted that the appellant's evidence should  be  believed
    on the  issue  of  past  ill-treatment  and  fear  of  persecution.  He
    submitted that the appellant's evidence clearly  demonstrated  that  he
    was tortured by  the  CIO  as  a  direct  consequence  of  brother  C's
    political activities. The medical evidence (which  was  compliant  with
    the Istanbul Protocol) gave support to appellant's claims and there  is
    a degree of corroboration to be found for the appellant's narrative  in
    the determinations of INIS in relation to his brothers.

33.  Mr Bedford relied on RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00083,
    and RT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
    UKSC 38. He invited me to conclude that past treatment of the appellant
    gave rise to a legitimate concern that  he  would  be  stopped  at  the
    airport. In any event, he submitted that applying the Country  Guidance
    in CM, clearly showed that the appellant was entitled to  international
    protection.


     Findings and conclusions

34.  I found the appellant to  be  a  straightforward  individual  who  gave
    clear simple answers to the questions asked of him. He seemed  somewhat
    bemused at the process in which he  found  himself,  which  is  perhaps
    unsurprising given  the  procedural  history.  But  his  testimony  was
    consistent with the contemporaneous evidence and he was entirely candid
    about what he did not know or had forgotten. There was  no  suggestion,
    as I viewed his evidence, that he was exaggerating or  overstating  his
    case or parroting a rehearsed story. I treat his account of his history
    as credible,  to  the  lower  standard  appropriate  for  international
    protection claims.

35.  The respondent has made no approach  to  the  Malawian  authorities  to
    support her assertion that he is  a  citizen  of  Malawi  or  had  been
    habitually resident there. I prefer the evidence of the appellant,  who
    has given a credible and compelling account  of  the  circumstances  by
    which he came by his Malawian passport and for his lack of  candour  at
    the time of his arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  for  some  time
    thereafter. Despite his assertions to the contrary  in  the  past,  the
    evidence before me all points to the  appellant  being  a  national  of
    Zimbabwe: his testimony, the fact he has only ever lived  in  Zimbabwe,
    his possession of a  Zimbabwean  passport,  the  claimed  and  admitted
    nationality of his siblings and other close relatives, and  the  expert
    evidence which suggests that dual nationality is not permissible.

36.  It follows that the appellant's only citizenship for  the  purposes  of
    Article 1A of the Geneva Refugee Convention 1951 is that  of  Zimbabwe,
    and the asylum and humanitarian  protection  claim  must  therefore  be
    addressed on the basis of a proposed return there.

37.  It is for the appellant to show that at  the  date  of  the  re-hearing
    before me, there is a real risk that returning  him  to  Zimbabwe  will
    lead to him being persecuted within the meaning of the  Geneva  Refugee
    Convention of 1951, or that he would face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm so as to be eligible for humanitarian protection.

38.  The respondent has not  challenged  the  conclusions  contained  in  Dr
    Gilmurray's report, nor was any expert evidence tendered on her behalf.
    The report has been prepared  to  the  Istanbul  Protocol  standard.  I
    accept Dr Gilmurray's conclusions and find that the  material  scarring
    on the appellant's body was more likely than not to have resulted  from
    torture in the manner described by the appellant.

39.  The appellant's credible evidence is that  his  ill-treatment  resulted
    in large measure from political beliefs imputed  to  the  appellant  in
    consequence of the high profile political activism of  his  brothers  C
    and V, both of whom now have international protection in  Ireland.  The
    respondent does not advance any good reason  why  I  should  go  behind
    that.

40.  I have also had regard to rule 339K  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
    provides:

         The fact that a person has already been subject to  persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated.

    There is not in this case any good reason to  consider  that  the  past
    treatment of the appellant will not repeated, and none was advanced  on
    behalf of the respondent.

41.  I reject Mr Tarlow's submission that the appellant's  undisturbed  stay
    with his grandmother for several weeks prior to him  leaving  Zimbabwe,
    coupled with the fact that he was  able  to  fly  from  Harare  without
    incident, prove that he is  not  of  interest  to  the  CIO.  That  the
    appellant successfully  hid  out  for  some  weeks  is  not  of  itself
    probative of any lack of interest on  the  part  the  authorities.  The
    appellant's departure from  Zimbabwe  was  facilitated  by  an  act  of
    deceit, evading enquiry  from  the  Zimbabwean  border  authorities  by
    travelling under a Malawian passport, albeit one bearing his  own  name
    and correct date of birth.

42.  In relation to sur  place  activities,  I  accept  that  the  appellant
    joined ROHR since arriving in the United Kingdom and was a  participant
    in its activities in Leicester and elsewhere. As there was no challenge
    to the appellant's involvement, I take the documents at face  value  as
    demonstrating at least some involvement in ROHR over a  lengthy  period
    and at a visible, if not necessarily particularly  influential,  level.



43.  The  headnote  to  the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  CM
    summarises the position. For present purposes, it is sufficient to  set
    out paragraphs 3(1) and 3(2) which refreshes and updates  the  relevant
    Country Guidance.

         (3) The only change to the EM Country Guidance that it is necessary
         to make as regards the position as  at  the  end  of  January  2011
         arises from the judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  The  EM
         Country Guidance is, accordingly, re-stated as  follows  (with  the
         change underlined in paragraph (5) below):

             (1)  As  a  general  matter,  there  is   significantly   less
             politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with  the
             situation considered by the AIT  in  RN.  In  particular,  the
             evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the  return
             of a failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom,  having  no
             significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing  a
             real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.
             (2) The position is, however, likely to be  otherwise  in  the
             case of a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from
             the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area
             of Zimbabwe, other than  Matabeleland  North  or  Matabeleland
             South. Such a person may  well  find  it  difficult  to  avoid
             adverse attention, amounting to  serious  ill-treatment,  from
             ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control. The  adverse
             attention  may  well  involve  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm  in  the
             event of failure. Persons who have shown themselves not to  be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled  to  international
             protection, whether or not they could and  would  do  whatever
             might  be  necessary   to   demonstrate   such   loyalty   (RT
             (Zimbabwe)).

44.  No questions were put to the appellant in cross-examination  concerning
    his willingness or otherwise to declare his loyalty to Zanu-PF, nor was
    enquiry made as to where in Zimbabwe the appellant might choose to live
    were he to be returned. In my assessment, the  appellant's  case  comes
    squarely within  paragraph  3(2)  above.  The  appellant  is  within  a
    category of persons recognised in CM as likely to suffer ill-treatment,
    and has in the past been ill-treated by the Zimbabwean authorities.  He
    is likely to be so treated again if he is returned to  Zimbabwe  today.
    I find that there is a real risk of persecution or serious harm to  the
    appellant both on arrival at the airport in Harare and,  in  the  event
    that he were to pass through the airport unchallenged, when residing in
    his  home  area  in  Zimbabwe.  Past  experience  indicates  that   the
    repetition of plausible denials of involvement with  Zanu-PF  will  not
    render him  safe  from  ill-treatment.  Accordingly  the  appellant  is
    entitled to international protection.

45.  In all the circumstances, the appellant has established a  well-founded
    fear that he would be persecuted for a reason that is recognised by the
    Refugee Convention and that there is a  real  risk  that  he  would  be
    subject to various forms of ill-treatment such as to infringe Article 3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge having been set aside  on  the
basis of a material error of law, a fresh decision is substituted:

The appellant's appeal is allowed on both asylum and human rights grounds.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed    Mark Hill                  |                                     |
|Mark Hill QC                         |                                     |
|Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal   |Dated:  29 July 2016                 |

