
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02684/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                  THAN WIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Singh of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national of Myanmar born on 30 January 1944.   On  6
    February 2014 he together with his wife Shwe Molly entered  the  United
    Kingdom with leave as visitors.  On 3  March  2014  they  both  claimed
    asylum as dependents of their daughter Ni Ni Win  also  a  national  of
    Myanmar and born on 5 March 1969.  Her claim for subsidiary  protection
    is based on her involvement in the development of  student  guides  for
    teaching Muslim children in community centres in respect of  which  she
    had been targeted by  Buddhist  extremists.   On  arrival  neither  the
    Appellant nor his wife had been in good health  for  some  considerable
    time.  Indeed on 26 May 2015 the Appellant's wife died.

The Respondent's Decision

 2. On 10 February 2015 the Respondent refused the asylum  applications  of
    the Appellant and his wife and proposed to make  directions  for  their
    removal to Myanmar.  The Respondent  also  considered  the  Appellant's
    claim based on his private and family life in the  United  Kingdom  and
    found he did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(i) of the
    Immigration Rules.  She went on to consider his claim under  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules taking into account his medical condition
    and his family in  the  United  Kingdom  and  found  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate to remove him.

 3. On 16 February 2015 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds are entirely generic save for the references to
    Myanmar as the destination for removal.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 4. On 2 March 2015 the Appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal requesting that the appeal of the Appellant and  his  wife  be
    transferred to the same hearing centre as  that  where  his  daughter's
    appeal against refusal of asylum was due to be heard and that all three
    appeals be in the same list.  The First-tier Tribunal obliged  and  all
    three were listed for full hearing on 19 June 2015.  On  9  April  2015
    the Appellant's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal to advise that due  to
    their failing health in respect of  which  medical  evidence  would  be
    submitted neither the Appellant nor his wife  would  be  attending  the
    appeals and requested the Tribunal to consider the  appeals  without  a
    hearing.  It would appear  that  at  that  point  the  appeals  of  the
    Appellant and his wife  became  separated  from  the  appeal  of  their
    daughter upon whose claim the Appellant and his wife were dependent.

 5. On 28 May 2015 the Appellant's solicitors advised the Tribunal  by  fax
    that the Appellant's wife had died.  The appeal file was handed  for  a
    decision on the papers without a hearing to  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Devittie three days after  the  hearing  of  their  daughter's
    appeal.

 6. By a decision promulgated on 16 September 2015 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Devittie dismissed the appeals of the Appellant and  his  late
    wife on human rights grounds.  He also made an anonymity direction.  He
    noted the daughter's claim for subsidiary protection was not before him
    and that the Respondent had found her account of past  persecution  not
    to be credible.  He mentioned the statements in the Tribunal file which
    referred mainly to the poor state of health of the  Appellant  and  his
    wife.  There  was  no  issue  but  that  their  claims  for  subsidiary
    protection were entirely dependent upon that  of  the  claim  of  their
    daughter who was stated to have been their sole carer in Myanmar.   The
    Judge proceeded on the basis that the Appellant  had  two  children  in
    Myanmar, one of them being their daughter who at the time  was  in  the
    United Kingdom and who was an asylum seeker.  He did  not  accept  that
    the Appellant's daughter was caring for him on  a  full-time  basis  in
    Myanmar because she had claimed that in Myanmar she was also engaged at
    least on a part-time basis as  a  teacher:  see  paragraph  21  of  his
    decision.

 7. On 6 October 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Ford  granted  the
    Appellant permission to appeal because it was arguable  the  Judge  had
    erred in basing his decision on the facts as at the date of the hearing
    and so may have give insufficient weight to the  deterioration  in  the
    Appellant's health since arrival in the United Kingdom and that in  the
    meantime his wife had died.  She noted the Tribunal had  been  notified
    of her death but that the Judge had not made any mention of it.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Submissions for the Appellant

 8. Before the hearing I ascertained that the  appeal  of  the  Appellant's
    daughter against the Respondent's refusal of subsidiary protection  had
    been dismissed following the hearing on 19 June 2015.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal had refused her permission to appeal and she had  renewed  her
    application for  permission  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  which  had  been
    granted.  The matter had been heard on 8 December 2015  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal's  decision  whether  the   First-tier   Tribunal's   decision
    contained an error of law was still outstanding.

 9.  There  followed  a  discussion  concerning  those  documents  for  the
    Appellant which  had  been  filed  late  with  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    readiness for the hearing.  Some related to the  medical  condition  of
    the Appellant's late wife.  After discussion, the parties  agreed  that
    for the purposes of deciding whether the Judge's decision  contained  a
    material error of law it would be adequate to rely on the bundle  which
    the Appellant had filed in the First-tier Tribunal on 15 May 2015.

10. Mr Singh for the Appellant referred to the records from the Appellant's
    general practitioner which had been before the Judge.  In particular he
    referred to the the various medications  the  Appellant  was  currently
    taking and the diagnosis of severe ischaemic heart disease and that  he
    had previously had a major coronary artery  by-pass  operation  carried
    out in Myanmar on 23 August 2012: see paragraph 4  of  the  Appellant's
    statement of 8 May 2015.  The Appellant required a  substantial  amount
    of personal care.  In Myanmar his daughter, Ni Ni, had been responsible
    for caring for him and his wife.  She was now in the United Kingdom and
    on return there would be nobody to care for him since  his  only  child
    remaining in Myanmar was his son who would not be able to care for  him
    for the reasons set out at paragraph 6 of  the  Appellant's  statement.
    In addition  he  had  two  children  who  were  settled  and  who  were
    naturalised British  citizens  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant had never claimed there were insufficient medical  facilities
    in Myanmar.  His claim was based on the lack of the extensive  personal
    care which he now required and which the Judge had failed adequately to
    address, focusing on the standard of medical care: see  paragraphs  14,
    15, 21-23 and 30 of his decision.

11. He continued that the Judge had not taken into account the evidence  of
    the circumstances of the Appellant at the date of  the  hearing.   This
    was evident from what he had said at paragraph 22 of his decision  that
    the medical evidence showed the Appellant was not fit to travel but  he
    had managed to travel to the United Kingdom.  The  fact  was  that  the
    health of the Appellant's wife had deteriorated so much  that  she  had
    died before the hearing.  Although there was evidence in  the  Tribunal
    file to that effect, the Judge had failed to make any reference  to  it
    in his decision.

12. The Judge had erred in his consideration of the evidence and  this  had
    infected his assessment of  the  proportionality  of  the  decision  to
    remove the Appellant which amounted to a material  error  of  law.   In
    answer to my enquiry, Mr Singh confirmed the Appellant was not  raising
    or pursuing any claim for asylum.

Submissions for the Respondent

13. Mr Nath made the point that the Appellant's own evidence  was  that  he
    had received extensive medical care  in  Myanmar.   The  Appellant  had
    produced little if any evidence about the  personal  care  arrangements
    and his need for personal care in Myanmar.

14. The position in the United Kingdom of his  daughter  was  at  the  very
    least uncertain and he referred to paragraphs 24 and 25 of the  Judge's
    decision.   Further,  the  Judge  had  not  made  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant's son in Myanmar would be unable to care for him.

The Appellant's Response

15. Mr Singh emphasised that the Appellant's carer, his  daughter,  was  no
    longer in Myanmar.  The Judge had considered the situation on the basis
    of the Appellant's situation before he and his late wife  came  to  the
    United Kingdom.

16. The Judge at paragraph 30 had considered the learning in GS (India) and
    Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ. 40 although the  Appellant's  claim  was
    not based on standards of medical  care  but  on  the  availability  of
    personal care.  The Judge had made no finding that the Appellant's  son
    in Myanmar would be able to supply appropriate care and  the  Appellant
    had in his witness statement explained why his son would not be able to
    provide such care but the Judge had not addressed it.

Findings and Consideration

17. Following submissions I adjourned the hearing to  chambers  to  discuss
    freely the issues raised at the hearing in the light  of  the  evidence
    that the Appellant's health had  considerably  deteriorated  since  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom and the problems which had  arisen  as  a
    result of the appeals of the  Appellant  and  his  late  wife  becoming
    separated from the appeal of their daughter.   We  also  discussed  the
    options for my decision.

Findings and Consideration

18. I am satisfied the Appellant's health had deteriorated between the time
    of his arrival in the United Kingdom and the Judge's  consideration  of
    the appeal and that there was evidence of such in  the  Tribunal  file.
    His general condition will have been further adversely affected by  the
    death of his wife of which there was evidence on the correspondence tag
    in the Tribunal  file  and  to  which  the  Judge  made  no  reference.
    Additionally, the Judge did  not  adequately  distinguish  between  the
    standard of medical care which the Appellant had  received  in  Myanmar
    and the availability of the extensive personal care which the Appellant
    now required by reason of his deteriorating health and which  could  be
    given by his daughter who at the date of the Judge's  decision  was  in
    the United Kingdom and not Myanmar.  I find the omission of  references
    to these matters and the evidence for them in the  Tribunal  file  must
    have infected the Judge's assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    proposed removal of the Appellant to Myanmar to an extent sufficient to
    amount to a material error of law.  I take into account that the  Judge
    was not helped by the fact that his decision was based on the papers in
    the file and there were no written submissions for the Appellant.   The
    consequence is that his decision must be set aside in its entirety.

19. The parties accepted it would be appropriate for me to proceed  to  re-
    decide the substantive appeal.  The Appellant  is  evidently  extremely
    ill.  His daughter cared for him in Myanmar.  I make no finding  as  to
    whether the care was full or part-time but I do find that the level  of
    care which the Appellant now receives  from  his  daughter  is  to  all
    intents and purposes full-time.

20. It is unfortunate that the decision whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    appropriate and pragmatic course to take  is  for  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant to be allowed on the grounds that the medical evidence  shows
    his medical condition is such that if he were to be returned to Myanmar
    at the date of this hearing he would face the prospect of a lonely  and
    undignified death: see D v United Kingdom; because the only person  who
    would care for him is presently in the United Kingdom and  she  clearly
    has a long-standing and deep relationship  with  him  as  daughter  and
    indeed as carer for him and his late wife.

21. When considering the length of leave, if any,  to  be  granted  to  the
    Appellant, the Respondent may well wish to grant leave in line with any
    leave which might be granted to his daughter on the basis that  if  his
    daughter's appeal is unsuccessful and she is returned  to  Myanmar  the
    Appellant on the present evidence could return with her.

Anonymity

22. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.

Afterword

23.  Subsequent to the hearing and preparation of this  decision  the  Upper
    Tribunal promulgated its decision to dismiss the Appellant's daughter's
    appeal (AA/02598/2015).

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors  of  law  such
    that it should be set aside.  The following decision is substituted:

    The appeal of the Appellant is  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds  as
    indicated at paragraph 21 above.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 02. ii. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed and I have therefore considered  whether  a  fee
award should be made.  Having regard to what information  was  available  to
the Respondent at the date of the Respondent's decision, I do  not  find  it
appropriate to make any fee award.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 02. ii. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
