
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA025852015
     AA030582015
     AA030652015
     AA030682015
     AA030732015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2016                             |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  [a r] (1)
                                  [R B] (2)
                                  [S R] (3)
                                 [S A R] (4)
                                  [R R] (5)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Warren, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. These are the appellants' appeals against the decision of Judge Dickson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 16th July 2015.

Background

 2. The appellants are citizens of Libya.  The first and second  appellants
    are married to one another and the third, fourth and  fifth  appellants
    are their children.  The first appellant appeals against  the  decision
    of the respondent made on 18th January 2015 to refuse him asylum.

 3. The first appellant entered  the  UK  on  12th  November  2009  with  a
    visitor's visa valid until 14th January 2012.   On  24th  May  2011  he
    claimed asylum on the basis that he would be  at  risk  of  persecution
    under Gaddafi's regime in Libya due to the political demonstrations  in
    which he had participated whilst residing in the UK. He was refused but
    in a decision promulgated on 23rd August 2011 Immigration Judge Mrs F M
    Kempton allowed the appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR.

 4. On 8th February 2012 he was granted three months' discretionary leave.

 5. On 7th May 2012 he made a further  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain on the grounds that he was a refugee  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection and his human rights would be infringed if  he  returned  to
    Libya.  On 18th January 2015 he was refused.

 6. The appellant's case was that his children would  not  be  able  to  be
    educated in Libya. He does not know where his family  is  living  since
    some are in Tunisia and others have fled and he has little contact with
    them.  Their house in Tripoli was destroyed and looted.  He  had  heard
    that his brother had been abducted and was currently being  held  in  a
    prison by militia-linked extremists.

 7. The judge said that there was an inconsistency in the evidence  between
    the first and second appellant in that the first appellant said that he
    had no family in Tripoli whereas the second  appellant  said  that  her
    family were still living there.  There  were  also  inconsistencies  in
    relation to what had happened about the family home in Tripoli in  that
    he told his solicitor  that  the  family  had  sold  their  possessions
    whereas in his statement he claimed  that  the  house  was  looted  and
    destroyed.

 8. The judge  said  that  he  could  place  no  reliance  upon  the  first
    appellant's evidence.

 9. The judge concluded that it could be  assumed  that  there  were  still
    flights into and out of Libya.  He said that the  information  produced
    by the appellant's representative had not overturned the guidance in AT
    and Others (Libya).  He was not satisfied that the family were close to
    the centre of power in the Gaddafi  regime  and  even  if  one  of  his
    brothers was employed by the  regime  such  employment  or  association
    alone was not  sufficient  to  establish  a  risk  of  persecution.  He
    concluded as follows:

         "The first appellant and his family may prefer to stay  in  the  UK
         especially as the children are now receiving some form of education
         in this country.  The first appellant has not established that  the
         conditions set out in Article 15(c)  of  the  directive  have  been
         established in Libya. The first appellant has not established  that
         he and his family would be specifically targeted on his return.  Mr
         Shah also submitted that the government of Libya is  now  based  in
         Tobruk.  The  Home  Office  objective  Immigration  refers  to  the
         situation being normal in Benghazi at the present time.   In  these
         circumstances the first appellant and his family could in  my  view
         return to Libya.  If it was  not  possible  for  them  to  live  in
         Tripoli then the internal flight option to places  such  as  Tobruk
         would be available to them.  In reaching my decision  I  take  into
         account the House of Lords guidance in Januzzi."

10. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in finding  that  there  were  contradictions  in  the  first
    appellant's evidence  and  had  not  properly  assessed  the  objective
    evidence provided to him.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Mailer on 26 August 2015.

13. On 3rd September 2015 the respondent served a reply.

Submissions

14. Miss Warren  submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  not  properly
    assessing the background evidence and had decided the  case  simply  on
    the basis of  whether  the  appellant  fell  within  one  of  the  risk
    categories identified by the Tribunal in AT.  AT had been decided at  a
    time when there was a single government in Libya and the situation  had
    deteriorated markedly since then.

15. He had also erred in presuming that there were flights in  and  out  of
    Libya when according to the FCO advice,  still  current,  published  in
    February 2015, Tripoli International Airport was closed  on  13th  July
    2014 and Benghazi Airport has been closed since May 2014.  It  was  not
    open to the judge to conjecture that there would be flights  available.



16. She submitted that the judge's assessment of the  appellant's  evidence
    was flawed and that his credibility findings were unsafe.

17. Mr Parkinson submitted that it was not incumbent  the  judge  to  trawl
    through all of the evidence presented to  him  but  in  any  event  the
    appellant's  bundle  did  not  establish   that   the   situation   had
    deteriorated since the decision in AT.  Much of the  evidence  in  fact
    predated it.  One could assume that the Immigration Judge had looked at
    the documentation even if he had not said so and it was not an error of
    law for him to apply the country guidance case.  He submitted that  the
    judge's credibility findings were open to him and asked me to  maintain
    the decision.

Consideration of Whether There is a Material Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the judge did err in law.

19. It was incumbent upon him to engage with the material  which  had  been
    presented and not sufficient simply to state that it did  not  overturn
    the guidance in AT and Others.  I  am  unpersuaded  by  Mr  Parkinson's
    submission that the evidence was to capable of affecting the  decision.
    Clearly the situation in Libya today is different from that when AT was
    decided.

20. Second, it was not open to the judge simply to assume that there  would
    be flights available for the family  to  Libya.  In  HH  (Somalia)  and
    Others v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 426 Sedley LJ said at paragraph 122:

         "It has been sufficient for the purposes of  resolving  the  issues
         before us to confirm, as this court has said on previous  occasions
         (albeit only obiter) that where the route and manner of return  are
         known or can be implied, the  first  tier  tribunal  must  consider
         whether the applicant would be put at  risk  if  returned  by  that
         route. We have not found it necessary to resolve the wider question
         whether that tribunal must always consider that  question  whenever
         the applicant puts it in issue,  although  our  strong  provisional
         view is that it must.  If that is right, it  will  inevitably  have
         important consequences for the  status  of  the  applicant  pending
         directions  finally  being  issued  to  secure   his   removal   or
         deportation. We have not had directly to address that issue but  it
         is bound to arise in the near future. Conceivably it might  require
         a reference to the ECJ in due course, but that is not necessary  in
         this case and no-one has suggested it."

21. Third, the judge did not directly address the evidence about the  first
    appellant's brother's involvement in  pro-Ghaddafi  activities  in  his
    credibility findings, concentrating on those matters which he said were
    contradictory. However it is not entirely clear why  he  placed  weight
    upon those contradictions, if such they were.  Whilst  this  in  itself
    would not be sufficient to overturn the decision, it does mean that the
    most convenient course is for the matter to be reheard  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal when all issues will be at large.



Signed[pic]                             Date 8 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
