
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/02268/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 26 January 2015                        |On 9 February 2015          |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              ANNE ROSE BISSECK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Nicholson counsel instructed by GMIAU.
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Lambert promulgated on 15 July 2014  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds.
Background


3. The Appellant was  born  on  26  November  1974  and  is  a  national  of
   Cameroon.
4. On 25 April 2008 the Appellant applied for asylum.
5. On 24 September 2009 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The Appellant  appealed  the  refusal  and  her  appeal  was
   dismissed on 21 January 2010 by Immigration Judge Thorne.  Permission  to
   appeal that decision was refused on 23 February 2010 and 31  March  2010.
   Following presentation of a medical report dated 13  September  2010  the
   claim was reconsidered by the Respondent  and  on  6  December  2011  was
   refused. Permission to appeal by way of Judicial Review was granted on 17
   June 2013 which led to the reconsideration dated 24 March  2014.  It  was
   the appeal against that decision that  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Lambert.
6. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons for refusing the  Appellant's
   claim that she was at risk on return to Cameroon as a political activist.
   They can be summarised as in essence that: the Appellant's claim to  have
   been detained as a result of her political activism with the SDF or  AFDC
   was not accepted; Judge Thorne  had  not  found  her  to  be  a  credible
   witness; actual or perceived membership of  the  SDF  does  not  put  the
   Appellant at risk; because  of  the  adverse  credibility  findings  made
   against the Appellant little weight could be attached  to  the  documents
   she produced; the letter from Mr Zamboue of the SDF did not  support  her
   claim to have been detained; regarding the report of Dr Miller it was not
   accepted that the injuries claimed to be the result of  torture  in  2001
   occurred in the way alleged; there were a number of  adverse  credibility
   findings made in relation to the Appellant which undermine her  claim  as
   to the events of 2007-2008; the  Appellant's  medical  problems  did  not
   reach the high threshold set out in Article 3; there  was  no  breach  of
   Article 8.



The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Lambert ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found :
   a) She found no reason to revisit the decision of Judge Thorne  that  the
      Appellant may have been detained in January 2001 and may have  been  a
      low level supporter or even a member of the SDF but she did  not  find
      that the letter from Mr Pascal added to her claim. She found she could
      place little reliance on the letter because of inconsistencies such as
      to the date she joined the party , he claimed it was 2000 and she said
      it was 2007 and mr Pascal made no mention of her having been helped by
      the SDF to leave Cameroon in April 2008.
   b) She accepted on the basis of Dr Millers report that the Appellant  was
      detained and tortured in 2001 and that contrary  to  the  findings  of
      Judge Thorne that there was a prison in Yaounde.
   c) She found that past persecution was an indicator of  future  risk  but
      not determinative.
   d) She found that the authorities were not interested  in  the  Appellant
      between 2001 -2008.
   e)  She  found  internal  inconsistencies  in  her  evidence  about   her
      involvement with the SDF in 2007-2008.
   f)  She did not find the Appellant's account of how  she  came  to  leave
      Cameroon in 2008 was credible.
   g) She did not find that the Appellant would be at risk on return.
   h) She found no breach of Article 3 or 8.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 November 2014  while  noting  that
   some grounds were stronger than other Upper Tribunal  Judge  Dr  R  Kekic
   gave permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Nicholson  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that enlarged on the grounds of appeal;

   a) The Appellant was found credible as her claim to  have  been  tortured
      and detained and should therefore have been found credible as  to  her
      claim as to the circumstances that led her to  flee in 2008.

   b) Mr Pascal may have been confused as to the date she joined  the  party
      writing a letter 11 years later.

   c) The Judge relied in Judge Thorne's findings which were flawed.

   d) The reasons given for not finding the Appellant's account credible  at
      paragraphs 8.4-8.7 were very short and  did  not  do  justice  to  the
      evidence provided in her witness statement, her oral evidence and made
      in submissions.

   e) The Court of Appeal had granted permission on the basis of the  letter
      from Mr Pascal of the SDF and the medical  evidence  and  this  should
      have been taken into account.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

   a) He relied on the case of Chiver (10758) that the Tribunal may  believe
      some parts of an Appellant's account but not others. In this case  the
      Judge accepted her claimed torture in 2001 but not what she said about
      the events of 2007-2008.

   b) The Judge gave sustainable reasons for  rejecting  the  letter  of  Mr
      Pascal.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Rationality is  a  very  high  threshold  and  a
   conclusion is not irrational just because  some  alternative  explanation
   has been rejected or can be said to be possible. Nor is it  necessary  to
   consider   every   possible   alternative   inference   consistent   with
   truthfulness because an Immigration judge concludes that the  story  told
   is untrue. If a point of evidence of significance  has  been  ignored  or
   misunderstood, that  is  a  failure  to  take  into  account  a  material
   consideration. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said  this
   in relation to challenging such findings:

   "Where, as in this case,  complaint  is  made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
   adjudicator  in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is   to   say
   credibility), particular care is necessary to ensure that  the  criticism
   is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and does not merely
   reflect a feeling on the part of the appellate  tribunal  that  it  might
   itself have taken a different view of the matter from that that  appealed
   to the adjudicator."

13. In relation to the adequacy of findings I  remind  myself  of  what  was
   said in  Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  Afghanistan  [2013]
   UKUT 85 (IAC) at headnote (1) : "Although there is a legal duty to give a
   brief explanation of the conclusions on the central  issue  on  which  an
   appeal is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision
   as a whole makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the
   judge."

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. I am satisfied that the background  and  chronology  of  this  case  was
   clear to the Judge by the time she came to write the decision even if  at
   the time of the hearing she may not  have  read  every  document  in  the
   bundle. Having written an accurate summary of the previous history of how
   the appeal came before her I am satisfied that she  was  not  obliged  to
   list every document that she read before coming to her decision and  that
   it was not an error of law to specifically fail to refer to  the  grounds
   of appeal that were before the Court of Appeal. Paragraph 7.3 makes clear
   that the Judge appreciated that there was fresh evidence in the  form  of
   medical evidence and a letter from Mr Pascal which she took into account.
   The decision of Judge Thorne has not been set aside but Judge Lambert put
   that decision into context by reference to Devaseelan  and  her  detailed
   consideration of the new material before her (7.2-7.3).

16. Mr Nicholson's principal submission appears to be that  having  accepted
   as she did that the Appellant had been truthful in her claim to have been
   tortured in 2001 it was more likely  that  she  was  credible  about  the
   events of 2001-2008.  I am satisfied that  the  Judge  properly  directed
   herself on this issue at 8.4 of her decision that while past  persecution
   was an indicator of future risk it was not determinative. It was open  to
   her to reject the subsequent history given by the Appellant provided  she
   gave adequate reasons for doing so.

17. The findings as to why the  Judge  rejected  her  evidence  about  later
   events are criticised as brief but I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  gave
   sufficiently detailed and cogent reasons at 8.2 and 8.4-8.7 why  she  did
   not find the Appellant's evidence persuasive about the  events  of  2001-
   2008 and I can see no error in the fundamental approach  she  adopted  to
   her consideration of the evidence. She was not obliged to set  out  every
   piece of evidence she  considered  in  reaching  her  conclusions.  Judge
   Lambert made those findings having had the opportunity to consider all of
   the documentary  evidence  and  having  heard  the  Appellant  give  oral
   evidence before her including the Appellant's own evidence that  she  was
   completely politically inactive as far as the SDF was  concerned  between
   2001-2008. I remind myself that there must be a fundamental error in  the
   approach to findings of fact not simple a disagreement with weight  given
   to certain pieces of evidence, reminding myself what  was  said  by  Lord
   Hoffman in Biogen Inc v Medeva Ltd [1997]
   "... specific findings of fact, even by the most  meticulous  judge,  are
   inherently an incomplete statement of the impression which was made  upon
   him by the primary evidence. His expressed findings are always surrounded
   by a penumbra of imprecision  as  to  emphasis,  relative  weight,  minor
   qualification and nuance ... of which time and  language  do  not  permit
   exact expression, but which may play an important  part  in  the  judge's
   overall evaluation."

18. . The Judge gave clear reasons why she did not find  the  letter  of  Mr
   Pascal supportive of the Appellant's claim and these  were  reasons  that
   were open to her whether or not the permission granted by  the  Court  of
   Appeal was based in part on the letter. There were clear  inconsistencies
   as to her level of involvement in the party, how  she  left  Cameroon  in
   2008 and even the date she joined  the  party:  the  suggestion  that  Mr
   Pascal may simply have forgotten when she joined is speculation and is an
   attempt to re argue the case.

19.  I am satisfied that the Judge at paragraphs 8.13 to  8.19  as  part  of
   her assessment under Article 8 considered  both  the  Appellant's  mental
   health problems , her relationship with her partner  and  her  length  of
   residence in the United Kingdom. There is no factor drawn to my attention
   which has been overlooked again I find that this is simply a disagreement
   with the weight given by the  Judge  to  the  competing  factors  in  the
   balancing exercise.

CONCLUSION

20. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                              Date
8.2.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
