

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/02955/2014
      AA/02964/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued on      |
|on 26th November 2014                         |On 1st December 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  YING LIN
                                    JIN HE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the First Appellant:     Mr O Mullan, Advocate, instructed by Miss
Rutherford of Latta    & Co., Solicitors

For the Second Appellant:    Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Mr Singh
of Latta & Co.,  Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against two determinations by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Agnew, both dated 16th June 2014.

 2. The judge appears to have been led into issuing two  determinations  as
    partial recognition of the application by  the  appellants,  which  was
    refused, for their cases to be heard separately.  That application  has
    been only a source of confusion.  There was  no  good  reason  why  the
    cases should have been subject to separate hearings or  determinations.



 3. The first appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    The first ground is the plainly absurd one that it was  prejudicial  to
    her case that it was not separated from that of her husband.  Ground  2
    is that the judge overlooked submissions about the appellants returning
    to different provinces in China [Szechuan and  Fujian],  they  being  a
    married couple with a young child.  Ground 3 complains that the finding
    on the risk of forcible sterilisation lacks  reasoning.   Ground  4  is
    lack of consideration of the best interests of the child.

 4. On 10th July 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  granted  permission
    to appeal, observing that while in all other respects the determination
    was well-structured and sound, there might  be  an  arguable  error  in
    failure to deal with a submission on return of the  appellant  and  her
    husband to different provinces, which might have an effect on the  best
    interests of the child.

 5. The first appellant did not apply to the Upper Tribunal for  permission
    to appeal on the grounds which had been refused.  Mr Mullan  recognised
    that his case was confined  to  the  ground  on  which  permission  was
    granted.

 6. The second appellant also sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Ground 1 is inadequacy of reasoning for the finding that  it
    was extremely unlikely that photographs  of  the  appellant  practising
    Falun Gong would come to the attention of the authorities.  Ground 2 is
    failing to take account of background  evidence  that  the  authorities
    reportedly instructed some neighbourhood communities  to  report  Falun
    Gong members, who were then liable to detention and abuse.  Ground 3 is
    failing to take account of evidence  -  photographs  of  the  appellant
    practising Falun Gong, a letter of support, and evidence from his wife.
     Ground 4, which is unclearly expressed,  complains  about  failure  to
    make findings in line with HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.

 7. On 10th July 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew refused  the  second
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on the view  that
    the judge explained the  finding  that  photographs  of  the  appellant
    practising Falun Gong would not come to attention of  the  authorities,
    the relevant evidence had been taken into account, and as the appellant
    was found incredible it was not necessary to consider HJ (Iran).

 8. The second appellant renewed his  application  for  permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on essentially the same grounds.  On 29th September 2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted  permission,  for  the  sake  of
    uniformity with  the  appeal  by  the  appellant's  wife,  and  without
    restricting the grant on other grounds.

 9. Mr Mullan said that he understood from his instructing  solicitor  that
    submissions on the "separate provinces" point were made in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.   The  matter  was  raised  in  the  statements  of  the
    appellants at paragraphs 8 and 7 respectively.  At paragraph 35 of  the
    determination, the judge found that the child was very young, it was in
    his best interests to be with his parents and there were no reasons why
    the family could not live in China or that it would be unreasonable for
    him to accompany his parents to China.  The wording made it plain  that
    the  point  of  possible  separation  of  the  family  had   not   been
    appreciated.  If they were sent to separate provinces the  child  would
    inevitably be separated from one parent or the other.  On  whether  the
    parents would in reality have to live in separate provinces,  they  had
    both mentioned in their statements the requirements of the hukou system
    about which there was background evidence.   Mr  Mullan  accepted  that
    there was also evidence of large  scale  internal  migration  in  China
    irrespective of hukou, but said there were details  of  very  different
    practices in the various provinces.  He submitted that there  had  been
    evidence  showing  a  real  possibility  of  wife  and  husband   being
    separated, which raised an issue about the best interests of the  child
    which was not answered in the determination.  The point  was  material.
    The remedy would be to fix a further hearing at which further  evidence
    would be provided.  There was no sufficient record of  the  submissions
    to enable a decision to be substituted immediately.   The  case  should
    not be sent back to the same First-tier Tribunal Judge and was probably
    suitable for further decision in the Upper Tribunal rather than in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

10. Mr Bryce indicated that he had three lines of argument to  pursue.   He
    accepted that although the grant of permission in respect of the second
    appellant  was  not  restricted,  and  some  of  the  grounds  in   the
    application were wide, the objection might be raised  that  his  points
    could not all be clearly derived from those grounds.  I indicated  that
    I would hear from him on the substance of  his  points,  reserving  any
    question of the scope of the grounds.

11. The first and main argument for the second appellant was  based  on  YB
    (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360 and  KS  and  NL  (Burma)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 67.  These cases vouch the general proposition that sur
    place activity, even if cynical and opportunistic, may be a sound basis
    for a claim.  The second appellant's position continues to be that  his
    involvement in Falun Gong  was  sincere,  notwithstanding  the  judge's
    conclusions  to  the  contrary.   Mr Bryce  did  not  say  that  these
    conclusions were open to criticism, but he said that was insignificant.
     The judge overlooked that such activities might nevertheless give rise
    to a risk and to a protection need.  Mr Bryce emphasised the finding at
    paragraph 46 that the appellant "may now be  making  the  attempt,  and
    will  continue  to  do  so,  to  connect  himself   with   Falun   Gong
    practitioners for the  sole  purpose  of  remaining  in  the  UK".   At
    paragraph 59 the judge accepted that  he  had  involvement  with  Falun
    Gong, even if "calculated only to enhance his prospects of a successful
    application to obtain legitimate status in this country".

12. Mr Bryce turned to background evidence at page 116 of  the  bundle  for
    the  second  appellant  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  US   State
    Department Report for 2013, under the heading Internet Freedom:

         The CCP continued to increase efforts to monitor internet  use  ...
         and  punish  those  who  ran  afoul  of  political   sensitivities.
         According to news sources, more than fourteen government ministries
         participated ...  resulting  in  the  censorship  of  thousands  of
         domestic and foreign websites, blogs,  cell  phone  text  messages,
         social networking services, online chat rooms, online games, and e-
         mail.  These measures were not universally effective.  In  addition
         to its own extensive system of internet censorship, the  government
         imposed more responsibilities on internet  companies  to  implement
         online censorship  and  surveillance  regimes,  and  it  sought  to
         prohibit anonymous expression online ...

         ...

         Under guidance from the CCP the government  employed  thousands  of
         persons at  national,  provincial,  and  local  levels  to  monitor
         electronic communications.  Official  monitoring  focused  on  such
         tools as social networking, microblogging, and video-sharing sites.
          Internet companies also employed thousands of censors to implement
         CCP directives.

13. Mr Bryce submitted that such scrutiny was  sufficient  to  establish  a
    real risk.  He accepted that no example had been cited of a person  who
    practised Falun Gong abroad being identified  by  the  authorities  and
    persecuted on return.

14. Mr Bryce's second point related to paragraph 43 of  the  determination.
    The judge notes that Falun Gong held a media festival the day prior  to
    the hearing in the area where the appellant claimed  to  practice  (the
    West End of Glasgow) but he failed to mention it, had not been present,
    and when asked gave a poor explanation of why he  was  not  there.   Mr
    Bryce said that the only source of information that a major festival of
    Falun Gong had taken place seem to have been the judge's own knowledge,
    and the point had not been put to the  appellants'  representative  for
    comment.

15. Mr Bryce's third point was that at paragraph 32 the judge  lapsed  into
    speculation.

16. Mr  Bryce  said  that  the  errors  cumulatively  were  such  that  the
    determination should be set aside and the case remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for entirely fresh hearing before another judge.

17. Mrs O'Brien accepted that the  matter  of  the  appellants  being  from
    separate provinces was before  the  judge,  and  was  not  dealt  with.
    However, she submitted that any error was immaterial, because based  on
    her other findings, in which no legal error was shown, the judge  would
    plainly have found that the appellants  could  relocate  within  China.
    The  availability  of  that  option  is  well-established  by   general
    background evidence and by the findings in AX (family planning  scheme)
    China CG [2012] UKUT 00097  (IAC).   Separation  of  the  three  family
    members would not happen.  The judge would have given the  same  answer
    on  the  best  interests  of  the   child   for   the   same   reasons.
    Alternatively, Mrs O'Brien said that if the determination did  require
    to be set aside on this point there was no need for a further  hearing.
    The appellants have had the opportunity to produce all their  evidence.
    AX should be applied on internal relocation and it should be found that
    removal would have no disproportionate effect, taking  account  of  the
    best interests of the child.

18. As to the second appellant, Mrs O'Brien said that Mr Bryce's  arguments
    did not arise from the grounds on which permission  had  been  granted.
    Those grounds were vague and did not amount more than disagreement with
    the credibility findings.  The main line of  argument  for  the  second
    appellant, based on  YB  (Eritrea),  was  not  put  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, was not in the Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    was not obvious.  Even if it were  to  be  entertained,  there  was  no
    evidence to support a real risk on return.  Evidence of monitoring  the
    internet did not establish that the Chinese authorities would  take  an
    adverse interest in the appellant on return because of  photographs  of
    him engaging in Falun Gong practices abroad.

19. As to the point  of  wrongfully  relying  on  judicial  knowledge,  Mrs
    O'Brien said that the matter had been put  to  the  appellant  for  his
    comment.  Objection might have been taken then, but was  not.   In  any
    event, this was a minor issue in the determination.

20. On the third point, Mrs O'Brien submitted  that  it  was  a  reasonable
    inference from all the other findings and could not be  categorised  as
    speculative.

21. Finally, Mrs O'Brien said that even if error were to be found  such  as
    to require a fresh decision there  had  been  no  application  for  any
    further evidence to  be  introduced  and  the  case  was  suitable  for
    decision in the Upper Tribunal based on submissions only.

22. Mr Mullan had nothing to add by way of reply.

23. Mr Bryce submitted that his argument based on YB (Eritrea) amounted  to
    an obvious point of Refugee Convention jurisprudence  which  should  be
    considered even if it had not been raised  earlier.   He  withdrew  his
    third point, being persuaded that Mrs O'Brien's submission was sound.

24. I reserved my determination.

25. Counsel made as  much  as  could  reasonably  be  made  of  the  points
    available to the two appellants at this stage, but in my opinion  those
    points were all succinctly met in the reply by Mrs O'Brien.

26. The judge unfortunately  lost  sight  of  the  "two  provinces"  point.
    However, the background evidence is that although the hukou  system  is
    restrictive and non-compliance with it carries disadvantages,  tens  if
    not hundreds of millions  of  Chinese  citizens  nevertheless  relocate
    without such difficulty as to amount to undue harshness.

27. AX held at paragraph 191(14):

         Where a real risk exists in the hukou area, it may be  possible  to
         avoid the risk by moving to a city.  Millions of  Chinese  internal
         migrants, male and female, live and work in cities  where  they  do
         not hold an urban hukou ... The country evidence does not indicate
         a real risk of effective pursuit  of  internal  migrant  women  ...
         internal relocation will, in almost all cases, avert  risk  in  the
         hukou area.  However, internal relocation may  not  be  safe  where
         there is credible evidence of individual pursuit ... Whether it  is
         unduly harsh to expect an individual returnee  and  her  family  to
         relocate in this way will be a question of fact in each case.

28. There is no good reason to think that these appellants may be split  up
    on return to China.  There is no reason why the question  of  the  best
    interests of the child should be resolved differently than in the First-
    tier Tribunal determination.

29. Mr Bryce's arguments do not derive from the second appellant's  Grounds
    of Appeal.  In any event, it is not clear that the judge  thought  that
    her finding that the appellant's activities were cynical and  contrived
    was the end of his asylum case.  She found that his activities had been
    "extremely limited", and that he had "failed to establish  the  Chinese
    authorities will take any interest in him for the reasons he claims".

30. Further, Mr Bryce has not shown that  after  putting  the  element  of
    cynicism and calculation entirely to one side entitlement to protection
    claim should follow.  The background evidence cited does  not  yield  a
    reasonable inference that  the  authorities  would  be  likely  (a)  to
    identify from photographs on the internet someone  like  the  appellant
    who has engaged in low level Falun  Gong  practice  abroad  or  (b)  to
    punish such activity if they did know about it.

31. The judge did apparently base her questions about a  major  Falun  Gong
    event in Glasgow on her own knowledge.  She says the point is  a  minor
    one.  The decision as a whole  does  not  suggest  otherwise.   In  any
    event, the appellant cannot say he was  treated  unfairly,  because  he
    accepted in evidence that there was such an event and he knew about it.
     That is quite different from a judge relying on a  specialist  insight
    which  might  be  open  to  debate,  where  fairness  would  demand  an
    opportunity to refute the matter.

32. No error has been identified such as to require the  determinations  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside in terms of section 12(2)(a) of
    the 2007 Act.  Both determinations shall stand.  Alternatively, if  the
    decision  had  been  set  aside,   I   would   have   substituted   one
    determination, dismissing both appeals.

33. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            28 November 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
