
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02986/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 3rd February 2016                 |On 11th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               PUPINDER SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Samba instructed by Harbans Singh & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal the decision of  the
         First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal on the  grounds  that  it
         was arguable that the judge had misdirected himself in  failing  to
         depart fro the country guidance case of SL  and  others  (Returning
         Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137 in the light of
         DSG & others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG)  Afghanistan  [2013]
         UKUT 00148 (IAC) and background material before him.

      2. This appeal first came before me on 5th October 2015.  I  adjourned
         consideration  of  the  appeal  because  the  Upper  Tribunal   was
         expecting to promulgate a Country Guidance case in the near  future
         on the issue of Sikhs in Afghanistan. I made directions  that  both
         parties were, within 14 days of the  promulgation  of  the  Country
         Guidance case, to file and serve written submissions within 14 days
         failing which I  would  reach  a  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
         materials presently before me, the findings of fact  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Pooler being retained.  Both  parties  made  written
         submissions.

      3. For some unexplained reason the appeal was then listed for  hearing
         before me today. Both parties appeared and  agreed  that  they  had
         made written submissions as directed by me. Neither party wished to
         call additional evidence, and both stated there was nothing further
         they wished to say. I have therefore proceeded to make my  decision
         on the basis of the retained  findings  of  fact  and  the  written
         submissions.

         Retained findings of fact

      4. Judge Pooler heard the appeal on 21st  July  2015.  He  heard  oral
         evidence from the appellant and his wife and heard submissions from
         both representatives. His decision sets out the evidence  he  heard
         and he made the following findings, none of which have been resiled
         from or contested:

             a)   The Tribunal was in no position to make a finding  as  to
                  the nationality or nationalities of the appellant's  wife;
                  this did not matter because her  nationality  was  largely
                  irrelevant  to  the  issues  before  the   Tribunal.   The
                  appellant's nationality as Afghan  was  accepted  and  the
                  respondent proposed to remove him to Afghanistan;

             b)   The appellant did not seek to mislead the  respondent  in
                  relation to his wife's nationality;

             c)   The appellant's account of  intimidation  and  harassment
                  chimes with the background evidence;

             d)   There is at least a serious possibility that  the  events
                  described  by  the  appellant  occurred  namely  that   in
                  September 2013 his family received threats  from  a  small
                  group of men who were believed by  the  appellant  not  to
                  represent the authorities but to include Taliban members.

             e)   The appellant's wife's family returned to Afghanistan  in
                  2009 having fled to India in 2002 0r 2003 which appears to
                  be consistent with  the  evidence  before  SL  and  others
                  (returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG  [2005]  UKIAT
                  00137 that there had  been  a  small  improvement  in  the
                  treatment of the Sikhs community in Afghanistan.

             f)   The appellant was well connected and  wealthy  enough  to
                  have owned property and a business in Kabul.

             g)   The appellant has demonstrated connections  to  the  Sikh
                  community in Jalalabad and had hospitality offered to  him
                  by the Sikh community in Jalalabad.

      5. The detail of the events described by the appellant are as  follows
         (as described by Judge Pooler):

             "6.  ... he was a Sikh from Kabul where  he  worked  with  his
             father in their clothing shop. He had attended school for  two
             years but left because there were episodes of bullying of Sikh
             children. He said that Sikhs were targeted under the Mujahedin
             and described insults, assaults and demands for  bribes.  When
             the Taliban came to power, Sikhs were required to wear  orange
             "marks" and they came under pressure to change their religion.

             7.   ... The appellant married in 2009 ...

             8.   The appellant described an incident which occurred a  few
             days before he and his  wife  left  Afghanistan  in  September
             2013. Four men came to his family home. They  said  that  they
             were from the authorities and had some boxes  they  wanted  to
             store in the house. The men would not tell  the  appellant  or
             his father what was in the boxes. The appellant's father  said
             that he could not store the boxes as he had no space. He  said
             that if they were from the government, they should show  their
             identification and a written request to store the  boxes.  The
             men left, warning the appellant's father that he  had  made  a
             mistake.

             9.   The men returned the following night with two others  and
             knocked at the door. From an upstairs  window,  the  appellant
             saw that the men were armed and had covered their  faces.  The
             two new men were bearded and dressed in  traditional  clothing
             and appeared to be Taliban.

             10.  The family fled  from  the  rear  of  the  house  to  the
             Gurdwara where they stayed for two days. They were advised  to
             flee the country and with  the  help  of  the  people  in  the
             Gurdwara they travelled to Jalalabad and stayed for a few days
             in the Gurdwara there. With the help of  the  Sikh  elders  in
             Jalalabad they found an agent to whom they signed  over  their
             house and gave both cash and jewellery of the appellant's wife
             and mother.

             11.  The agent took the family to Peshawar in  Pakistan  where
             they were separated as the  agent  could  not  take  them  all
             together. The appellant was taken with his wife  and  daughter
             to Lahore from where they travelled.....

         Error of law

      6. The respondent submitted that, in accordance  with  TG  and  others
         (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015]  UKUT  00595  (IAC)
         and in the light of the findings of Judge Pooler that the appellant
         and his family were wealthy enough and well connected in Kabul  and
         had demonstrated connections to and had hospitality from  the  Sikh
         community  in  Jalalabad,  relocation  was  a  reasonable   option.
         Furthermore that the appellant would, on his return, have available
         help and assistance with a return package  tailored  to  his  needs
         "... for example help setting up a small  business  and/or  provide
         educational or  vocational  training  for  the  appellant  and  his
         family."

      7. The appellant, through his representatives, submitted that he would
         not be able, as a Sikh, to secure employment  because  Muslims  are
         generally unlikely to employ a member of the Sikh community and the
         family  would  thus  suffer  financial  difficulties;  he  has   no
         remaining family in Afghanistan and would not  be  able  to  secure
         accommodation; he has a child aged 3 and the  child  would  not  be
         able to access education in the light of the discrimination against
         Sikh children and the shortage of adequate education facilities for
         them; his wife would face difficulties because she  does  not  wear
         hijab and does not speak Dari or Pushto; the Gurdwara is much  less
         able to provide adequate support for him and his family; he has  no
         property because this was given to the agent in  exchange  for  the
         travel arrangements.

      8. Both parties referred to the headnote of TG  in  support  of  their
         submissions. The assessment of risk in this case, as emphasised  by
         TG, is fact sensitive.

      9. The conclusions  of  Judge  Pooler  were  predicated  upon  country
         guidance that has since been overturned.  Although  this  does  not
         adversely infect the findings  of  fact,  the  relevance  of  those
         findings is such that they have to be considered in  the  light  of
         the current country guidance. Although at the date of the  decision
         by  Judge  Pooler  the  current  country  guidance  had  not   been
         promulgated and he cannot be faulted for failing to take account of
         matters that were not before him and were not argued  to  the  same
         detail as before the Upper Tribunal hearing  the  Country  Guidance
         case, in an asylum  matter  it  is  appropriate  that  changes  are
         factored in to the decision. The judge did  not  properly  consider
         the evidence before him, despite the existing country guidance, and
         this view is reinforced by the subsequent country guidance which is
         now promulgated. It is for this reason that  I  am  satisfied  that
         there is an error of law such that the decision is set aside to  be
         remade, the findings of fact to be retained.

         Remaking the decision

     10. The respondent in her submissions relied upon the appellant and his
         family relocating. On the basis of the  findings  of  fact  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal  as  to  the  serious  harm  sustained  by  the
         appellant and his family there does not, from the documents  before
         me, appear to be a submission on the part of  the  respondent  that
         the appellant and his family could return to Kabul. It  appears  to
         have been accepted that they would be  at  serious  risk  of  being
         persecuted if they returned there and the issue is therefore one of
         relocation. The respondent submits that  relocation  would  not  be
         unduly harsh.

     11. The appellant's wife would not be returning  to  Afghanistan  as  a
         lone woman without a male protector -she will be returning with her
         husband and although she would  not  be  able  to  go  out  without
         covering herself, this has not  been  found  to  be  sufficient  to
         amount to persecution - this is the position faced by virtually all
         women in Afghanistan. The family,  although  they  may  have  owned
         property in the past, will be returning  with  only  the  financial
         package provided by the Home Office; they do not and will not  have
         family to turn to for assistance. It is not argued that they  could
         return to Kabul but rather they could go to  Jalalabad  where  they
         have received  assistance  from  the  Gurdwara  in  the  past.  The
         appellant had to leave school - not because his  family  sought  to
         employ  him  in  the  family  business  but  because  of  bullying.
         Jalalabad is  one  of  the  two  areas  in  Afghanistan  where  the
         government has established a  primary  school  for  Sikh  children.
         There was no evidence and no suggestion that the appellant would be
         able to access financial support on even a short term basis. He has
         no friends or other support that could  provide  that.  His  child,
         even if she were able to attend the Sikh school  in  Jalalabad  for
         her primary school years, which is unlikely given  the  requirement
         to pay for that education and the lack of access to finance,  would
         then have to cease attending school. She would be unable to  attend
         secondary school as the level of bullying and harm she  would  come
         to is  such  that  she  would  be  prevented  from  attending.  The
         appellant's ability  to  access  employment  is  unlikely  and  his
         ability to resume  his  previous  self-employment  difficult  in  a
         different city without personal contacts or financial support other
         than the UK Government package.

     12. Although, as TG notes  in  [48]  there  is  a  continuing  lack  of
         evidence of specific incidents of targeted persecution suffered  by
         individuals because of their religious  identity,  taking  all  the
         other factors into account in the light  of  the  overall  guidance
         proffered  by  TG,  including  that  those  without  access  to  an
         independent income, relocation  to  Jalalabad  (or  elsewhere  than
         Kabul) is unduly harsh and not a reasonable or  appropriate  option
         open to them.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and I set aside the decision to be
    remade.

    I allow the appeal against the decision  to  refuse  to  recognise  the
    appellant as a refugee




         Date 9th February 2016
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
