
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA029642011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th May 2016                     |On 27th May 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                                   Between

                                     zm
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, Counsel instructed by Wilsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal has a somewhat lengthy history.  The  appellant's  case  is
    that she is from Somalia and that she claimed  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection on the basis that as a lone female she would be at  risk  of
    ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 were she to be removed to  Somalia.



2.   She originally claimed asylum in this country in March 2009.  She  then
    claimed that she was born on [ ] 1992 and so was a  minor.   I  do  not
    need for the purposes of this judgment to go into detail of the  issues
    on her credibility. Suffice it to say that an  age  assessment  carried
    out in a way which  was  said  to  be  consistent  with  what  the  law
    requires, the Merton test, concluded that she was not indeed  a  minor.
    In fact I think what was said was that she was some five  years  or  so
    older than she alleged.  That has been upheld.

3.   Furthermore she claimed that she was from a clan, Reer Hamar, and  from
    Mogadishu.  That was not accepted on the basis  of  linguistic  reports
    which have been undertaken both against her  through  the  organisation
    that  the  Home  Office  was  then  using,  namely  Sprakab,   and   an
    organisation which the appellant's solicitors went to known as De Taal.
     Both accept that she is not  as  she  said  from  the  clan  that  she
    alleges.  Furthermore, her knowledge of Mogadishu was not sufficient to
    make it likely that she had come from Mogadishu.  Sadly, what  she  has
    done is to put forward a case which is untruthful as to  both  her  age
    and where she comes from in Somalia.  It may well be that she  believed
    that by asserting that she was a minor she would get  an  advantage  as
    indeed she would in arriving in this country and were she to be able to
    show that she came from a particular clan and from Mogadishu, she would
    also be at a greater advantage in putting forward an asylum claim.

4.   However the Secretary of State rejected her claim.  In the report  from
    SPRAKAB which was obtained on the basis of a 17  minute  recording  the
    authors (because there were two assessors) decided that  not  only  was
    she not from the clan in question but that the  Somali  she  spoke  was
    southern Somali and it was put in this way, namely  that  there  was  a
    certainty that she was a south Somali speaker and a certainty that that
    meant she was from  Kenya,  not  from  Somalia.   That  conclusion  was
    accepted by the Secretary of State,  not  surprisingly,  and  was  also
    accepted first of all by the  First-tier  Judges  who  decided  on  her
    appeal: there were two because there were issues  in  relation  to  the
    first finding and there was a  reconsideration  by  the  second  judge.
    Again it is not necessary for the purposes of this judgment to go  into
    the various details suffice it to say that there was an appeal to  this
    Tribunal and that was heard by Upper Tribunal Judge Craig.

5.   Initially in 2012  he  decided  the  discrete  point  relating  to  the
    appellant's age and he found against her on  that.   For  reasons  that
    will become clear in a moment that is no longer an issue  but  he  also
    had to decide on the claim based upon the age that she in  reality  was
    and that decision was made in August 2013.  What he  decided  was  that
    there were clear reasons to reject her credibility in relation  to  the
    tribe and in relation to Mogadishu but he decided in terms that if  she
    had to be removed to Somalia, that  is  to  say  if  she  was  truly  a
    national of Somalia, then she would be at real risk of  breach  of  her
    Article 3 rights because it was not safe for a lone female such as  her
    to be returned to  Somalia,  certainly  to  Mogadishu,  and  there  was
    nowhere else within Somalia where as a lone female without support  she
    could safely relocate.  That is set out in  paragraphs  40  and  41  of
    Judge Craig's decision.

6.   He then went on to decide where indeed she came from and he  considered
    the reports to which I have made reference and he decided that he could
    properly give sufficient weight to the Sprakab Report  and  he  decided
    that he was satisfied on the totality of the evidence that she was from
    Kenya.  He relied heavily upon the decision in RB (Somalia) that  is  a
    decision in which the Tribunal had relied on Sprakab.  That  was  taken
    to the Court of Appeal and the Court  of  Appeal  stated  that  it  was
    proper to give weight and  if  necessary  to  accept  the  report  from
    Sprakab.  The Secretary of State was entitled to do that and the  Court
    of Appeal upheld that.

7.   What was unknown to Judge Craig was that  a  different  view  had  been
    taken in Scotland.  There was a decision, albeit it was I think only  a
    paper decision, of Lord Macphail.  Not surprisingly that had  not  been
    reported and there was no suggestion that the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Jarvis who was involved in the appeal  before  Judge  Craig
    was aware of that decision and it is I  am  afraid  not  in  the  least
    surprising that the information about it was not given to those who had
    to deal with appeals in this country.  Since  then  there  has  been  a
    formal decision of the Scottish Inner House which was 2013 CSIH 68,  in
    fact there were two appeals before the Scottish  Court.   Judge  Eassie
    giving the judgment of the court considered an attack  on  the  Sprakab
    Report in the relevant cases and he cites at length the views  of  Lord
    Macphail to which I have referred.  It so happens that the two analysts
    concerned were  subjected  to  the  very  strong  criticism  from  Lord
    Macphail, the same two who have been involved in this appeal.  Guidance
    has been issued in the form  of  guidelines  produced  in  2004  by  an
    international group of linguists.  As Lord Macphail said, and I adopt:

         "Although they are not authoritative or prescriptive  they  are  in
         accordance with commonsense and are backed by a considerable number
         of signatories who have very strong academic  standing  and  it  is
         made clear that analysis must be done by  qualified  linguists  who
         should provide specific evidence of their professional training and
         expertise but neither of the analysts who are described as EA20 and
         EA17 fell into that category."

8.   Those as I say are the two analysts who  are  involved  in  this  case.
    Neither has a degree in linguistics, neither has published in any peer-
    reviewed publication or been  a  member  of  professional  association.
    Their expertise involves EA20 having been born in Mogadishu and  having
    been a Somali interpreter since 1990 and an analyst  at  Sprakab  since
    2006 and having knowledge of some dialect and EA17 equally is  said  to
    have been born in Mogadishu and been an analyst since 2007.   The  fact
    that they are natives of Somalia does not overcome their  lack  of  the
    necessary expertise.

9.   Furthermore the assertion of certainty  is  one  which  simply,  it  is
    said, cannot stand. There has been a criticism in the  De  Taal  Report
    obtained by the appellant's solicitors and that makes clear that in the
    view of the author it is quite impossible and clearly wrong for Sprakab
    to say that it is certain that she comes from Kenya.  That  she  speaks
    southern Somali is common ground but those from southern  Somalia  will
    all speak southern Somali so that in itself cannot mean she comes  from
    Kenya.  Equally, the basis upon which  the  Sprakab  analysts  asserted
    that she was indeed from Kenya depends upon the  manner  in  which  she
    spoke certain words.  It is very important in a case such as this where
    there is a real issue that the speaking which is analysed  is  entirely
    acceptable.  I put it that way because we are here concerned with a  17
    minute interview or 17 minutes speaking on tape.  The question  whether
    that is indeed satisfactory has not been gone into.

10.  I should add that the Supreme Court has since considered  the  Scottish
    case that went to the Supreme Court.  The Supreme Court has  said  that
    the Home Office, indeed the Tribunal, is entitled to  consider  Sprakab
    Reports and can give weight  to  them  depending  of  course  upon  the
    circumstances but RB went too far in the Court of Appeal in giving  the
    imprimatur to those reports that it did.  All will depend in any  given
    case upon the circumstances of that  case  and  the  evidence  that  is
    before the Tribunal as to the reliability of the  individual  decision.
    I should add that I am aware that this Tribunal is due to hear  a  case
    in  July  in  which  there  will  be  detailed  consideration  of   the
    reliability of Sprakab in general.  That is a case called Rezq,  appeal
    number AA/10153/2012, a case which is to be decided by judges  of  this
    Tribunal in Glasgow on 7 July this year  but  it  is  not  in  my  view
    necessary for this case to be put over awaiting that  general  decision
    because I am satisfied that for the reasons given by the De Taal Report
    and the analysis of Lord Macphail as applied by Lord  Eassie  that  the
    Secretary of State cannot place reliance upon the  Sprakab  conclusions
    in relation to Kenya.  It follows that I  do  not  believe  that  Judge
    Craig was correct in deciding that the appellant came from Kenya.  That
    was not a finding that was justified on the evidence before him.  To be
    fair to him he was relying heavily upon the RB approach which  has  now
    been shown to be over favourable to the Sprakab Reports.

11.  I should say in fairness to Mr Bramble that from the outset I think  he
    recognised that he might be in some difficulty  in  seeking  to  uphold
    that part of Judge Craig's findings.  What he believed he was  able  to
    rely on was the conclusion of Judge Craig that if despite her  untruths
    she was a national of Somalia she would  be  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.  That was based upon  the  then  guideline  case  but  that
    decision has been overtaken by a more recent country guidance  MOJ  and
    the conclusion that  Judge  Craig  reached  to  which  I  have  already
    referred was  one  which  is  not  correct.   The  difficulty  in  that
    submission relies in the way in which this matter had been remitted  by
    the Court of Appeal.  Following Judge Craig's  decision  there  was  an
    application for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  The  Court  of
    Appeal accepted that leave should be granted.  Judge Craig had  refused
    leave and as a result of that there was a consent  order,  the  consent
    order being that the appeal be allowed, that Judge Craig's decision  be
    quashed  and  the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   for
    consideration of the grounds of appeal.

12.  The grounds of appeal  were  of  course  grounds  put  forward  by  the
    appellant who was appealing against the dismissal of his appeal and  it
    is important to see what were the statement of reasons put  forward  by
    the Treasury Solicitor on behalf of the respondent as  to  why  it  was
    accepted that the matter should be reconsidered.  In paragraph  4  this
    is said:

         "Following three hearings in the Upper Tribunal on 28  August  2013
         Upper Tribunal Judge Craig  made  findings  on  the  basis  of  the
         country guidance then in existence that  she  was  from  Kenya  and
         would not be at risk on removal to Kenya.  Had  the  Tribunal  been
         satisfied that she was Somalian it would have  concluded  that  she
         could not safely be removed to Mogadishu and nor is there  anywhere
         else within Somalia to where, as a lone  female,  without  support,
         she could safely relocate."

13.  But in paragraphs 7  and  8  the  Treasury  Solicitor  deals  with  the
    Sprakab issue, whether she was from Kenya or from  Somalia.   It  makes
    the point that the matter now has to be considered in the light of  the
    Scottish decisions and indeed the Supreme Court decision  and  accepted
    in those circumstances  that  the  matter  should  be  reconsidered  in
    relation to that.  Of course there was no cross-appeal by the Secretary
    of State in relation to the matters set  out  in  paragraph  4  of  the
    Statement of Reasons, namely that she could not be safely removed as  a
    lone female to Somalia and it is to be noted that the Court of Appeal's
    order in paragraph 3 states in terms "the matter  be  remitted  to  the
    Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber for consideration of  the
    grounds of appeal" and that is the only consideration that the Court of
    Appeal has directed, not a reconsideration of the conclusion  of  Judge
    Craig that as a lone female she could not be removed  to  Somalia.   Of
    course the quashing of the decision simply meant that the dismissal  of
    the appeal was quashed because that was the decision which was made  by
    Judge Craig.

Notice of Decision

14.  In those circumstances and  for  the  reasons  that  I  have  given  my
    judgment this appeal has to be allowed and it has to be  recorded  that
    the appellant is entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  because  there
    would be a real risk of breach of her Article 3 rights were she  to  be
    returned to Somalia.  The Secretary of State must make  or  grant  such
    leave to her as is consistent with that finding.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed   Date: 17th May 2016

The Honourable Mr Justice Collins
