

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02576/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 20 June 2013                               |On 10 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                                 LORD BURNS
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                     LV
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Hayes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     This  is  an  appeal  from  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  OBE
    dismissing an appeal against a  decision  of  the  respondent  made  on
    26 February 2012 to remove the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  to
    Zimbabwe following the refusal of her asylum and human rights claims.

Background

2.    In about June 2004 the appellant travelled  from  Zimbabwe  to  South
    Africa  illegally  and  claimed  asylum  there.   After  a  number   of
    unsuccessful applications,  her  application  for  asylum  was  granted
    in 2010.  On 13 September 2010 she applied for a visitor's visa to the
    UK which was refused on the same day.  She successfully  appealed  that
    decision and a visa was issued on 26 May 2011 valid until 26  November
    2011.  In June 2011, she left South Africa and travelled  to  Zimbabwe.
    She left Zimbabwe on 21 June 2011 and arrived in  the  UK  on  22 June
    2011.  She attended for asylum screening interview  on  5 October  and
    lodged an asylum claim on 18 November 2011.  She was  served  with  an
    IS151A form alleging that she had unlawfully entered the United Kingdom
    by deception on 24 November 2011.

3.    She claimed refugee status under the 1951  Geneva  Convention  arguing
    that she had a legitimate fear of persecution if returned to  Zimbabwe.
    She applied for a grant of humanitarian protection in  accordance  with
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  Further, she claimed that the
    United  Kingdom  would  be  placed  in  breach  of  its   international
    obligations under articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European  Convention  of
    Human Rights (ECHR).  Those claims were refused and reasons were  given
    in the decision letter dated  27 February  2012.   The  appellant  had
    maintained before the respondent that she had fled Zimbabwe as a result
    of her husband having been killed by supporters of ZANU-PF in an attack
    at their home in June  of  2004.   During  that  attack  the  appellant
    herself had been injured.  The reason for that attack was  said  to  be
    the fact that her husband was a supporter of  the  local  Movement  for
    Democratic Change party (MDC)  or a chairman of  the  local  MDC  party
    (see paragraph 20 of the decision letter  of  27  February  2012  where
    attention was drawn to the differing accounts of this matter  given  by
    the appellant).  She feared that  she  would  be  the  subject  of  the
    attentions of ZANU-PF if she was returned to Zimbabwe.

4.    The respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant's  husband  was  a
    member of the MDC nor that he or the appellant  had  been  attacked  by
    ZANU-PF members.  It was not considered that she had an adverse profile
    in Zimbabwe as a supporter  or  member  of  the  MDC.   The  respondent
    therefore refused the appellant's claim for asylum on  the  basis  that
    she had not established any fear of persecution on return to  Zimbabwe.
    The appellant's claim for humanitarian protection under  rule 339C  of
    the Immigration Rules was also refused and it was not  considered  that
    removing her from the  UK  to  Zimbabwe  was  contrary  to  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under articles 2, 3 or 8 ECHR.

5.    The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    appeal was first heard on 11  April  2012  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge Beg.  That appeal was  refused  but  the  appellant  successfully
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal who, on 3 September  2012,  found  that
    Judge Beg had made an error on a point of law, set aside that  decision
    and remitted the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision  on
    the appeal to be remade.


Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal

6.    The appeal was reheard before Judge Herbert on 4 October  2012.   The
    appellant gave evidence and confirmed that her written  statements  and
    her asylum interview were correct.  She rehearsed the account given  on
    prior occasions that she had lived in  the  town  of  Kadoma  with  her
    husband and children.  Her husband, unbeknown to her,  had  joined  the
    MDC and was active within that party in  the  town  of  Kadoma  and  in
    Chegutu.  He had held meetings at their house  from  the  end  of 2003
    until 2004.  On 16 June 2004 ZANU-PF youths came to her house and beat
    her husband.  They returned the next day, broke down the door to  their
    house and dragged her and her husband from bed and beat them both.  She
    lost consciousness but when she came to, she discovered her husband was
    dead.  She then fled to a friend's  house  some  five  miles  away  and
    subsequently  was  treated  in  a  hospital  for  injuries  which   she
    sustained.  She then went to her sister in Masvingo  where  she  stayed
    for two weeks.  She received a letter from  her  mother  while  staying
    with her sister which stated that her mother had been attacked by ZANU-
    PF supporters and that they were  looking  for  the  appellant.   As  a
    consequence of that, she fled to South Africa.  She left three  of  her
    children behind who were young.  She claimed that  it  would  be  "very
    difficult for her" to return to Zimbabwe as she would be regarded as  a
    person with imputed political beliefs because of her husband's  support
    of the MDC (see paragraph 18 of the Tribunal judge's determination).

7.    The First-tier Tribunal, having considered the  appellant's  evidence,
    rejected her account as not being credible.  There was  no  independent
    corroboration of her husband's death at the hands  of  ZANU-PF  and  no
    death  certificate  or  newspaper  reports  covering  the  matter  were
    produced.  The details given by the appellant were vague  as  were  her
    account of the whereabouts of her children  at  the  time.   The  judge
    found it implausible  that  she  would  leave  her  three  children  in
    Zimbabwe in the area where the attack had  occurred.   Furthermore,  on
    arrival in South Africa,  she  had  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of
    "economic hardship".   In  addition,  having  left  South  Africa,  she
    voluntarily returned to Zimbabwe in 2011 and used her own passport  to
    travel from Zimbabwe to the UK.

8.    The Tribunal judge had regard to the country guidance set  out  in  EM
    and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011] UKUT 98  (IAC).   The  judge
    considered that  there  had  been  a  significant  improvement  in  the
    circumstances on the ground in Zimbabwe since 2008.  In paragraph 38 he
    stated as follows:

           "I find that there has been an improvement as  set  out  in  the
           case of EM in the  generalised  risk  that  MDC  supporters  and
           members would face and although it has not disappeared  entirely
           it is certainly only applicable to people who have a profile and
           persons who have faced persecution in the past."

9.    He did not accept on the evidence before him that  the  appellant  had
    faced         persecution  imputed  or  otherwise  via  her   husband's
    membership or chairmanship of the MDC in her local area.  He  therefore
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.   He  considered  the  appellant's
    claim under article 8 of ECHR at paragraph 40.  That claim was based on
    one  of  her  children  being  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  upon  the
    appellant's own ill-health.  However, he found that the extended family
    of the appellant would assist her if she returned to Zimbabwe and  that
    she could provide maintenance and accommodation for herself through her
    extended family.

10.   The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal and on 11 December  2012
    an Upper Tribunal judge granted permission to appeal on the basis  that
    it was arguable that the First-tier judge failed to appreciate that the
    Court of Appeal had quashed the determination of the Tribunal in EM and
    Others  (cited  above)  so  that  the  appellant's  appeal  had  to  be
    determined in the light of the previous determination of  the  Tribunal
    in  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]  UKUT  00083  (IAC).   Having
    considered representations from the respondent, the same Upper Tribunal
    judge issued a direction dated 31 January 2013 to the effect  that  it
    was anticipated that the Upper Tribunal would be  able  to  remake  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge.


Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal


11.    We  heard  this  appeal  on  20  June 2013.   The   appellant   was
    unrepresented.  She addressed us through an interpreter.  Mr Hayes, for
    the respondent, submitted that the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    in relation to the credibility of the appellant and  in  particular  in
    respect of her account  of  the  circumstances  under  which  she  left
    Zimbabwe should stand.  We were able to accept that submission  because
    of the limited basis upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  in
    this case.  Permission was granted on the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge had proceeded to follow the country guidance in  EM  and
    Others although the Court of Appeal  was  said  to  have  "quashed  the
    determination" of the Tribunal in that  case.   Accordingly,  the  only
    issue was whether, within the context of the findings made by the First
    Tribunal, the applicable country guidance dictated that the appellant's
    claims ought to be upheld.


12.   It is necessary  at  this  point  to  examine  what  happened  in  the
    proceedings before the Court of Appeal  in  EM.   The  principal  issue
    before the court was the impact on the appeals and the Country Guidance
    issued in them of data relating  to  assessment  of  risk  in  Zimbabwe
    available in January 2011 that had not been disclosed to  the  Tribunal
    or to the claimants.  Before the appeal had  proceeded  to  a  hearing,
    parties agreed that the respondent had failed in duties  of  disclosure
    and a consent order was drawn up to the  effect  that  the  appeals  be
    allowed and remitted to the Upper Tribunal for re-determination in  the
    light of certain identified issues of law.

13.   When the Upper Tribunal came to make its determination on the  matters
    remitted to it, it found that the country guidance given in EM was  not
    vitiated by any non-disclosure and did not require to be  amended  save
    in a relatively minor respect set out in paragraph 5  of  the  modified
    guidance (see CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00059 (IAC)).

14.   We therefore have to consider  whether,  within  the  factual  context
    found by the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  should  be  granted
    refugee status on  the  ground  that  she  has  a  legitimate  fear  of
    persecution on the  grounds  of  political  opinion,  whether  she  was
    entitled to humanitarian protection under rule 339C of the Immigration
    Rules or whether her return to Zimbabwe would place the UK in breach of
    articles 2, 3 and 8 of ECHR.


15.   The appellant was unrepresented at the  hearing.  She  explained  that
    this was because she  could  not  afford  to  pay  for  representation.
    Accordingly, there was no reason to think that she  would  be  able  to
    secure representation  if  the  hearing  was  adjourned.  We  therefore
    proceeded with the hearing, having  explained  to  her  that  we  would
    assist her,  if  necessary.  In  order  to  ascertain  the  appellant's
    circumstances on the issue of future risk, we put a number of questions
    to her.  Mr Hayes, for the respondent, had declined the invitation  to
    ask any questions prior to us doing so.


16.   The appellant told us that she had lived in  Kadoma  with  her  family
    but was unable to describe where that town was or how far it  was  from
    Harare.  She stated that Kadoma was controlled by the MDC.   Her  three
    children remain there in the care of  a  lady  who  attended  the  same
    church as the appellant.  They had recently been ill because of typhoid
    and lack of food.  She spoke to them about once every one or two months
    by telephone.  She claimed that they had been forced to go  to  ZANU-PF
    youth meetings but was unable  to  say  how  often  that  had  occurred
    despite speaking to them on the phone about four times this year.   She
    accepted that she had a sister in Masvingo but she  was  mentally  ill.
    At this point, she said she became aware of her sister's mental illness
    in 2011. She would not be able to go and live  in  Harare  or  anywhere
    else in Zimbabwe because she  would  not  be  safe  there  due  to  her
    husband's history.  She would be killed as her husband had  been.   She
    claimed that ZANU-PF would always be able to find her.  She  had  never
    lived in Harare and it would be a new area for  her.   In  response  to
    subsequent questions by Mr Hayes, she said that  her  mother  died  in
    May 2011 but that she did not go to her mother's funeral nor  had  she
    visited her grave.  She knew the town of Masvingo well since her sister
    and her mother had lived there.  She had visited Harare on a number  of
    occasions and had stayed sometimes for about three days while on church
    outings.  She denied however that she could return to Zimbabwe and live
    there since she did not know that city.  At this point, she  said  that
    she first learned of her sister's mental illness in December 2004 when
    she was in South Africa.  It was her sister who had told the  appellant
    that Masvingo was not safe for her  but  that  was  before  she  became
    mentally ill.


17.   At the conclusion of that evidence, Mr Hayes submitted that there was
    no evidence to support the view that the appellant would be subject  to
    any persecution by ZANU-PF.  Her account of she and her  husband  being
    attacked by ZANU-PF had been rejected by the First-tier Tribunal on the
    basis of her lack of credibility.  He submitted that we  should  reject
    her account that her sister suffers from mental illness  and  therefore
    could not assist the appellant in  establishing  herself  in  Masvingo.
    The appellant could also go back to Kadoma where  she  had  connections
    with members of her church.  They would be able to give  her  temporary
    support while she established herself there.  It  was  also  an  option
    that she could relocate to Harare.  In  those  circumstances  Mr Hayes
    invited us to refuse this appeal.


Discussion

18.   Having considered the appellant's evidence we have  reached  the  view
    that she has not established (to the lower standard for  proof  as  set
    out in Sivakumaran 1998 AC 958) a real likelihood that she would suffer
    persecution for a Convention reason or that there is a real  risk  that
    she would face serious harm in Zimbabwe.  Her account of  the  violence
    against  her  and  her  husband  was  rejected  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  We  therefore  do  not  consider  that,  by  reason  of  her
    husband's  connections  with  the  MDC,  she  is  at  real  risk   from
    persecution or serious harm.  Such a conclusion  is  supported  by  the
    fact that she voluntarily returned to Zimbabwe from South Africa before
    travelling to the UK.   At  the  border  and  at  Harare  airport,  her
    passport was examined and she was required to engage with a  number  of
    institutions both at the border and at the airport.  At no time did she
    come to the adverse attention of the authorities.

19.   The restated Country Guidance in CM states that there is  no  evidence
    to show, in general, that the return of a failed asylum seeker from the
    UK, having no significant MDC profile,  would  result  in  that  person
    facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF.   Given
    the adverse credibility assessment by Judge Herbert, we find  that  the
    appellant has no such profile.  CM goes on to state that  the  position
    is likely to be otherwise in the  case  of  a  person  without  ZANU-PF
    connections, returning from the UK after a  significant  absence  to  a
    rural area of Zimbabwe. Such a person may well  find  it  difficult  to
    avoid adverse attention, amounting  to  serious  ill  treatment.   That
    situation was not uniform across the relevant rural areas and  in  some
    areas the position may be different where ZANU-PF power structures  are
    weak.  At paragraph 204, the  Tribunal  pointed  out  that  it  was  in
    certain rural areas that this risk arose but it was not  a  "widespread
    or generic" one.  The evidence from the  appellant  was  that  the  MDC
    controlled the Kadoma area.  Standing the rejection of her  account  of
    the activities of the ZANU-PF in that town, we are unable  to  conclude
    that she would be at any real risk there.  Her children are  there  and
    she has social connections from her membership of the church.  We  were
    unable to accept her evidence that her children had been forced  to  go
    to ZANU-PF meetings.  This matter has not been raised  by  her  in  the
    past and there was no apparent reason  why  this  feature  should  have
    arisen only in the past year, despite her claim  that  ZANU-PF  was  so
    active in this area in 2004.   She was unable to say how often this had
    occurred.  In any event, the appellant has family in Masvingo.  We  did
    not find her evidence that her sister in Masvingo was  unable  to  help
    her on account of her mental illness credible, given the discrepancy in
    her evidence as to when she  first  learned  of  her  sister's  alleged
    mental illness (initially saying 2011 and later 2004), that she gave no
    detail about her sister's alleged mental illness and whether  for  that
    reason she would be  unable  to  assist  the  appellant.   Despite  her
    alleged illness, her sister was, according to the  appellant,  able  to
    warn her that she  was  not  safe  in  Masvingo.   In  addition,  there
    appeared to us that she could  go  to  Harare  which  she  had  visited
    several times in the past.

20.   If returned, the appellant would  have  to  pass  through  immigration
    control at Harare  airport.   The  guidance  in  HS  (returning  asylum
    seekers) Zimbabwe CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00094  was  reviewed  in  CM.   At
    paragraph 203 of CM it is stated that "the evidence as a whole  reveals
    no case of scrutiny  for  loyalty  at  the  airport".    HS  itself  at
    paragraph 264 recognises that any  adverse  attention  at  the  airport
    would focus on those which are perceived to be  politically  active  in
    support of the opposition or perceived to be a threat to or a critic of
    the regime.  Applying the low standard of proof,  we  do  not  consider
    that the appellant falls into either category.   Accordingly,  we  find
    that the appellant has not established her  claim  for  refugee  status
    under the UN Convention 1951 or under  rule  339C  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

21.   For the same reasons, we do not consider that returning the  appellant
      to Zimbabwe would involve a violation of her rights under Article 2 or
      3 of the EHCR.  We do not require to re-make the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal under Article 8.

Decision
The asylum appeal is dismissed.
The humanitarian protection appeal is dismissed.
The human rights appeal under Articles 2 and 3 is dismissed.

Anonymity

We make an order under r.14(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the applicant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the applicant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date
Lord Burns
