
IAC-CH- CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02300/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 29th April 2015                   |On 20th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                                     GWG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Uganda, born 16 November  1969.   He
    entered the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.  His claim was  rejected
    by the respondent in a decision dated 7 April 2014 and on the same date
    the respondent made a decision to remove the appellant from the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant appealed the decisions of  the  respondent  and
    his appeal came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Woolley sitting
    at Newport in July 2014.  An oral hearing was  held  and  both  parties
    were represented.

 2. In  a  decision  dated  11  July  2014,  Judge  Woolley  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  At paragraph 36 Judge Woolley found
    the appellant's account "not to be credible".   The  appellant's  claim
    for asylum was based upon his alleged support  for  homosexuals  within
    Uganda.

 3. The appellant sought leave to appeal,  alleging  a  number  of  issues,
    including one suggesting a denial of a fair hearing.  It was  suggested
    that the judge had  not  applied  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  evidence.
    Another allegation is that the judge had wrongly viewed the "Convention
    reason" as one of imputed political opinion,  whereas  a  claim  should
    have been  considered  "through  the  prism  of  imputed  PSG".   Other
    allegations deal with findings made by Judge Woolley in respect of  the
    evidence tendered.

 4. The application came before another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal,
    who in refusing the application gave the following as his reasons:

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
         decision of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Woolley  who,  in  a
         determination promulgated on 14 July 2014 refused  the  Appellant's
         appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse asylum.

         2.   The grounds to argue that the Appellant was not given  a  fair
         hearing however the  grounds  then  do  not  argue  any  procedural
         unfairness but appear simply to disagree with the findings  of  the
         Judge.

         3.   It is clear from the  lengthy  determination  that  the  Judge
         dealt with the evidence and the law  in  detail.   His  conclusions
         were explained in  details  and  the  reasons  for  reaching  those
         conclusions were adequate.  Whilst it is correct that at  paragraph
         22 of the determination the Judge refers only to imputed  political
         opinion as the Convention reason, it is abundantly clear  from  the
         body of the determination that he also considered particular social
         group as an alternative basis for protection.  There  is  therefore
         no arguable error in that part of the grounds.

         4.    The  grounds  actually  amount  to  nothing   more   than   a
         disagreement with the findings made by the Judge on  the  sexuality
         or perceived  sexuality  of  the  Appellant  however  it  is  well-
         established law that the weight  to  be  given  to  any  particular
         factor in an appeal is a matter for the judge and will rarely  give
         rise to an error of law (Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013]  UKUT
         254.

         5.   The findings were open to the Judge on the evidence put before
         him and the grounds disclose no arguable error of law".

 5. The appellant then renewed the application before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    itself.  The grounds are in slightly different form, but  again  allege
    the denial of a fair hearing.  In particular reference is  made  to  HJ
    (Iran) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31.
     The grounds also make reference to the treatment by the judge  of  the
    witness evidence and in particular it is suggested  that  there  was  a
    "misapplication of the standard of  proof"  and  an  alleged  error  in
    making reference, by the judge, of the lack  of  documentary  evidence.
    The grounds then go on to challenge the decision of the judge  refusing
    leave to appeal.

 6. The matter then came before a judge of the Upper Tribunal  who  granted
    permission to appeal and in doing so gave the following as reasons:

         "If I understand the grounds correctly,  at  paras  9  and  10  the
         argument seems to be that because the appellant by his actions will
         be perceived as being gay, his appeal should have  been  determined
         through the prism of imputed PSG reasons and the judge did  not  do
         that.  For this reason and the arguments raised  in  the  remaining
         grounds, it is appropriate to grant permission".

 7. Thus the matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.   I  note
    that the respondent produced a response  under  Rule  24  of  the  2008
    Procedure Rules submitting, inter alia,  that  Judge  Woolley  directed
    himself appropriately and had good  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    account was not credible.

 8. The appellant's representatives produced a reply under Rule 25  of  the
    Procedure Rules.  This response  by  the  appellant  alleges  that  the
    respondent failed to address the grounds upon which leave was granted.

 9. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Chelvan made his submission  that
    the determination of Judge Woolley contained a material error  of  law.
    He indicated that he had reached agreement with  Mr  Mills  that  if  a
    material error was found the appropriate course would be to  remit  the
    appeal back to the First-Tier Tribunal.

10. The main thrust of Mr Chelvan's argument was  that  Judge  Woolley  had
    wrongly identified the Convention Reason.  He had found (paragraph  22)
    that the reason put forward on behalf of  the  appellant  was  "imputed
    political opinion".  The  true  reason  was  imputed  membership  of  a
    particular social group.  This amounted to  a  material  error  of  law
    making the decision unsafe or unsound.  Additionally the judge had been
    wrong to find it not credible that the appellant  had  resigned,  given
    that no documents had been produced.  Such documents are not needed  in
    an asylum claim/appeal.

11. Mr Chelvan then challenged the judge's dealings so far as the witness K
    was concerned.  He should not have been treated as an  expert  witness.
    That witness had indicated that the appellant would be presumed gay  to
    the village community.  Mr Chelvan referred me to paragraphs 5 to 7  of
    K's witness statement.  Mr Chelvan indicated that all this amounted  to
    a material error of law in the way that evidence had been dealt with.

12. In his response Mr Mills relied upon the Rule 24 submission.  The judge
    had found against the appellant on  other  credibility  issues  and  he
    referred me to paragraphs 29 to 30 and 35.  The lack  of  documentation
    was only one issue.  It would make no difference whether the  appellant
    was a sympathiser or gay himself.  The judge had dealt with the witness
    evidence at paragraph 34.

13. In a further response Mr Chelvan indicated  that  paragraph  34  showed
    that the judge had misconstrued the evidence.

14. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I would reserve my  decision
    which I now give with reasons.

15. Paragraph 19 of the determination records a submission on behalf of the
    appellant that the appellant himself had demonstrated imputed political
    opinion.  As a result the judge (paragraph 22) records "the  Convention
    reason which the appellant has put forward  is  his  imputed  political
    opinion, which puts him at risk on return...".  It is now  argued  that
    the true Convention reason would be imputed membership of a  particular
    social group.  I do not consider that the judge can be  criticised  for
    responding to the  submission  of  the  appellant's  representative  as
    detailed in paragraph 19.  There is no suggestion that  the  judge  has
    misinterpreted the submission.  Certainly  there  is  no  statement  of
    truth from the advocate  challenging  the  contents  of  paragraph  19.
    Given the circumstances of the appellant's case it is clear that he was
    suggesting that he was involved in  the  political  issues  surrounding
    homosexuality in his locality.  Accordingly I do not consider the judge
    can be criticised for his findings as set out in paragraph 22.  In  any
    event, the important issue is not so much finding a peg upon  which  to
    hang the appellant's evidence, but  more  to  fully  engage  with  that
    evidence.  I consider the judge did fully engage  with  that  evidence.
    He took into account the political element of the  appellant  allegedly
    supporting an organisation and at paragraph 34 the judge  engages  with
    the possibility of the appellant being conceived as  gay  himself.   In
    addition paragraph 19 notes the suggestion that the appellant "will  be
    perceived as being gay himself".  I am therefore satisfied  that  Judge
    Woolley fully engaged with the two concepts.  Was the appellant at risk
    through supporting gay organisations and was he at risk if perceived as
    being gay, and therefore a member of a particular social group.  I find
    no error of law with  regard  to  a  mis-description  of  a  Convention
    reason.

16. Turning now to the point regarding the lack of documentation (paragraph
    32).  Mr Mills makes the point that this was but one  of  a  number  of
    areas in which the judge found against  the  appellant  on  credibility
    issues.  I agree.  However, whilst it  is  correct  that  the  lack  of
    documentation should not be held against  an  appellant/claimant,  this
    must be viewed in the context of  the  case  and  with  regard  to  the
    documentation in question.  Paragraph 32 adequately  explains  why  the
    judge found against the appellant with regard to  his  resignation  and
    even if the judge was wrong to make reference to the lack of documents,
    it was not material to the eventual outcome of the appeal.

17. As to the witness K, a reading of the determination and  in  particular
    paragraph 34 shows that the judge did not  regard  the  witness  as  an
    expert.  Indeed he discounted that witness's evidence for  the  reasons
    set out in the paragraph and he certainly  did  not  apply  any  higher
    standard of proof following a mistaken view that  the  witness  was  an
    expert.  Paragraph 34 shows that the judge analysed the content of  the
    statement and he reached conclusions.  He  was  perfectly  entitled  to
    reach those conclusions.  Mr Chelvan had drawn attention to the use  of
    the words "at its highest".  This did not imply a higher standard.  The
    judge was merely saying that if he accepted the evidence of the witness
    it would not demonstrate "any risk to the appellant".  Again, I find no
    error of law.

18. The remaining challenges to the determination amount  to  nothing  more
    than a disagreement with the findings made by the judge.   This  was  a
    conclusion reached by the judge initially refusing leave to appeal  and
    I support those reasons.

19. The grounds allege a lack of fair hearing.  Beyond  what  I  have  said
    above, nothing has been put forward to show that the appellant received
    anything other  than  a  fair  and  balanced  hearing.   There  are  no
    allegations of any procedural irregularity and again I find no error on
    the part of the judge.

20. For these reasons I conclude that the findings and  decision  of  Judge
    Woolley must stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


