
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02249/2014
                                                               AA/02250/2014
                                                               AA/02251/2014
                                                               AA/02252/2014
                                                               AA/02253/2014
                                                               AA/02254/2014
                                                               AA/02376/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2014                           |On 5 November 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                          Mr a o - first appellant
                         Mrs o o - second appellant
                       Master a a o - third appellant
                        Miss a o o - fourth appellant
                       master a o o - fifth appellant
                       master o i o - sixth appellant
                      miss a o o o - seventh appellant

                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. An anonymity order has previously been made in these proceedings and  I
    direct that it continues.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first appellant  was  born
    on 23 February 1971.  The second appellant is his wife  and  the  other
    appellants their children.

 3. They sought international protection which the respondent refused in  a
    decision dated 21 March 2014.  Thereafter they appealed and following a
    hearing at Taylor House on  5  August  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Aujla dismissed their appeals on asylum grounds,  Humanitarian
    Protection grounds and human rights grounds.

 4. The appellants sought permission to appeal and in a decision  dated  12
    September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Ransley  set  out  her
    reasons for granting such permission.  They state:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Aujla)  who,  in  a
             determination  promulgated  on   22/08/2014,   dismissed   the
             Appellant's appeal against the 21/03/2014 decision  to  remove
             the Appellant and to refuse to vary leave to remain.

         2.   Ground  (1)  submits  that  the  Judge  wrongly  rejected  the
             evidence of the country  expert  Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi  on  the
             erroneous assumption that  she  lacked  credentials  when  the
             expert had stated her credentials in her report at page 5; the
             Judge also failed to give sufficient reasons for not accepting
             the expert evidence in the report.

         3.   Ground (2) submits that the Judge failed  to  properly  assess
             the appellant's wife's oral/written evidence; the  Judge  also
             failed to give reasons for rejecting the documentary  evidence
             relied upon by the appellant.

         4.   Ground (3)  submits  that  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  the
             Appellant's  children  were  made  to  write   their   witness
             statements with a view to embellishing the Appellant's  asylum
             claim was not one open to the Judge on the evidence.

         5.   Ground (4) submits that the Judge failed to  take  account  of
             relevant factors  in  assessing  the  best  interests  of  the
             Appellant's children under s55.

         6.   Ground (5) submits that the Judge erred  in  his  finding,  by
             reference to s117B(5), that the Appellant's immigration status
             is 'precarious' when the Appellant had student to remain as  a
             student until June 2013.

         7.   The Grounds have disclosed that there are arguable  errors  of
             law in the determination  that  might  have  made  a  material
             difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal;  permission  is
             therefore grant.  All Grounds may be argued."

 5. The first ground of appeal states:

         "Ground one: Wrongful rejection of expert evidence

         1.   It is submitted that the  FtTJ  wrongly  rejected  the  expert
             evidence of  Ms  Bisi  Olateru-Olagbegi  [pp13  -  39  of  the
             appellant's bundle].  He stated [paragraph 38];

             "I noted that the expert did not  make  any  mention  of  ever
             having given evidence as an expert or been recognised  by  the
             Tribunal or higher courts as an expert witness".

             However, in her report, Ms Olateru-Olagbegi stated [page 5  of
             her report};

             "I have written several expert  opinions  on  cases  involving
             migration rights, human trafficking, forced labour and  gender
             violence including  FGM  at  local  and  international  levels
             including in the United Kingdom".

             In any event, there is no requirement in law for an expert  to
             have previously  given  oral  evidence  as  an  expert  or  be
             recognised as an expert, before their report can be  accepted;
             Karanakaran [2000] 3 All ER 449, CA and  Mibanga  [2005]  EWCA
             Civ 36.  If this were the case, it would be impossible for any
             expert to be accepted.

         2.   With regard to the FtTJ's contention that Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi
             'did not even mention her day-to-day profession', it is  clear
             that he failed to engage with  the  information  she  provided
             that she is; (a) the Executive Director of Women's  Consortium
             of Nigeria (WOCON) a non-governmental  organisation  promoting
             the rights  of  women  and  children  and  the  attainment  of
             equality,  development  and  peace;   (b)   a   Board   member
             representing West Africa Anglo-phone countries of the Women in
             Law and Development in Africa (WiLDAF), a pan  member  of  the
             Nigerian Network of CSOs against Child Trafficking, Abuse  and
             Labour  (NACTAL).   These  is  clearly  Ms  Olateru-Olagbegi's
             relevant 'day-to-day' occupation.

         3.    In  respect  of  Ms   Olateru-Olagbegi's   conclusions,   her
             declaration at the foot of her report is particularly material
             and  relevant.   She  stated  that  she  is   aware   of   the
             requirements of Part 35 of the Practice Direction for  Experts
             (Civil  Procedure  Rules)  and  also  of  the   Protocol   for
             Instruction of Experts to give Evidence in Civil Claims.   She
             also  stated  that  she  was  aware  of  the  Ikarian   Reefer
             guidelines and had read section 10 of the Practice  Directions
             of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chambers  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal and The Upper Tribunal (10/02/10) and applied them in
             the preparation of her expert report.  It is further submitted
             that there is no prohibition on  an  expert  expressing  their
             relevant guidance and instruction, as in this case.  The  case
             of FS (Treatment of  Expert  evidence)  Somalia  [2009]  UKAIT
             00004 makes it clear that this is not prohibited and that  the
             notwithstanding any such expression by an expert,  credibility
             and any 'ultimate issue' remains a matter for the judge in any
             given case notwithstanding the expert's opinion.

         4.   In  light  of  the  above,  and  given  the  support  for  the
             appellants' case contained within the expert report [e.g.  see
             paragraphs 11 and 16 of the appellants' skeleton argument], it
             is submitted that  the  FtTJ  wrongly  rejected  the  material
             aspects of the appellants' account and materially  misdirected
             himself in  respect  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  the
             availability of an internal flight alternative."

 6. At the hearing before me Ms Jones amplified not only  that  ground  but
    also the other four.  The note of her submissions are  set  out  in  my
    Record of Proceedings.  Likewise  the  submissions  of  Mr  Kandola  in
    opposing the applications.  With  reference  to  the  first  ground  he
    argued that the findings the judge  made  in  relation  to  the  expert
    evidence were open to be made.  He had pressed Counsel at  the  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal for assistance but none was  available.   At
    the end of the day the judge had considered the appellants'  claims  at
    their highest and in so doing the judge had not erred as  submitted  by
    the appellants' Counsel.

 7. I disagree with Mr Kandola.  The ground is deliberately set  out  above
    by me as its analysis of the judge's approach and wrongful rejection of
    the expert evidence is in total accord with my own.

 8. It follows therefore that any analysis of the other grounds  becomes  a
    redundant exercise as the material error in the judge's approach to the
    expert evidence is such that the  appellant  was  deprived  of  a  fair
    hearing.  That being so I find that the determination is such  that  it
    must be set aside in its entirety.

 9. It is clear  therefore  that  where  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside, the Upper Tribunal has power to remit the appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal with directions for reconsideration  of  the
    appeal.  I take account of the practice  statement  dated  10  February
    2010 at 7.2 which contemplates that an appeal may be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the errors have been to deprive
    the party before the First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for that party's case to be put to and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  That nature and extent of  the  judicial  finding
    necessary in order to enable to the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
    made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. This is my view on my own analysis of the totality of the circumstances
    here.  It is appropriate for me to remit this matter to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The hearing that took place there was a hearing within which
    the First-tier Judge erred and thereby preventing  the  appellant  from
    having a fair hearing.

11. Accordingly this appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    reconsideration of the appeal by a First-tier Judge  other  than  Judge
    Aujla.  None of the findings of fact made at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    are preserved and there is to be a fresh hearing when all issues are to
    be considered de novo.

Anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 4 November 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
DIRECTIONS

 1. The substantive hearing of this appeal will take place at Taylor  House
    on the first available date.

 2. The time estimate is three hours.

 3. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed and served with the Tribunal no later than 4pm five working  days
    prior to the substantive hearing.




Signed                              Date 4 November 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


