
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02167/2014
                                                               AA/02168/2014
                                                               AA/02169/2014
                                                               AA/02170/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 August 2014                            |On 8 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                       Mr KoFI ATTAH (first appellant)
                   MRS GEORGINA AGYEMAN (second appellant)
                 MASTER KOFI GIDEOAN ATTAH (THIRD APPELLANT)
              MASER EUGEN ADJEI-ABABIO ATTAH (fourth appellant)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Murphy
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Ghana.  The  first  two  appellants  are
    husband and wife born in 1970 and 1972.  The remaining  appellants  are
    their children born in 2006 and 2010.

 2. They appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State made on 19
    March 2014 to refuse their application for leave to remain in  the  UK.
    It was refused on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  and  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. They appealed.

 4. Following a hearing at hearing at Taylor House on 7 May 2014  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal McWilliam dismissed the appeals on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds and under the Rules.

 5. She noted the immigration history.  In summary, in respect of the first
    appellant he claimed asylum in September 2000 which  was  refused  that
    month.  An appeal was dismissed in December 2000.  In November 2004  he
    sought a travel document.  In October 2005 it was asserted that he  had
    been granted ILR in July 2003 as a refugee but the Home Office  had  no
    record of this.  The application for a travel document was  refused  in
    October 2005.  In June 2009 his solicitors made further representations
    regarding legacy and  human  rights  which  the  Respondent  eventually
    refused in the decision of 19 March 2014.

 6. As for the second appellant the respondent relied on a determination by
    a judge in August 2007.  She had sought  leave  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276B(b) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  in  2007  found
    that she did not enter the UK as claimed in 1991, did not work  in  the
    capacity claimed and that it was 'unlikely that  she  arrived  sometime
    prior to her application of September 2005 and certainly by the time of
    decision had remained in the UK illegally without status'.   The  judge
    (2007) noted that a copy of her son's birth certificate showing he  was
    born in the UK on 31 August 2006 had been provided.

 7. At the  hearing  before  Judge  McWilliam  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellants could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE.  The
    submission was that the appellants were relying on EX.1 of Appendix  FM
    on  the  basis  that  they  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a child.  Alternatively, they  relied  on  article  8
    ECHR.

 8. The judge's findings and reasons are at paragraphs [25-46].  She  found
    the evidence of the first and second  appellants  to  be  'inconsistent
    both internally and with each other'.  It was 'vague and  ambiguous  in
    parts lacking in credibility'.  They were both 'unimpressive witnesses'
    [25] and she did not accept their evidence.

 9. They were 'wholly inconsistent' about where their elder son is  living.
    They were inconsistent about how long they had lived at the address  in
    Tottenham and there were 'significant inconsistencies  in  relation  to
    the living arrangements  relating  to  their  eldest  son'  [26].   She
    preferred the account of the first appellant, namely,  that  the  elder
    son is at present living with a pastor in  Watford  to  enable  him  to
    attend a primary school with the younger child being accommodated at an
    address in Tottenham.

10. As for their claimed employment, namely, cleaning for  members  of  the
    church congregation, the first appellant's evidence  was  that  he  was
    paid money which he used to buy food for his family, whilst the  second
    appellant stated that the family was paid in food.  The judge found  it
    lacking in credibility that the  appellants  are  solely  reliant  upon
    money or food they received from members of the church congregation  in
    exchange for cleaning their houses. In that regard it  was  noted  that
    there was no evidence from members of the congregation.

11. The judge also noted the admission by the second appellant that at  the
    hearing before the Tribunal in 2007 she had been untruthful  in  saying
    she had been in the UK since 1991.

12. The judge went on to find that 'There  is  no  persuasive  evidence  in
    relation to the difficulties that the appellants would encounter should
    they return to Ghana'.  She did not find credible that they would  have
    no support from family.  The first appellant had been 'vague about  his
    wife's family and what she was doing in Ghana  prior  to  coming  here'
    [28].

13. The judge further found that there was 'no  cogent  evidence'  [29]  to
    support the assertions that if returned they would not be able to work,
    would have nowhere to live, their children would not  be  educated  and
    they would not have the benefit of adequate health care.

14. She concluded on that matter that they had 'not established  that  they
    do not have family or friends in  Ghana'.   Nor  did  she  accept  that
    'neither appellant had ever been in properly paid employment  in  Ghana
    before coming to the UK'  [32].

15. She noted that it was not argued that the appellants  were  relying  on
    their relationship with each other  and  that  as  such  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside Ghana was not material.  In
    any event she found that there were no such insurmountable obstacles.

16. The appellants were arguing the parental route.  Her  conclusion  under
    the Immigration Rules was that the appellants were unable to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and  thus  whether  or  not
    they satisfied EX.1 was not material  in  relation  to  their  parental
    relationship with their children.  She noted  of  the  claim  that  the
    elder child had lived in the UK continuously for at least  seven  years
    preceding the date of application that the claim  was  flawed  'because
    the application was made on 10 June 2009 when the  eldest  (sic)  child
    was aged 2.  The child was aged 7 on 31 August 2013' [35].

17. Turning to consider Article 8 the judge considered  the  case  law,  in
    particular, Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]
    UKUT 640 (IAC) which states that after applying the requirements of the
    Rules only if there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave  to
    remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to
    consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised under them.

18. She found that there were arguably good grounds namely  the  two  young
    children both of whom were born in the UK, the elder being now seven.

19. She went on to consider the best interests of the children.  She  noted
    that there was 'very little evidence about either  child'.   The  elder
    was in year 3 at a primary school and there was no reason to disbelieve
    his father that he is making academic progress.  However,  the  younger
    had not yet started school.  The judge noted  that  both  children  had
    been born in the UK.  She went on: 'Whilst it might be  the  case  that
    there is better health care and education provision here as opposed  to
    that in Ghana ... it would be in the best interests of both children to
    be with both their parents who it is proposed are removed from  the  UK
    to Ghana' [40]. The judge  reiterated  that  she  did  not  accept  the
    evidence that they would not have any support and that they do not have
    family there or that there  would  be  no  state  education  or  health
    provision whatsoever.

20. Advancing to proportionality the judge noted that the appellants  could
    not satisfy the Immigration Rules.  She also noted that  correspondence
    from the appellants' solicitors to UKBA enclosed documents such as P60s
    which was inconsistent with the first appellant's evidence that he  had
    never worked officially in the UK.  She noted that the first  appellant
    had been in the UK since 2000 and,  she  found,  the  second  appellant
    since 2005.  Such was a 'significant period of time and was a factor in
    their favour'.  However, the immigration history was  'not  impressive'
    [43] as they had chosen to remain here after unsuccessful  appeals  and
    to start a family together.  They were aware that that their status was
    at all times precarious.

21. She repeated that  their  evidence  lacked  credibility.   It  was  not
    accepted that they did not have family in Ghana.  There was no evidence
    of significant ties with others in the  UK.   Whilst  the  elder  son's
    education would be disrupted the children's best interests would be  to
    return to Ghana with their parents.  The judge  noted  that  the  elder
    child's situation having to live apart during the week from his parents
    'must be unsettling and difficult for him' [44].

22. The judge concluded that the  appellants  'have  made  between  them  a
    series of unsuccessful applications and appeals and for one  reason  or
    another they have decided to remain in the UK  illegally  and  start  a
    family here' [45].

23. She noted the delay between the application in 2009 and the decision in
    2013 but considered the impact to be 'neutral' as 'both the  appellants
    had made previous applications and had unsuccessful  appeals  prior  to
    their final application'.

24. The judge dismissed the case under Article 8 ECHR.



25. They sought permission to appeal which was granted by  a  judge  on  12
    June 2014 who stated:

         '...

         The application for permission to appeal contends  that  the  judge
         erred by contradicting herself in her findings in relation  to  the
         situation the family would face  in  Ghana.   The  judge  erred  in
         rejecting the evidence that the  family  are  wholly  dependent  on
         assistance from members of their church and community.   The  judge
         did not properly apply para EX.1 of Appendix FM.   Despite  finding
         that there were  arguably  good  grounds  for  the  children  being
         granted leave outside the Rules the judge went on to find  that  it
         was in their best interests to return with their parents to Ghana.

         The older child, though not a British citizen, had resided  in  the
         UK for more than 7 years by the date of the refusal letter and  the
         judge arguably misconstrued para EX.1 of Appendix FM.  The  grounds
         are arguable'.

26. In submissions before me Mr  Murphy  sought  essentially  to  make  two
    points.  First, he  questioned  whether  the  judge  should  have  been
    looking at the Rules as the application was made prior  to  June  2012.
    In accordance with Edgehill and another v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402
    consideration should have been made by the Secretary of  State  to  the
    seven year residence policy in respect of children (DP5/96).  The  case
    should be remitted to the Respondent to make a fresh decision.

27. Mr Murphy's second point was to question whether the best interests of,
    particularly, the elder child had been adequately considered.  It might
    be thought that as the elder child is in school and the  younger  about
    to start their best interests would be to stay  in  the  UK.   However,
    there was no independent finding as to their best  interests.   Rather,
    the finding had been that the family should be removed and as  such  it
    was in the best interests of the children to go.

28. Mr Murphy essentially left the remaining written grounds for me.

29. In reply Mr Bramble noted that the Edgehill point had not been taken in
    the grounds.  In any event Edgehill was not relevant to this case.   It
    was a case on its own facts about long residency.  Also the seven  year
    threshold only arose in 2013.

30. As for the best interests of the children the judge had given  adequate
    consideration.  She appreciated that there would be disruption  to  the
    schooling of the elder child.  She had noted the lack  of  credibility.
    There was very little other evidence about either child.   As  such  it
    was difficult to see what more she could have said.

31. In considering this matter I do not find any of the  issues  raised  to
    have merit.  Dealing first with the Edgehill point I do not see  it  to
    be an error of law for the First-tier Judge in  an  immigration  appeal
    not to have dealt with an issue which it was accepted  was  not  raised
    before her.  Indeed it was not  even  raised  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.

32. Even if I am wrong on that matter and the judge should have  considered
    the seven year child concession  I  do  not  see  that  it  could  have
    benefitted the appellants.  That policy (DP5/96)  was  withdrawn  by  a
    Ministerial Statement on 9 December 2008.  The essence  of  the  policy
    was that if a parent or parents faced  deportation  or  removal  DP5/96
    would apply if they had a child, under 18 years, living  with  them  in
    the UK and the child had been living continuously in the UK  for  seven
    years or more.

33. The applications were made in June 2009.  At that time the elder  child
    (born in 2006) had not been living in the  UK  continuously  for  seven
    years.  The younger child was not yet born.  The family had accrued  no
    rights under the policy.

34. I conclude that even if the judge erred in not considering  the  policy
    it was not material as it could not have affected the outcome.

35. I also do not find merit in the submission that the judge did not  give
    adequate consideration to the best  interests  of  the  children.   She
    carefully set out and clearly had in mind the guidance given in  Azimi-
    Moayed and  Others  (Decisions  affecting  children;  onwards  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74.

36. She was aware that they were not British citizens and had no  right  to
    future education and health care in this country.  She was  aware  that
    the family  are  here  unlawfully,  and  had  chosen  to  remain  after
    unsuccessful appeals and to start a family together despite  having  no
    lawful  status.   Specifically  in  relation  to   the   children   she
    acknowledged that education provision was likely to be better here than
    in Ghana but noted that there was 'very little  evidence  about  either
    child' [40] merely that the elder child was  at  primary  school.   She
    acknowledged  that  removal  would  disrupt  that  child's   education.
    However, noting that the appellants had poor credibility  she  did  not
    accept that they would not have family and support in Ghana.   Nor  did
    she accept that there would be no state education or  health  provision
    in Ghana.  From my reading of her findings the judge was  stating  that
    almost  no  evidence  had  been  provided  about  the  children's  best
    interests and even if the best interests of the  elder  child  were  in
    continuing in education here these were outweighed  by  the  cumulative
    effect of other considerations.  These were findings which were open to
    her on the very limited evidence about the children  before  her.   Her
    conclusions on the children's best interests were adequate.

37. As for the written grounds as indicated these were simply left for  me.
    The first is that the judge contradicted herself  in  stating  at  [29]
    that there was no cogent evidence before her that  there  would  be  no
    provision of education or health care  for  the  children  should  they
    return and there would be nowhere to live, yet  at  [32]  she  did  not
    accept that neither the appellant or his wife has ever been in properly
    paid employment in  Ghana  prior  to  coming  to  the  UK.   That,  the
    submission continues, is what the first appellant is  stating,  namely,
    that he would not find work to provide for  the  education  and  health
    care of the children.

38. There is no contradiction.  Whilst it could perhaps have been expressed
    more clearly, the judge in stating 'I do not accept  neither  appellant
    has ever been in properly paid employment  ...', is saying the claim is
    that neither the first nor second  appellant  has  ever  been  in  paid
    employment but she does not accept that claim.

39. As for the claim that it had been accepted that the  appellants  during
    the time they have been in the UK have lost contact with Ghana and have
    no relatives or friends there to whom they could turn for support, such
    was, on the contrary, not accepted by the judge [40].  Her findings  on
    those matters were open to her on the evidence before her.

40. Ground 2 is a claim that the judge erred in failing to accept that  the
    appellants are receiving help from members  of  the  church  and  their
    community.  This amounts to nothing more than a disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings for which she gave  adequate  reasons  which  included
    that there was no evidence from the church.

41. Ground 3 claims that in citing the case of Sabir (Appendix FM-EX.1  not
    freestanding) [2014] UKUT 63 the judge erred.  She applied Section  (b)
    of EX.1. which concerns genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    partner which was not relevant to the appellants' case. Section  (a)(i)
    and (ii) were the only provisions which applied to the appellants.

42. I do not see this ground to have merit.  Whether or not she should have
    referred to Sabir, it is clear that she put her mind  to  the  parental
    relationship finding that E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4 could not be  met  not  least
    because 2.2(d) could not be satisfied as the  children  had  not  lived
    continuously in the UK for seven years prior to the date of application
    [35] with the further consequence that EX.1 (a) (i) (cc) could  not  be
    met.

43. The final written ground is that  the  judge  contradicted  herself  by
    stating [37] that arguably there are good grounds  for  granting  leave
    outside the Rules to the two young children born in  the  UK,  yet  she
    reached the conclusion that it would be  in  their  best  interests  to
    return with their parents to Ghana.  Also,  she  erred  in  not  giving
    proper weight to Article 8, the grounds stating 'it is obvious that the
    appellant and others have made many ties in the  UK  and  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove them'.

44. I again find these points to have no merit.  The judge was entitled  to
    find that there were arguably good grounds for granting  leave  outside
    the Rules, but on specific consideration of the facts to conclude  that
    the appeal under Article 8 could not  succeed.   She  carried  out  the
    balancing exercise at [42] to [46].  Such  included  that  very  little
    evidence was put before the judge about the family's circumstances  and
    what was put was largely not believed. There was no  credible  evidence
    before the judge about ties in the UK.  On the evidence before her  she
    was entitled to conclude that any interference was proportionate to the
    legitimate aim.

45. For the reasons stated the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no
    material error of law and the decision dismissing the appeals stands.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
that decision dismissing the appeals stands.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway







