


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
AA/02091/2015

                                                   AA/02143/2015

                                                   AA/02142/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : UT(IAC) Birmingham             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 7th June 2017                         |On: 15th June 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  SDDV (+2)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr J Holt, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants, citizens of Venezuela, are husband, wife  and  their  child.
They most recently arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 July 2014.  The  main
appellant claimed asylum  on  30  July  2014,  with  the  second  and  third
appellants as  his  dependants.  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the  main
appellant as "the appellant".  The  appellant's  claim  was  refused  on  16
January 2015 and a decision was then made on 21 January 2015 to  remove  the
family from the UK. The appellants appealed against that  decision  and  the
appeals were dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal, initially on 5 May  2015,
but then following a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal,  on  15  September
2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thomas.  Permission  was  granted  on  30
November 2016 to appeal that decision. At an error  of  law  hearing  on  28
February 2017, I found that Judge Thomas had  made  errors  of  law  in  her
decision such that the decision had to be  set  aside  and  re-made  by  the
Upper Tribunal on a limited basis.

The Appellant's claim

The basis of the  appellant's  claim  was  that  he  feared  persecution  in
Venezuela from pro-government militia, as a result of his  uncle  EV's  high
profile political involvement and his own political  activities.  His  uncle
had stood against Chavez as a Presidential candidate in 2006, but  had  been
unsuccessful. The appellant had supported his uncle in  that  election.  His
uncle also published political blogs. The appellant claimed that  he  was  a
member of the Primero Justicia Party, which  he  joined  in  2012,  and  was
appointed by the National Election Commission (CNE), at  election  time,  as
an official at the polling station in his home area and on a third  occasion
as head of the polling station. He referred to  three  particular  incidents
in which he was  threatened.  The  first,  on  14  April  2013,  during  the
polling, was when he refused access to Chavistas  who  were  demanding  that
they fix a fault on the electronic voting system and wanted  to  attend  his
polling station to do so. On 17 December 2013 he received  a  call  from  an
unknown source threatening him to stop posting against the government or  he
would be killed. He received further calls from  unknown  numbers  which  he
did not answer. On 23 April 2014 he was forced to stop his car  by  two  men
on a motorbike whom he believed to  be  "colectivos",  associated  with  the
government, and who pointed a gun at him and ordered him and  his  uncle  to
keep quiet and stop their publications and public demonstrations. His  uncle
also received threats. He left Venezuela on 15 July 2014.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was politically active in Venezuela and did not accept that he was  at  risk
on return.


The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Thomas  on  20  July  2016.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
appellant was the maternal nephew of a Presidential  election  candidate  in
the 2006 elections in Venezuela, standing against Hugo Chavez  who  won  the
election, and that his uncle had written a number of documents and  articles
against the government.  She also accepted that the appellant was  a  member
of the Primero Justicia political party and attended rallies  and  meetings,
although not of a high profile, and she accepted that he was appointed  head
of the polling stations in his  home  area.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
incident in April 2013 at the polling station  took  place,  but  considered
that it was because of the appellant's  position  as  head  of  the  polling
station and not because of  his  identity,  relationship  to  his  uncle  or
political opinion. She accepted that the appellant received one  threatening
telephone call in December 2013 from an unknown  source  and  accepted  that
the  incident  in  April  2014  occurred.  However,  she  noted   that   the
appellant's uncle continued to reside in Venezuela and had not  been  harmed
and concluded that his uncle's political profile was not at  a  level  which
would indicate that he or his family and supporters would be  at  risk.  The
judge found that the incidents  were  "random  acts  against  him  during  a
politically heightened election period, by pro-government militia,  possibly
colectivos". She did not find that there was insufficient  state  protection
available for the appellant and she considered that  he  could  relocate  in
Venezuela. She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

At an error of law hearing on 28 February  2017  and  I  found  the  judge's
determination to be materially flawed, for the following reasons:

    "Having heard submissions from both  parties  I  concluded  that  Judge
    Thomas' decision had to be set aside. There is merit in  the  assertion
    that the judge's finding that the three incidents  were  "random  acts"
    was insufficiently reasoned and in the observation,  in  the  grant  of
    permission, that the judge did not address the cumulative nature of the
    threats together with the appellant's political profile and  his  links
    with his uncle. It is material, as Mr Holt submitted, that the  judge's
    findings at [35] were incomplete, with part of the  paragraph  missing,
    so that there is an absence of full and proper reasoning in  regard  to
    the threatening telephone calls and the expert's view on that aspect of
    the case. Likewise, there is merit in the assertion that the  departure
    by the judge  from  the  conclusions  of  the  expert  in  relation  to
    sufficiency  of  state  protection,  in  her  findings  at  [40],   was
    insufficiently reasoned. It seems to me that, in a  case  in  which  Mr
    Mills  accepted  that  another  judge  may  have  reached  a  different
    decision, and where the  events  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  were
    accepted, it is incumbent upon the deciding  judge  to  give  full  and
    proper reasons to support the  conclusions  on  risk  on  return.  Such
    reasons are lacking in this decision and, as such, the decision has  to
    be re-made."

I directed that the case be listed  for  a  resumed  hearing  in  the  Upper
Tribunal for consideration of the question of risk on return, on  the  basis
of the facts as accepted by the judge, which were to be preserved.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me  on  7  June  2017,  by  which  time  further
evidence had been produced by the appellant in support of his  claim  as  to
an ongoing threat from the Venezuelan authorities. That  evidence  consisted
of a transcription of an interview with the appellant's uncle on  Venezuelan
television which took place on 11 August 2016,  in  which  he  made  serious
allegations about the legitimacy  of  the  Venezuelan  presidency,  together
with confirmation of consequential threats made to the appellant's  brother,
D, leading him to flee Venezuela and relocate to Mexico.

Mr Mills advised me that there was no challenge to  that  evidence,  nor  to
that of the witnesses whose evidence had not previously  been  disputed.  He
accepted that the evidence showed  an  ongoing  threat  to  the  appellant's
family and the expert evidence confirmed that  the  situation  in  Venezuela
had seriously deteriorated. He had nothing to add.


Mr Holt provided a summary of the relevant parts of the evidence  supporting
the appellant's case and, in  light  of  Mr  Mills'  helpful  indication,  I
allowed the appeals. Mr  Mills  advised  me  that  he  was  content  for  my
decision to be brief, given the uncontentious nature of the  proceedings.  I
therefore provide brief reasons for allowing the appeals.

Consideration and findings

 The preserved findings of fact made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are,  in
summary, that: the appellant is the nephew of EV who  stood  against  Chavez
in the  2006  Presidential  elections  and  who  had  written  a  number  of
documents and articles critical of  the  government;  the  appellant  was  a
member of the Primero Justicia political party  and  attended  rallies   and
meetings; the appellant was appointed head of the polling  stations  in  his
home area in 2012 and 2013;  and  the  appellant  was  threatened  on  three
occasions - firstly  in  2013  when  he  denied  colectivos  access  to  the
electronic voting system at the polling station, secondly when  he  received
at least one threatening telephone call in December 2013, and  thirdly  when
he was stopped and threatened by armed men on a motorbike in April 2014.

Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  three  incidents  to  be
confined to their circumstances at the time, it is clear that  that  is  not
the case  and  that  the  threat  to  the  appellant  has  always  remained,
particularly as  a  result  of  his  family  ties  to  EV.  That  is  indeed
illustrated  by  the  more  recent  evidence  of  the  experiences  of   the
appellant's brother, D, who received a threatening telephone call  following
their uncle EV's television appearance, whereby a demand for money was  made
and mention was made of  the  appellant  himself,  and  further  calls  were
received, although not answered. D's experiences, and  his  subsequent  move
to Mexico, are explained by the appellant in his statement  of  16  February
2017 and are supported by a letter from D's former employer.  That  evidence
was accepted by Mr Mills.


It is plain from that evidence that, whilst EV  has  managed  to  remain  in
Venezuela, his family members have been the subject of threats and  continue
to be so. That they are at risk on such a basis is confirmed by  the  expert
Dr Brown in his reports of 15 April 2015 and 15 July 2016. In his report  of
15 April 2015 at [3.12] Dr Brown referred to the colectivos,  identified  as
armed pro-government urban militia, as becoming  increasingly  active  since
the 2014 protests, and at [5.2] he  referred  to  the  risks  to  family  of
opposition leaders. In his second report, of 15 July 2016,  he  referred  at
[3.1] and  [3.2]  to  the  increased  risk  to  individuals  linked  to  key
opposition figures and to the  risk  being  exacerbated  by  the  subsequent
months of economic deterioration and political instability.


The most recent expert report from Julia Buxton refers to  the  serious  and
significant deterioration in the economic  and  human  rights  situation  in
Venezuela leading to an elevation to emergency status and  to  concerns  for
the international community. At [2.1] she opined that the risk on return  to
the  appellants  "cannot  be  overstated"  and  at   [3.1]   that   "it   is
unconscionable to me that the client and his family  can  be  removed  to  a
safe location within Venezuela". At [3.4] she referred to the  inability  of
the appellant to return to any area of Venezuela to live anonymously,  given
that accessing state controlled food distribution would lead  to  him  being
immediately brought to the attention of the colectivos.

In light of that evidence and for all of these reasons, as  acknowledged  by
Mr Mills, it is plain that the appellant and his family would be at risk  on
return to Venezuela and that they could not relocate to another part of  the
country to avoid such risks. The question of sufficiency of protection  does
not arise, given that their fear is of the state or  state  agents.  In  the
circumstances I find that the appellant has been  able  to  demonstrate,  to
the lower standard of proof, that he and his family  would  be  at  risk  of
persecution if returned to  Venezuela  and  their  appeals  are  accordingly
allowed on asylum grounds and Article 3 human rights grounds. As  such  they
are not entitled to humanitarian protection.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the decision by allowing the appellants' appeals on  asylum  and  Article  3
human rights grounds.




    Anonymity


    The anonymity order previously made is continued, pursuant to  rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 7 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
