
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02065/2015
     AA/07394/2015
     AA/07406/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th June 2016                         |On 22nd July 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   fy (1)
                                   fa (2)
                                  fa-y (3)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Hoshi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Froom,
    promulgated on 3rd March 2016, following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on
    20th January 2016 and 17th February 2016.  In  the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the first Appellant on human rights grounds
    (Article  3)  but  dismissed  the  appeals  of  the  second  and  third
    Appellants on Article 3 grounds.  The appeals of all  three  Appellants
    were dismissed on refugee, humanitarian and  Article  8  grounds.   The
    Appellants subsequently for, and were granted, permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Afghanistan,  aged  18,  19,  and  16
    respectively, and are brothers and the appeals of all of  them  relayed
    to a common fear of another family in Afghanistan.   They  belonged  to
    the Hazara ethnic minority  community  and  are  members  of  the  Shia
    Ismaili religious minority.



The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is that they lived in the Baghlan Province in the
    north of Afghanistan.  They  lived  with  their  parents  and  attended
    school.  Their father rented  a  shop  selling  groceries.   The  older
    brothers would help their father in the shop from time  to  time.   The
    family  suffered  discrimination.   A  local  boy,  Rashid  Sadat,  was
    particularly threatening and abusive.  A  fight  developed  and  Rashid
    held a knife and the first Appellant managed to take this  out  of  his
    hand in the struggle and the first Appellant then stabbed Rashid in the
    heart whereupon Rashid was taken to hospital.  The first Appellant fled
    to Pakistan.  The Appellants' father visited Rashid in hospital and met
    his parents.  The local police was called.   The  first  Appellant  now
    faces punishment if he  is  caught.   However,  his  main  fear  is  of
    Rashid's family taking revenge.  Rashid's  father  is  a  high  ranking
    officer  in  the  Afghan  National  Army  and  has  influence  in   the
    government.  Indeed, the first Appellant was told that the  police  and
    Rashid's family are looking for him.  It is in these circumstances that
    his father sent money to arrange for him to be taken to a safe  country
    (see paragraph 5 of the determination).

 4. As far as the second and third Appellants are concerned  they  did  not
    leave Afghanistan until much later.  The second  and  third  Appellants
    were attacked and beaten up by members of Rashid's family.   They  both
    required treatment in hospital.  It  was  suggested  that  they  go  to
    Pakistan for a while and live a low profile  life  and  they  went  and
    stayed there for about six months.  They returned to Kabul to spend the
    new year with the family but the second  Appellant  was  then  attacked
    again some six months later.  After this he  and  the  third  Appellant
    left Afghanistan.  They took a similar route  to  the  first  Appellant
    saying that they travelled overland to France and then entered  the  UK
    clandestinely in the back of a lorry (see paragraph 6).



The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge observed how the Respondent in the  refusal  letter  of  20th
    January 2015 and of 22nd April 2015 has treated the Appellant's account
    as a fabrication.  The judge looked at the Appellant's account given in
    their interviews and bore in mind the fact that they  would  have  been
    nervous and were of a particularly young age which would  affect  their
    answers.  However, the judge found that

         "the  Appellants  were  generally   reliable   as   straightforward
         witnesses who sought to answer the questions put to them  as  fully
         as possible.  They did not avoid  any  questions.   They  were  not
         unsettled by challenges made during  cross-examination"  (paragraph
         57).

    In fact, the judge concluded that "compelling and detailed account"  of
    the attack in July 2012 was given by  the  Appellants  (paragraph  57).
    Moreover,  "the Appellants have been able to produce numerous documents
    to support their account and that the contents of these  documents  are
    entirely consistent" (paragraph 53).  Furthermore, "the Appellants were
    almost entirely consistent with each other" (paragraph 58).

 6. The judge went on to consider the risk on return and properly  observed
    that "much depends ..... on the level of inference and  power  held  by
    Rashid's father and the family in general" (paragraph  68).   He  noted
    that

         "the account suggests Rashid's brothers in Kabul are violent  thugs
         who took two opportunities presented to  inflict  violence  on  the
         second and third Appellants, despite the third Appellant being only
         12 years of age at the time ..." (paragraph 69).

    It was noted that "Rashid's father has been described as a general  and
    a very influential person", although the judge's own view was that, "he
    was no more than a major in the logistics corps"  (paragraph  70).   It
    was in this context, that the judge also  noted  that  "Afghan  society
    structured along family lines and some families may be regarded as pre-
    imminent without the head of the family necessarily holding an elevated
    official post" (paragraph 72).

 7. On the facts, the judge concluded that "the family of  Rashid  are  not
    bent on pursuing the first Appellant's family so as to target them  for
    serious ill-treatment.  The risk is only that  chance  encounters  with
    Rashid's brothers might result in a fight" (paragraph 77).   The  judge
    concluded that, "the circumstances do not give rise to a real  risk  of
    persecution or ill-treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  to  engage  the
    protection of the 1950 or 1951 Conventions" (paragraph 78).  The  judge
    moved on to consider that,

         "as such the issues  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
         flight do not arise.  However it is clear from what happens  or  it
         is clear from what the Appellants have said that  the  family  been
         able to remain safely in Kabul by simply moving  house"  (paragraph
         79).

    In recording that the police had detained the Appellants'  father,  but
    dropped the case against the people who had attacked  them,  the  judge
    observed that,  "they  are  unlikely  to  be  willing  to  provide  the
    protection which might be expected even with their  limited  resources"
    and that "the children of Colonel Hameedullah are able to  act  with  a
    degree of  impunity"  (paragraph  80).   Importantly,  the  judge  here
    observed that, be as it may, "the point does not arise  unless  it  has
    been shown that there is  a  risk  reaching  the  threshold  to  engage
    international protection.  In this  case  the  risk  does  not,  in  my
    judgment, reach that threshold" (paragraph 80).  It  is  observed  that
    "the Appellants, who are not  the  authors  of  their  own  misfortune"
    deserved sympathy, and that "the beatings inflicted on the  second  and
    third Appellants were not trivial, so that, "they may well not be  able
    to walk the streets without feeling concerned and they  may  bump  into
    one  of  Rashid's  family  members"  (paragraph  82).   However,   this
    situation did not engage the UK's international obligations.

 8. The judge then went on to consider the first Appellant's position  and,
    observing that his account was true that he did stab  Rashid,  observed
    that he was reasonably  likely  to  face  discriminatory  treatment  on
    account of his  ethnic  minority  status  (paragraph  90)  because  the
    settlement proposed by the counsel  of  elders  did  not  result  in  a
    successful  resolution  of  the  dispute  (paragraph  90).   In   these
    circumstances, the first Appellant's appeal was allowed  on  Article  3
    grounds.

 9. The second and third Appellants did not have their appeals  allowed  in
    this manner.  Consideration was thereafter given to the application  of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive (see paragraphs 95 to 108)
    and to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention (see paragraphs 109  to
    119) but the appeals of all three were dismissed on this basis.



Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    allowing the appeal of the third named Appellant under Article 3 of the
    ECHR because he misdirected himself as to the minimum level of severity
    required for ill-treatment to engage  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
    Convention  or  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  in  relation  to  all  three
    Appellants.  This was important because the judge had accepted  in  his
    decision that the first and second of  the  Appellants  had  both  been
    beaten to the point of hospitalisation when they were minors.   One  of
    them suffered hearing damage and erectile dysfunction, whilst the other
    suffered a broken arm.  Given that Pretty v UK [2002]  35  EHRR  1  had
    established  that  ill-treatment  must  maintain  a  minimum  level  of
    severity and could involve actual bodily harm or mental suffering,  the
    judge had erred in concluding that being  hit  over  the  head  with  a
    brick, or kicked in the testicles, were not sufficient to engage either
    Convention.

11. On 29th March 2016, permission to appeal was granted.



Submissions

12. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Hoshi,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, submitted that in Bagdanavicius [2005] 2 AC 668, Lord  Brown
    had held that, "if someone is beaten up  and  seriously  injured  by  a
    criminal gang, the Member State will not be  in  breach  of  Article  3
    unless it has  failed  in  its  positive  duty  to  provide  reasonable
    protection against such criminal acts" and this was a  case  where  the
    judge had accepted that the ability of the police to provide protection
    to the Appellants was considerably diminished in the  circumstances  of
    the case.  That case also established that the  level  of  mistreatment
    did not differ in  its  recognition,  depending  on  whether  the  ill-
    treatment emanated from the State or from non-State agents, because the
    level remained the same, and ultimately the question was whether  there
    was a sufficiency of State protection.  The  judge  in  this  case  had
    wrongly said that there was no issue arising from  the  sufficiency  of
    State protection.

13. Second, the judge's findings at  paragraph  62  were  inconsistent  and
    unsustainable.  He had accepted that the second  and  third  Appellants
    were beaten to the point of hospitalisation by members of the aggressor
    family in or around 12th October 2012  (when  they  were  both  minors)
    causing them both to flee to Pakistan and to stay there for six months.
     Shortly after return to Afghanistan in March 2013 the second Appellant
    was set upon again and severely beaten  by  members  of  the  aggressor
    family (when he was still a minor).  Furthermore,  on  or  around  11th
    October 2015 the Appellants' father was set  upon  and  beaten  to  the
    point of hospitalisation  by  members  of  the  aggressor  clan  again.
    Despite these findings, the judge found (at paragraph 78) that, "whilst
    what has happened to the second and  third  Appellant  and  also  their
    father is abhorrent and inexcusable, the circumstances do not give rise
    to a real risk of persecution of ill-treatment contrary to  Article  3"
    and that "as such, the issue of sufficiency of protection and  internal
    flight do not arise".  This was a plainly unsustainable  conclusion  to
    reach.  It was particularly so  given  that  the  judge  had  held  (at
    paragraph 80) that the police "are unlikely to be  willing  to  provide
    the  protection  which  might  be  expected  even  with  their  limited
    resources".

14. The European Court had established in Pretty v UK [2002] 35 EHRR 1 that
    "ill-treatment", provided that it reaches the minimum level of severity
    test, "involves actual bodily injury  or  intends  physical  or  mental
    suffering".

15. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that the judge was not  saying  that
    the  injuries  suffered  by  the  Appellants  were  not  serious   (see
    paragraphs 77 to 78).  What he was  saying  was  that  the  injury  was
    inflicted on a random basis and that it came from a source who were not
    a high profile family.  It was not in dispute that there  was  a  nasty
    situation between the two families.  However, there was no blood  feud.
    There was only really the one incident at the beginning and apart  from
    that, there was sporadic instances whereupon the parties came  face  to
    face with each other and in that random situation  violence  arose  and
    this could not be seen to be a systematic violation of the  Appellants'
    human rights.  Mr McVeety submitted that some of  the  judge's  use  of
    words was "oddly worded" but that essentially  the  decision  could  be
    pursuant.

16. In reply, Mr Hoshi submitted that this was not a case of  two  families
    fighting each other in a feud.   It  was  one-sided.   One  family  was
    attacking the other.  This was the aggressor  family.   Whilst  it  was
    accepted that criminal acts do not involve the Refugee Convention, this
    was a case where the judge had accepted that the risk of such  violence
    arising again was real, and the availability  of  protection  was  non-
    existent, which is why the conclusion  that  there  was  no  reason  to
    consider the "sufficiency of protection" issue was irrational.



Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, the judge has accepted that violence was inflicted  on
    the Appellants and on their father  which  led  to  hospitalisation  of
    family members.  As Mr McVeety also conceded, it  was  not  tenable  in
    these circumstances to suggest that this violence  did  not  reach  the
    minimum  level  of  severity  tested.   The  case   of   Demirkaya   is
    longstanding authority for the proposition  that  brutal  beatings  can
    lead to  the  violation  of  fundamental  human  rights.   The  judge's
    conclusion that this did not give rise to real risk of  persecution  of
    ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 was  unsustainable  (see  paragraph
    78).  It was accordingly also wrong to state that  the  issues  do  not
    raise sufficiency of protection and internal flight considerations  (at
    paragraph 79).  This was especially so given that the  judge  had  held
    that the police "are unlikely to be willing to provide  the  protection
    which might be expected".



Re-Making the Decision

18.  I have remade the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal only to the extent that it
    be remitted back to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Froom,
    with all favourable findings preserved intact.   This  is  because  the
    nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary  in
    order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, "having
    regard to the overriding objective in Rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (see  Practice  Statement
    7.2(b)).  This is a case where further evidence will be  necessary,  Mr
    Hoshi has submitted in the form of an expert report, this being so,  it
    is appropriate that this matter return back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a consideration of all the issues again, such as to the  Appellants
    having the benefit of favourable findings preserved intact.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I accept  the  Tribunal's  decision
of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.   This  appeal  is
remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a  judge  other
than Judge Froom.

An anonymity order is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th July 2016

