
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02568/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 19 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     ZTH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Naveed, RW Anderson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I  continue  that
order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the respondent on 28 March 2014  to
    refuse her application for asylum and to remove her from the UK.  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal C M Phillips dismissed the appeal.

 2. The appellant was granted a  visit  visa  and  entered  the  UK  on  29
    November 2008. She applied for asylum in 27 February  2009.  The  basis
    for her claim is that she  was  the  victim  of  domestic  violence  in
    Pakistan and that her husband reported her to the police informing them
    that she committed  adultery,  theft  and  kidnapping.  The  respondent
    accepted  the  appellant's  identity  and  nationality.   However   the
    respondent did not accept that the appellant's claim is credible due to
    inconsistencies in her account. The respondent also took account of the
    fact that the  appellant's  husband  had  previously  applied  on  four
    occasions for visit visas for him and the appellant to visit  a  friend
    in the UK. Two of the applications were refused and two  were  granted.
    It was not accepted that the appellant was wanted by the authorities in
    Pakistan as she did not adduce evidence that she had been summoned to a
    court in Lahore as claimed and she was able to leave Pakistan using her
    own passport.

 3. The appellant and two witnesses gave oral evidence  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal Judge took into account the fact that
    the  appellant  had  not  produced  any  evidence  of  the  outstanding
    proceedings against her in Pakistan or of  the  property  dispute.  The
    Judge took into account the fact that the appellant had  not  explained
    her countervailing immigration history, in particular the fact that the
    appellant and her husband had applied  for  visit  visa  together.  The
    Judge considered that the appellant's  account  was  inconsistent,  for
    example in relation to her name and that of her father. The Judge noted
    that there was no medical evidence to  support  the  appellant's  claim
    that she had mental health problems which affected her asylum interview
    and no up-to-date medical evidence dealing with her mental health.  The
    Judge found that the appellant had not made out  her  core  claim.  The
    Judge further found  that  internal  relocation  is  available  to  the
    appellant in Pakistan. Her appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights was dismissed.

 4. At the outset of the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Naveed  applied  for  an
    adjournment of the hearing as the appellant was  expecting  to  receive
    documents from Pakistan that day or the following  day.  I  refused  to
    grant that application as new evidence was not relevant  to  the  first
    issue I had to determine, which  is  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made a material error of law in her decision.

Error of law

 5. The first ground of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  contends  that  the
    Judge erred in her findings of fact. It is  contended  that  the  Judge
    failed to consider the appellant's claim that her husband registered  a
    criminal case against her accusing  her  of  adultery,  kidnapping  and
    theft. Mr Naveed submitted that the Judge considered the whole case  on
    the basis of the property dispute and that she failed to  consider  the
    main part of the claim  that  the  appellant  is  subject  of  criminal
    proceedings. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that all the elements of the
    appellant's claim were identified and that the Judge did  consider  the
    claim that criminal proceedings were outstanding.

 6. It is clear that the Judge did consider this matter properly. The Judge
    correctly set out the basis of the appellant's  claim  at  paragraph  3
    where she refereed to  the  claim  that  the  appellant's  husband  had
    reported her to the police in  relation  to  adultery,  kidnapping  and
    theft. The Judge considered  this  claim  at  paragraph  80  where  she
    referred to the involvement of the police, paragraph 81 where she  said
    that there was no evidence  to  support  the  appellant's  claims  that
    include a claim that there are proceedings outstanding against  her  in
    Pakistan and that there is a property dispute. The  Judge  referred  to
    both issues again at paragraph 82 and at paragraph 93. I  am  therefore
    satisfied that the Judge made no factual error as to the nature of  the
    appellant's claim and that the Judge fully considered this part of  the
    appellant's claim.

 7. It is contended that the Judge erred in fact  in  that  she  failed  to
    consider that the appellant left her husband on 17  November  2008  and
    went to Okara with her children and then left Pakistan on  29  November
    2008 and that she did not intend to leave  her  husband  when  she  was
    issued with the visit visa in September 2008. Mr Naveed submitted  that
    the Judge failed to consider that the problems  between  the  appellant
    and her husband came after the visa was granted, between September  and
    November 2008. However Ms Willocks-Briscoe referred to the  summary  of
    the appellant's evidence at paragraph 7(h) of the Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter which refers to the witness statement and the  asylum  interview
    where the appellant said that she left her husband in August  2008.  In
    her asylum interview the appellant said that she left her husband on 18
    August 2008 [Q100]. It was therefore open to the Judge to take  account
    of the fact that the appellant's application for a visit visa, made  on
    1 September 2008, with the assistance of her  husband  [82],  was  made
    after she claims to have left her husband.

 8. It is contended in the grounds of  appeal  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider the appellant's physical and mental health  problems.   It  is
    contended that the Judge erred in failing to consider  the  appellant's
    medical problems, in particular her mental  health  problems,  and  the
    effect of these problems upon her memory. Mr Naveed submitted that  the
    appellant's mental health problems have developed gradually and she has
    lost her memory. Mr Naveed submitted that the Judge ignored the medical
    report dated 12 November 2014 from Dr Razia Hussein. However the  Judge
    did refer to that evidence at paragraph 47 of  the  determination.  The
    Judge referred to the report and its predecessor again at paragraphs 55
    and 56. Further, there was nothing in  that  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claim that she had an issue with  her  memory  such  as  to
    affect her ability to give her account in her asylum  interview.  I  am
    satisfied that the Judge considered all of  the  medical  evidence  and
    reached conclusions open to her on that evidence at paragraphs 88-91 of
    the determination.

 9. It is contended that the Judge erred in her finding in relation to  the
    appellant's father's name and in relation to the appellant's own  name.
    Mr Naveed submitted that the appellant's passport correctly states  the
    appellant's husband's name and not that of  her  father.  He  submitted
    that there was no discrepancy  in  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's own name.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe pointed to  the  appellant's
    passport at B5 of the respondent's bundle which states the  appellant's
    father's name as being that of her husband. However the  copy  passport
    in the respondent's bundle is of poor  quality  and  it  is  not  clear
    whether the appellant's father's name or husband's name  is  given.  In
    any event there is a discrepancy in the previous visa  applications  in
    that the application made on 1 September 2008  giving  the  appellant's
    father's name as that of her husband. The further discrepancy noted  by
    the Judge in relation to the appellant's son's visa  application  where
    the name he gave for his mother is not consistent  with  her  name  was
    open to her on the evidence. Given that there  are  inconsistencies  in
    relation to this evidence the Judge did not make any material error  in
    finding that the appellant's account of her name and that of her father
    has been inconsistent [84].

10. The grounds of appeal contend that the Judge erred in failing to  apply
    the rationale of  the  decisions  in  AW  (Sufficiency  of  Protection)
    Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC),  KA and Others (domestic violence - risk
    on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC), and SN and  HM  (Divorced
    women - risk on return) Pakistan CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00283.  However  Mr
    Naveed did  not  explain  how  the  Judge  could  have  considered  the
    decisions in these cases given  her  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
    credibility. In any event the Judge identified the  relevant  case  law
    and considered it in the context of her credibility findings [95].

11. The grounds of appeal further contend that the Judge erred in assessing
    the reasonableness of internal relocation in that she  failed  to  take
    account of the FIR registered against the appellant and that a case  of
    adultery has been taken against her. The Judge went on to consider  the
    issue of internal relocation in the alternative taking the  appellant's
    claim at its highest and considered all relevant issues [97].

12. The grounds of appeal contend that the Judge failed  to  consider  that
    the appellant has established a private and family life in the  UK.  Mr
    Naveed submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    relationship between the appellant and the witness with  whom  she  has
    been living. The grounds contend that the Judge failed to take  account
    of the delay in the asylum process. Mr Naveed submitted that the  delay
    of more than 5 years by the Home Office should have been considered.

13. However the Judge refers to the fact that the appellant has been living
    with her friend [100]. The  Judge  was  entitled  on  the  evidence  to
    conclude that the appellant has not established a family  life  in  the
    UK. She considered the appellant's private life within and  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules. She considered the delay in the consideration of
    the appellant's claim for asylum and the medical evidence [103].  I  am
    satisfied that the Judge did properly direct  herself  to  all  of  the
    relevant factors in  carrying  out  the  proportionality  exercise  and
    reached a conclusion open to her on the basis of the evidence.

14. It is contended in the grounds of appeal that the  Judge  breached  her
    duty to act fairly. However this is a bare assertion and Mr Naveed  did
    not expand upon it in his oral submissions. I find that this ground has
    not been made out.

15. The Judge was therefore entitled to conclude as she did and dismiss the
    appellant's appeal for the reasons provided.

Conclusion:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.


Signed      Date:  17 November 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


