
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02471/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 14th September 2015               |On 21st September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MRS J I
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mrs U Sood (Instructed by 1st call Immigration
Services)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of  State,
    with permission, against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Devlin promulgated on 4th June 2015 in which he allowed the Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to grant her
    and her dependant husband and three children leave  to  remain  outside
    the Rules.  Judge Devlin allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds  based
    on the medical condition of one of the children.

2.   The grounds argue that the Judge erred at paragraphs 113 - 119  of  his
    decision where he found that the evidence relied upon by the  Secretary
    of State that the drug,  Levetiracetam  is  available  in  Nigeria  was
    unreliable.  It is asserted that his reliance on RP (proof of  Forgery)
    Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086 is misplaced and that he  has  reversed  the
    burden of proof.  The burden is on the Appellant to show that the  drug
    is unavailable.

3.    Secondly,  the  grounds  assert  that  he  Judge   erred   in   giving
    insufficient weight to the "public interest"  factors  as  set  out  in
    s.117  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   In
    particular he gave insufficient weight to the fact that the family  was
    in the UK illegally and thus little weight should be given  to  private
    life.  He erred in giving credit to the husband for working when he was
    working illegally and that the family had already been a burden on  the
    state as a result of education and the NHS.

4.   The grounds also assert that the  Judge  erred  in  allowing  a  health
    claim and that his conclusions on what would  happen  in  Nigeria  were
    speculative and hypothetical.

5.   I have read the Decision and Reasons with care.   It  is  a  meticulous
    assessment of  the  claim  taking  full  account  of  legislation,  the
    Immigration Rules and case law.  The grounds are simply not made out.

6.   The Judge set out the claim and the evidence before him which  included
    a considerable amount of medical evidence in relation to one child  who
    was diagnosed at 5 months of age with "West Syndrome" which is  a  rare
    form of epileptic disorder in infants.  He  has  as  a  result  of  his
    illness required emergency treatment more than once  and  has  required
    emergency rescue medication.  It is clear that the treating  team  have
    tried various anti-convulsant medications and found  the  current  one,
    Levetiracetam, the most effective to date.  It is also clear  that  the
    child needs access to expert medical care with a knowledge of his  rare
    condition quickly.  Seizures are likely to result in  brain  damage  or
    death if not rapidly controlled.

7.   So far as the availability of the medication in Nigeria  is  concerned,
    the  Judge  has  not  erred  as  suggested.   He  has   given   careful
    consideration to what the WHO says as quoted in the Letter  of  Refusal
    and noted no mention is made of Levetiracetam .  The medications listed
    are the more common anti convulsive drugs.  Those  are  not  what  this
    child requires.  The Judge notes that although the  Letter  of  Refusal
    refers to evidence from Drs that  the  medication  is  available,  that
    evidence was not produced.  He was entitled on that basis to prefer the
    other evidence that indicated it was unavailable.  He did  not  reverse
    the  burden  of  proof  but  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  evidence
    established,  to  the  required  standard,  that  the  medication   was
    unavailable.

8.   So far as the public interest and s.117 is concerned it is  clear  that
    the Judge was well aware of his duty.  He set out at great length  that
    for the rest of the family there were no obstacles  to  their  removal,
    even the children.  He catalogued the poor immigration history  and  it
    is plain that, absent the medical condition of the one child, he  would
    have dismissed the appeal.

9.   The evidence about the child's condition was  extensive  including  the
    real risk of death without the appropriate treatment and the  evidence,
    again which was set out in detail pointed to it being unavailable.

10.  The Judge did note that father was working.  However he was aware  that
    this was illegal and that as on overstayer he had  no  right  to  work.
    Nevertheless he was supporting his family, a factor that the Judge  was
    entitled to take into account.

11.  The determination, running to 24 pages does not suffer  from  "padding"
    but is in its entirety dealing with the issues and  the  relevant  law.
    It is a meticulous assessment of the  case  and  contains  no  material
    error of law. It does not run counter to statute or case law, which the
    decision demonstrates, the Judge was  fully  aware  of  and  took  into
    account.

12.  The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity  direction  I  see  no
    reason not to continue it.


Signed   Dated 15th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction regarding anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed   Dated 15th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

