

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
AA/02164/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                    |Promulgated                         |
|On 14 March 2016                    |        On 7 April 2016             |
|                                    |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                        OMAR ABBAS MESHOAH AL-AZZAWI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Ms C Bayarti instructed by Thakrar & Co
For the Respondent:        Mr Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicol promulgated on 21 July 2015
   which  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Respondent to remove the Appellant from the UK following the decision  to
   refuse the Appellant's claim for asylum

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 17 August 1982 in Baghdad and is a national  of
   Iraq and a Sunni Muslim. The Appellant was  educated  to  Masters  Degree
   level.
4. The Appellant had lived in one of the last Sunni communities  in  Baghdad
   surrounded by Shi'a. His area was regularly attacked by  sectarian  Shi'a
   militia. The Appellant was easily identified  as  Sunni  because  he  was
   called Omar.
5. In September 2013 the Appellant was awarded a  fully  funded  scholarship
   to complete a PhD in the UK, USA or Australia. He was offered a place  on
   a course at Manchester University in Geotechnical Engineering.
6. The Appellant was employed by the Central Bank of Iraq and  worked  on  a
   project that entailed meetings in London with architects.
7. The Appellant came to the UK on 3 March 2014 for 10 days. On  his  return
   to Iraq the atmosphere at work had changed and questions were asked as to
   why as a Sunni he had been allowed to travel  to  London.  The  Appellant
   believed that this caused him to be identified by members  of  the  Shi'a
   militias who had infiltrated government organisations such as the bank he
   worked for.
8. In April 2014 the Appellant applied for a 6 month business visa  for  the
   UK and he intended to come on 14 June 2014.
9. The capture of Mosul  on  10  June  2014  by  ISIS  increased  Shia/Sunni
   tensions in Baghdad and the targeting of Sunnis increased.
10. 6 July 2014 the Appellant was told by a colleague not to return to  work
   as it was not safe. He told him Shi'a militia had been  making  enquiries
   about him. The Appellant went to stay with a friend in  another  area  of
   the city for 5 days. His friend advised him to leave Baghdad  and  go  to
   the UK because of the upturn in sectarian violence in the city.
11. 8 July 2014 the friend gave him air tickets and offered to arrange  safe
   travel to the airport of $3000. The Appellant left  Baghdad  on  11  July
   2014.
12. 18 July 2014  Shi'a  militia  visited  his  neighbourhood  and  a  group
   visited his home on 20 July 2014 asking about him and fired shots in  the
   house. His father was told the Appellant should  be  there  in  72  hours
   because his father had not told them he  was  not  in  the  country.  The
   militia returned on two other occasions asking neighbours about him.
13. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he  feared  being  killed
   by the Asai'b Ahl Al Haq Shia militia because  of  his  Sunni  ethnicity,
   because f his name and his position in the bank. The  Appellant  believes
   he could not relocate as he would need a personal guarantee  to  move  to
   Erbil or the KRG.
14. On 22 August 2014 the Appellant applied for asylum.
15. On 14  March  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) The increase in sectarian tensions and violence between  June  -August
      2014 was acknowledged but the  evidence  showed  that  the  levels  of
      violence in non-disputed areas such as Baghdad have  since  dissipated
      to previous levels.
   b) Reliance was placed on HM and Others (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2012]
      UKUT 00409(IAC) to show that show that the Appellant was not  at  risk
      simply because he was a Sunni or because of the security situation.
   c) In relation to the Appellants claim that  there  are  additional  risk
      factors relating to him such as his employment at the Central Bank and
      his  authorship  of  scientific  papers  was  not  supported  by   the
      background material that suggested that the insurgents targeted  other
      groups.
   d) The Appellants claim that his  name,  Omar,  was  an  additional  risk
      factor was not accepted as the evidence and case law state that  being
      identified as Sunni does not of itself place a person at risk
   e) It was not accepted that the Appellant has given a truthful account of
      the circumstances in which he left Iraq because:  he failed  to  claim
      asylum promptly on arrival; it was not credible that the militia would
      wait to  visit  his  home  after  he  left  rather  than  before;  the
      Appellants claim that he was forced to flee was inconsistent with  the
      fact that he took the time  to  gather  photographs  and  certificates
      before he left; his claim that he came to the UK intending  to  return
      after 14 days is not credible as he could not have expected matters to
      resolve within that time; the photographs submitted of damage  to  his
      home do not add to his claim as there is no evidence that  it  is  his
      home and given the violence of the past decade it is unlikely any home
      in Baghdad is undamaged.
   f) Even if his claim were  accepted  at  its  highest  it  would  not  be
      unreasonable for the Appellant to relocate to another Sunni  community
      in Iraq or to the KRG where his lack of connections or a sponsor would
      be no bar to relocation  on  the  basis  of  the  background  material
      particularly given that the Appellant is a healthy well educated  male
      in possession of all of the required travel and ID documents.


The Judge's Decision
16. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Nicol ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision on asylum, humanitarian and human rights grounds. The Judge:
   a) Set out the law .
   b) Set out what the Appellant claimed in his asylum interview.
   c) Set out his oral evidence.
   d) Stated that he had read the expert report of Dr Fatah.
   e) Confirmed that submissions were made.
   f) Under the heading Asylum Appeal at 29-31 again sets out the Appellants
      claim.
   g) At paragraph 32 states that he finds the Appellants account to be true
      and there is a realistic risk of him suffering harm on return.
   h) In  relation  to  relocation  at  paragraph  33  he  states  that  the
      Respondent 'had not shown  that  the  Appellant  could  travel  safely
      within Iraq.'
   i) He accepted that the Appellant had given an explanation for  his  late
      claim
17. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :
   a) The Judge had failed to give reasons for findings on material  matters
      in that he gave no reasons for accepting the  Appellants  account  was
      true but simply made a bare statement that he found his account to  be
      true.
   b) The Judge had also failed to identify and resolve key conflicts in the
      evidence and explain why he preferred one version to the other as  set
      out in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)
   c) In considering the viability of  relocation  the  Judge  reversed  the
      burden of proof requiring the Respondent to show that it was safe  for
      the Appellant to relocate.
18.  On 7 August 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes  gave  permission  to
   appeal.
19. There is a Rule 24 Response drafted by Ms Bayarti which states:
   a) The challenge that the reasons are inadequate fails  to  consider  the
      whole decision simply focusing on paragraph 32 and does not take  into
      account  the  Judges  detailed  record  of  the  Appellants  oral  and
      documentary evidence.
   b) It is accepted that in relation to relocation the Judge erred  in  law
      as to the burden of proof however the error is  not  material  because
      even had he approached it correctly the result  would  have  been  the
      same.

20. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Duffy  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that:

   a) He relied on the grounds as drafted.

   b) At paragraph 32 the Judge makes  a  finding  that  being  a  Sunni  in
      Baghdad the Appellant is at risk without making findings as to why. He
      does not reconcile his finding with either the caselaw  or  background
      material.

   c) There is a complete absence of reasoning.

   d) He conceded that the  Respondent  did  not  seek  to  argue  that  the
      Appellant should relocate outside of Baghdad so the error in  relation
      to that falls away.

21. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Bayarti submitted that :

   a) The decision must be looked at as a whole in that the  Judge  accepted
      the Appellant was at risk as a Sunni with the name Omar.

   b) This Appellants case was that his personal history would lead  to  him
      being targeted and this was supported by the  expert  report  from  Dr
      Fatah.

   c) The decision did not support the contention that every  Sunni  was  at
      risk because not every Sunni was immediately identifiable as a Sunni.

   d)  The CG relied on by the Respondent  was  about  Article  15  (c)  not
      whether being a Sunni put an applicant at risk.

   e) The Secretary of State rejected part of the Appellants  account  based
      on plausibility but the Judge on the basis of the Appellants  evidence
      and that of the expert report of Dr Fatah  found  his  account  to  be
      credible. He was entitled to make that finding.

   f) His conclusion was that having accepted his account the Appellant  was
      an immediately identifiable Sunni who had previously been targeted  he
      would be at risk on return.

22. In reply Mr Duffy on behalf of the Respondent submitted

   a) AA was indeed about Article 15(c) but  paragraph  22  stated  that  it
      replaced all current country guidance on Iraq. Thus  if  there  was  a
      risk to Sunnis because they bore the name  Omar  it  would  have  been
      addressed given the number of Sunnis in Baghdad.

   b) The Judge found the Appellant at risk simply because he  was  a  Sunni
      and given they are 20% of Baghdad's population such a  risk  would  be
      addressed in AA.

The Law

23.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

24. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.
25. As to the requirement to provide reasons in a decision and  address  and
   engage with  MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),
   it was held that (i) It was  axiomatic  that  a  determination  disclosed
   clearly the reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a  tribunal  found
   oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or  a  document
   to be worth no weight whatsoever, it was  necessary  to  say  so  in  the
   determination and for such findings to be supported by  reasons.  A  bare
   statement that a witness was not believed or that a document was afforded
   no weight was unlikely to satisfy the requirement to  give  reasons.  The
   Respondent also relied on Budhathoki  where it is stated :
    ".   It is,  however,  necessary  for  First-tier  Tribunal  judges  to
    identify and resolve the key conflicts in the evidence and  explain  in
    clear and brief terms their reasons for  preferring  one  case  to  the
    other so that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.




Finding on Material Error

26. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law as the reasons given for the limited
   findings are wholly inadequate.

27. I do not propose to address the error  of  law  made  by  the  Judge  in
   relation to relocation because the Respondent  through  Mr  Duffy  accept
   that there is no question of the Appellant living other than  in  Baghdad
   so the error is not material to the outcome.

28. The refusal letter in this case incorporated a number of  challenges  at
   paragraphs 6-20, which I have analysed in more detail at 14(a)-(f)  above
   which relate to the core of the Appellants claim. These challenges, based
   on both case  law  and  background  material,  were  to  the  Appellant's
   assertions as to the increasing levels of sectarian violence in  Baghdad,
   that being a Sunni per se put the Appellant at risk, that his  employment
   put him at further risk, his name putting him at additional risk  ,  that
   militia had targeted his home and his intentions on arrival in the UK.

29. While the Judge set out the Appellants claim and the  oral  evidence  at
   some length there is no identification  or  analysis  of  the  challenges
   raised by the Respondent merely a bare assertion in paragraph 5  that  he
   did not qualify for asylum. In the  Judges  findings  under  the  heading
   'asylum appeal' there is only one paragraph  that  can  be  described  as
   findings (paragraph 32) as the rest simply re state his case.  I  do  not
   accept Ms Bayarti's assertion that this decision is improved  by  reading
   it as a whole as there is a requirement  to  make  findings  on  disputed
   evidence. Paragraph 32, 7 lines  long,  is  a  bare  assertion  that  the
   Appellants account is true with no attempt to identify the  identify  and
   resolve the key conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief
   terms his reasons for preferring the Appellants account and that  of  the
   expert witness over the background material and case law relied on by the
   Respondent.

30. The failure of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  provide  adequate  reasons
   constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider  to  be  material
   since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise  the  outcome  could  have
   been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

31. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

32. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

33. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
   the findings of fact are wholly inadequate  and  the  matter  will  be  a
   complete re hearing.

34. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed, before me.

Signed                                                              Date
28.3.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

















