

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02378/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 June 2013                               |On 28 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                             MR ALI VOSSOUGHRAD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T Hodson, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr. N Bramble, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 24 May 1982.  His appeal
    against the respondent's decision on 27 February 2013 to refuse him
    asylum and to remove him from the UK as an illegal entrant was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole in a
    determination promulgated on 24 April 2013

2.   The Judge found the appellant's claim to be implausible and placed no
    weight on the documents relied on by the appellant.

3.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal the Judge's decision on
    grounds that argued that the Judge failed to consider evidence
    contained in the appellant's witness statement and what he said in his
    interview.  Therefore the Judge failed to consider the appellant's
    claims with sufficient care and anxious scrutiny, in the round and in
    relation to all the evidence in accordance with and applying the
    correct lower standard of proof.

4.   The respondent in the Rule 24 reply did not oppose the appellant's
    application for permission to appeal.

5.   Both parties agreed that the case be remitted to Taylor House for re-
    hearing by a different Judge.


DIRECTIONS

Date of hearing is 9 October 2013

Time Estimate - 2 hours

1 witness

Interpreter in the Farsi language required

A consolidated bundle of all documents to be relied on by the appellant
should be submitted to the Tribunal 7 days before the hearing.  Any
document not in English should be translated.





UT Judge Eshun
27 June 2013





