
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02342/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Given extempore on 28 November 2016  |On 6th December 2016                 |
|Signed and sent to Promulgation      |                                     |
|on 5th December, 2016.               |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  Mazza [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Logan of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeatie a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is a citizen  of  Sudan  born  on  26  May
    1977.

2.   She claimed asylum in the basis that she  would  face  mistreatment  in
    Sudan due to her  imputed  political  opinion,  because  she  helped  a
    political youth group by allowing them  to  use  her  laboratory.   Her
    application to the respondent was dismissed  and  on  27  January  2015
    served notice of refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom.

3.   The appellant subsequently appealed against the  respondent's  decision
    and her appeal was heard in Manchester by First-tier Tribunal G D Tobin
    on 17 February 2016.

4.   The judge dismissed the appeal, but in doing  so  failed  to  make  any
    findings in respect of the evidence of  a  Mr  Alabas,  who  gave  oral
    evidence to the judge on behalf  of  the  appellant.   The  appellant's
    grounds of appeal also allege  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the background evidence placed before him  on  the  appellant's
    behalf.

5.   I do not believe there to be any merit in that  claim  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account the background evidence before  making  the
    decision, since at paragraph 10 of the judge's determination, the judge
    clearly  indicates  that  he  has  read  all  the  documents  prior  to
    commencing the hearing of the case and in paragraph 24 his reference to
    journalists, editors and newspaper proprietors  having  been  arrested,
    demonstrates that he clearly has considered the background evidence.

6.   However his failure to deal with the oral evidence  he  heard  from  Mr
    Alabas does amount to an error on a point of law.  It is  by  no  means
    clear what the oral evidence of Mr Alabas was.  In  the  circumstances,
    and with the consent of the representative's, I have decided  that  the
    most appropriate course of action is for me to set  aside  the  judge's
    decision and to remit this appeal for hearing afresh by the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  An Arabic interpreter will be required and two hours  should
    be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the judge's decision  and  to  remit  this  appeal  for  hearing
afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley                          Date:  6th  December
2016


