
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02052/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2016                    |On 18th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                            MISS EDITH MAPANZURE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D Mtisi, Globetrot Consultancy Services
For the Respondent:    Mr. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Pacey promulgated on 28th April 2015,  in  which  she  dismissed  the
       appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department of 14th January 2015, to refuse the appellant's claim  for
       asylum, humanitarian protection and on Article 8 grounds.


Background


    2. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  She travelled to the UK via
       South Africa and arrived in the UK on 12th November 2002, at the  age
       of 19.  She was granted leave to enter for one year and then received
       a number of successive grants of leave to remain  in  the  UK,  as  a
       student nurse.  She was last granted leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
       student until 7th October 2011.  In November 2012 the appellant  made
       a claim for asylum and it was the  respondent's  decision  upon  that
       claim, that gave rise to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    3. The appellant attended the hearing of her appeal  before  the  First-
       tier  Tribunal.   She  was  represented.   The  Judge  sets  out  the
       background to the appeal before her at paragraphs [1] to [4]  of  her
       decision.  A summary of the appellant's claim and the evidence before
       the First-tier Tribunal is to be found at paragraphs [6] to  [18]  of
       the Judge's decision.  The Judge records her findings  at  paragraphs
       [30] to [38] of her decision.  The  Judge  accepted  the  appellant's
       account of events in Zimbabwe to be credible.


    4.  Having  accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  events,  the  Judge
       considered  whether  the  appellant  has  a  well-founded   fear   of
       persecution for a convention reason, if returned  to  Zimbabwe.   The
       Judge addressed the risk upon return  by  reference  to  the  country
       guidance set out in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG
       [2013] UKUT 00059.  The Judge held;


             "43. ... the Appellant has no significant MDC profile. She was
             not politically active in Zimbabwe and had no  connections  to
             MDC. In the UK she has been involved with the non-partisan ZAS
             and although Mr Muzuwa, of that organization,  is  a  founding
             member of  MDC,  I  accept  that  the  two  organisations  are
             separate. Moreover,  on  the  oral  evidence  the  Appellant's
             profile in ZAS is not such as to draw her to the attention  of
             the authorities in Zimbabwe on return.


             44.  ... the Appellant does have Zanu PF  connections  in  the
             form of her grandfather, in his rural  area  of  Masvingo  and
             would, therefore, following CM, not come to adverse attention.




             45.  She lived and was educated in Bulawayo  and  hence  could
             reasonably return there, where, following CM,  she  would  not
             suffer adverse attention.


             ...


             47.  The Appellant said at her asylum interview that  she  had
             had no problems in Bulawayo from Zanu PF  and  none  other  in
             Masvingo when staying with her grandfather.


             48.  There is no evidence, then, that she would be treated  as
             a supporter of the regime's and persecuted on that account.  I
             note that she left the country using her own passport, and was
             not detained at the airport as it is reasonable to suppose she
             would  have  been  had  she  come  to  the  attention  of  the
             authorities.


             49.  I accept that  the  assault  and  rape  occurred  as  the
             Appellant said, but on the evidence before  me,  she  has  not
             established,  even  to  the  lower  standard,  that  this  was
             politically  motivated,  rather   than   being   fundamentally
             criminal behaviour.


             50.  The Appellant said at her screening  interview  that  she
             could  not  return  to  Masvingo  because  it  is  a  Zanu  PF
             stronghold. Moreover,  country  guidance  indicates  that  she
             could return to Bulawayo, a city with which she is familiar.


             51.  For the above reasons, I find that she would  not  be  at
             risk on return."


    5. The Judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


    6. Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 13th July 2015. The matter comes before  me
       to consider whether or not the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Pacey involved the making of a material error of law, and if  so,  to
       remake the decision.  The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response  in
       which she confirms that the appeal is opposed.


The Grounds of Appeal and the hearing of the appeal before me


    7. The appellant claims that the Judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider
       whether the appellant is at risk upon return as a single  female  who
       would have no family support network were she to return to  Zimbabwe.
       The appellant claims that her evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
       was that her mother is no longer living in Bulawayo and that she does
       not know where her mother is now living.  The appellant  states  that
       she is from the Shona tribe from Masvingo.  Bulawayo is predominantly
       populated by the  Ndebele  tribe,  which  means  that  she  would  be
       isolated as a young single woman returning to a city where she is  in
       a minority group, after a 12-year absence.   She  has  no  family  or
       support  network  in  Bulawayo.   The  appellant  contends  that  the
       connections that she has with her grandfather are purely  biological,
       and do not offer her any protection  from  the  Zanu-PF  or  for  any
       financial support, given his own age.


    8. The appellant claims  that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
       appellant has no significant political profile.  She  refers  to  her
       activities in the UK with ZAS and she  claims  that  the  authorities
       would regard her as being against ZANU-PF even if she holds a neutral
       opinion.  The appellant contends that after an absence  of  12  years
       from Zimbabwe, she would be viewed with suspicion.


    9. The appellant  claims  that  having  found  that  the  appellant  was
       assaulted and raped as she had claimed, the Judge  erred  in  finding
       that that was fundamentally  criminal  behaviour  rather  than  being
       politically motivated.  The rape  was  perpetrated  by  the  National
       Youth Service, that are part of the Zanu-PF.


   10. Finally, the Judge erred in concluding that  the  appellant  had  not
       substantively argued her Article 8  claim.   The  appellant  contends
       that the Article 8 claim was advanced  in  the  submissions  made  in
       writing in the appellant's skeleton argument, and again in  the  oral
       submissions made to the Judge.  The appellant  claims  that  she  had
       almost completed 10 years of lawful leave to remain, which would have
       been grounds for applying for indefinite leave to remain.


   11. At the hearing before me, Mr Mtisi relied upon  a  skeleton  argument
       dated 4th April 2016 in which he identifies what he considered to  be
       issues in the appeal.   He accepts that the appellant has  previously
       had no problems when  she  was  living  in  Bulawayo.    However,  he
       submits that the appellant had confirmed in her asylum interview  (Q.
       13-14) that she last had contact with her mother and siblings  in  or
       around 2006, and when asked why she had not had contact  since  then,
       the appellant had claimed that they had moved  from  Bulawayo.    The
       appellant had said during that interview that her mother was planning
       to go to Mozambique because it was getting violent in  Masvingo.   He
       submits that if the appellant were  returned  to  Zimbabwe  now,  she
       would therefore be returning to Bulawayo as a lone single woman  with
       no family network or support.  He  refers  to  the  country  guidance
       decision of CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]
       UKUT 00059 and submits that whilst the Judge had regard  to  headnote
       [6], she did not have regard to the matters set out at  headnote  [8]
       in assessing the  risk  upon  return.   Mr  Mtisi  submits  that  the
       appellant has no home and that she will be destitute. He submits that
       the unemployment rate remains high, and  that  the  Judge  fell  into
       error when she proceeded on the basis that the appellant  has  family
       that remain in Bulawayo.


   12. Mr Mtisi submits that the  appellant  had  previously  attracted  the
       adverse attention of the authorities in Masvingo notwithstanding  her
       association with her grandfather. He  submits  that  the  appellant's
       grandfather had simply negotiated her release, without being able  to
       do any more for her. He  submits  that  the  appellant's  grandfather
       could not call for sanctions against the militia for violation of his
       granddaughter's well-being. He submits that in  any  event,  whatever
       nominal protection the appellant's grandfather might have  been  able
       to provide in the past, will not now be available given  the  passage
       of time and his advanced age.


   13. Mr Mtisi accepts that when the appellant left Zimbabwe, she  did  not
       have a significant political  profile.    He  submits  that  she  was
       however detained for 3 hours, and that information will  continue  to
       be held by the authorities. He submits  that  the  Judge  erroneously
       focussed upon whether the appellant has a MDC profile, and failed  to
       consider whether those involved in civil organisations such  as  ZAS,
       might be at risk upon return.


   14. Mr Mtisi submits that having accepted that  the  appellant  had  been
       assaulted and raped as claimed by the appellant, there was no  reason
       for the judge to find that the rape was  not  politically  motivated.
       He submits that if, as the Judge found, the rape had  been  a  random
       criminal act, the appellant would have  been  able  to  approach  her
       grandfather.    She had not been able to do so because the  rape  was
       politically motivated.


   15. Finally, Mr Mtisi submits that the appellant's Article 8 claim stands
       and falls with   the  findings  as  to  whether  she  can  return  to
       Bulawayo. He concedes that the appellant is  unable  to  satisfy  the
       requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph   276ADE(1)   of   the
       Immigration Rules.    He  accepts  that  if  it  is  found  that  the
       appellant is not at risk upon return to Zimbabwe,  there  is  nothing
       exceptional or compelling about  her  Article  8  claim,  that  would
       enable such a claim to succeed outwith the immigration rules.


   16. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response dated 13th  August  2015.
       The respondent submits that in addressing the risk upon  return,  the
       Judge correctly decided the appeal by reference  to  the  appellant's
       evidence and the country guidance decision  of  CM.   The  respondent
       submits that the findings made were open to the Judge, and  if  there
       is any error in the Judge's finding that the appellant would  not  be
       at risk were she to return to Masvingo, such an error  is  immaterial
       since the Judge also found that the appellant can return to Bulawayo.
        The respondent submits that it does  not  follow  from  the  Judge's
       finding that the assault and rape occurred, that the Judge was  bound
       to find that the rape and assault, were politically motivated.


   17. Mr Whitwell adopted  the  Rule  24  response  and  submits  that  the
       submissions made before me on behalf of the appellant, and as set out
       in the appellant's skeleton argument proceed as if the hearing before
       me is a rehearing of the appeal. He submits that a careful reading of
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  does  not  disclose  a
       material error of law. He submits that the appellant  did  not  claim
       before the First-tier Tribunal that she is at risk as a lone  female,
       that cannot return to Bulawayo.   He submits that it was open to  the
       Judge to find that the appellant had faced no  previous  problems  in
       Bulawayo. The appellant has previous connections to Bulawayo, and she
       would be returning to a place where she  has  lived  previously,  and
       where she had family connections including her mother and siblings.


   18. Mr Whitwell submits that it was open to the Judge to  find  that  the
       rape and assault of the appellant  was  a  random  criminal  act.  He
       submits that the Judge carefully considered the  appellant's  account
       of events and the appellant now simply disagrees with a finding  that
       was properly open to the Judge.


Discussion


   19. The appellant is a Shona and in her  screening  interview,  confirmed
       that her last address in Zimbabwe was in Bulawayo.  In her  statement
       of 7th December 2012, the  appellant  claimed  that  her  mother  and
       siblings had all left Zimbabwe and she  has  now  lost  contact  with
       them.  During the course of her interview on 7th December  2012,  the
       appellant confirmed (Q.10 & 11) that prior to coming to the  UK,  she
       had lived in Zimbabwe with her mother and 3 siblings at an address in
       Bulawayo.  She was asked where her mother and siblings are  now,  and
       she stated "I'm not sure".  She claimed to have last been in  contact
       with them in around 2006 and when asked why she had not  had  contact
       since 2006 with her mother and  siblings  (Q.14)  she  replied  "they
       moved from Bulawayo. She was planning to go to Mozambique because  it
       was getting violent in Masvingo where we went  in  the  holidays  and
       Masvingo is  close  to  Bulawayo  &  she  is  trying  to  protect  my
       siblings".   When asked whether the appellant knew if her mother  and
       siblings have reached Mozambique (Q.16) she replied "I'm not sure".


   20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  the  appellant's  account  of
       events  in  Zimbabwe  and  having  noted  that  the  appellant  fears
       persecution on account of her imputed political opinion, went  on  to
       consider  whether  the  appellant  has  a  well-  founded   fear   of
       persecution.  She did so by reference to the guidance set out  in  CM
       (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059.   It
       is useful at this point to set out the relevant part of the  guidance
       as set out in the headnote:


             The EM Country Guidance is, accordingly, re-stated as  follows
             (with the change underlined in paragraph (5) below):


             (1)   As  a  general  matter,  there  is  significantly   less
             politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with  the
             situation considered by the AIT in  RN.   In  particular,  the
             evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the  return
             of a failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom,  having  no
             significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing  a
             real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


             (2) The position is, however, likely to be  otherwise  in  the
             case of a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from
             the United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area
             of Zimbabwe, other than  Matabeleland  North  or  Matabeleland
             South. Such a person may  well  find  it  difficult  to  avoid
             adverse attention, amounting to  serious  ill-treatment,  from
             ZANU-PF authority figures and those they control.  The adverse
             attention  may  well  involve  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm  in  the
             event of failure.  Persons who have shown themselves not to be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled  to  international
             protection, whether or not they could and  would  do  whatever
             might  be  necessary   to   demonstrate   such   loyalty   (RT
             (Zimbabwe)).


             .....


             (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in  general  not  suffer  the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, including the  security  forces,
             even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.


             (7)  The issue of what is a person's home for the purposes  of
             internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and
             is not necessarily to be determined by reference to the  place
             a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her  rural  homeland.
             As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person with a well-
             founded fear of persecution in a major urban  centre  such  as
             Harare will have a viable internal relocation alternative to a
             rural  area  in   the   Eastern   provinces.   Relocation   to
             Matabeleland  (including   Bulawayo)   may   be   negated   by
             discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


             (8) Internal  relocation  from  a  rural  area  to  Harare  or
             (subject to what we have just said) Bulawayo is,  in  general,
             more realistic; but the socio-economic circumstances in  which
             persons are reasonably likely to find themselves will need  to
             be considered, in order  to  determine  whether  it  would  be
             unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.


             (9) The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since  the
             period considered in RN. The  replacement  of  the  Zimbabwean
             currency by the US dollar and the South African rand has ended
             the recent hyperinflation. The availability of food and  other
             goods in shops has likewise improved, as has the  availability
             of utilities in Harare. Although these  improvements  are  not
             being felt by everyone,  with  15%  of  the  population  still
             requiring food aid, there has not been  any  deterioration  in
             the humanitarian situation since late  2008.  Zimbabwe  has  a
             large informal economy, ranging from street traders  to  home-
             based enterprises,  which  (depending  on  the  circumstances)
             returnees may be expected to enter.


             ....


   21. The issue for me to decide is  whether  or  not  the  Judge  properly
       considered whether the appellant  falls  within  the  category  of  a
       person who may be at  risk,  as  set  out  in  the  country  guidance
       decision of CM.   The assessment of the  risk  upon  return  must  be
       completed in light of the evidence before the Judge and the  findings
       made by her.  In that respect I follow the guidance of the  Court  of
       Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.   The  Court  of
       Appeal held that a finding might only be set aside for error  of  law
       on the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable  in
       the Wednesbury sense, or one  that  was  wholly  unsupported  by  the
       evidence.  A finding that is "perverse" embraces  findings  that  are
       irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and  findings  of
       fact that are wholly unsupported by the  evidence.   On  appeal,  the
       Upper Tribunal should not overturn  a  judgment  at  first  instance,
       unless it really could not understand the  original  judge's  thought
       process when he was making material findings. I apply  that  guidance
       to my consideration of the decision in this appeal.


   22. Having carefully read the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       and her reasons, I reject the appellant's submission that  the  Judge
       erred in failing to consider whether the appellant is  at  risk  upon
       return as a single female who would have no  family  support  network
       were she to return to Zimbabwe.  The appellant's own account is  that
       she is from Bulawayo and  that  the  appellant  had  no  problems  in
       Bulawayo.  The appellant was  raped  and  assaulted  whilst  she  was
       visiting her grandparents in Masvingo. The Judge concluded that:


             "45. She lived and was educated in Bulawayo  and  hence  could
             reasonably return there, where, following CM,  she  would  not
             suffer adverse attention.


             ...


             47.  The Appellant said at her asylum interview that  she  had
             had no problems in Bulawayo from Zanu PF  and  none  other  in
             Masvingo when staying with her grandfather."


   23. The country guidance in CM does not identify lone women  in  Bulawayo
       as being at risk.  The guidance in fact states  that  a  returnee  to
       Bulawayo will in general, not suffer the adverse attention  of  ZANU-
       PF,  including  the  security  forces,  even  if  he  or  she  has  a
       significant MDC profile.  Headnote [7] of the decision is CM makes it
       plain that the issue as to what is a person's home for  the  purposes
       of internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and  is
       not necessarily to be determined by reference to the place  a  person
       from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  The appellant is
       from Bulawayo and by her own account, had experienced no problems  in
       Bulawayo.  The  appellant  is  not  therefore  internally  relocating
       within Zimbabwe to Bulawayo, but is in fact  returning  to  her  home
       area.  I accept that CM  identifies  that  relocation  to  Matebaland
       (including Bulawayo) may be  negated  by  discrimination,  where  the
       returnee is Shona, but as the Judge  noted,  the  appellant  is  from
       Bulawayo.  That is where she lived and  was  educated.   She  is  not
       relocating to Bulawayo, but as the Judge found,  she  can  reasonably
       return to Bulawayo where, following CM, she would not suffer  adverse
       attention.  In my judgement, that was a conclusion that was  open  to
       the Judge on the evidence and does not disclose an error of law.  The
       appellant is now 33 years old and whatever the position might  be  as
       to the whereabouts of her mother and siblings, there is  no  evidence
       that the appellant would face a risk upon return to  Bulawayo,  where
       she had no previous problems, simply because she is a lone woman.


   24. In my judgement it was open to the Judge on  the  evidence,  to  note
       that in any event, the appellant does have Zanu PF connections in the
       form of her grandfather in his  rural  area  of  Masvingo.   That  is
       relevant because CM identifies that the return  of  a  failed  asylum
       seeker from the United Kingdom, having no  significant  MDC  profile,
       would not result in that person facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
       demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.  The country guidance notes  that
       the position is likely to be  otherwise  in  the  case  of  a  person
       without ZANU-PF connections, returning from the United Kingdom  after
       a significant absence to a    rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,  other  than
       Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South.  In my  judgement,  on  the
       evidence, the appellant gains no assistance from the matters set  out
       at paragraph [2] of the headnote guidance in  CM.   The  Judge  found
       that in any event the appellant could reasonably return to  Bulawayo,
       which, as I have set out, is where she  lived  with  her  mother  and
       siblings before she left Zimbabwe.


   25. I reject the submission that  the  Judge  erroneously  focussed  upon
       whether the appellant has a  MDC  profile,  and  failed  to  consider
       whether those involved in civil organisations such as ZAS,  might  be
       at risk upon return. The Judge reminded herself at paragraph [46]  of
       her decision that persecution on the grounds of imputed opinion  will
       occur if a declared political neutral is treated by the regime  as  a
       supporter of its opponents and persecuted on that  account.   However
       she noted that the appellant had  maintained  that  she  had  had  no
       problems in Bulawayo.  The appellant's claim that her  activities  in
       the UK with ZAS are such that the authorities  would  regard  her  as
       being against ZANU-PF even  if  she  holds  a  neutral  opinion  adds
       nothing in the circumstances.  In reaching her  decision,  the  Judge
       plainly had in mind the guidance that a returnee to Bulawayo will  in
       general not suffer the adverse attention of  ZANU-PF,  including  the
       security forces, even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.


   26. I also reject the claim made on behalf of the appellant  that  having
       accepted that the appellant had been assaulted and raped as  claimed,
       there was no reason for the judge to  find  that  the  rape  was  not
       politically motivated.  At paragraphs [10] and [11] of her  decision,
       the Judge sets out the appellant's account leading to  the  rape  and
       assault.  The Judge noted that the appellant had been taken to a  NYS
       camp and the leader had said that he wanted the appellant to  be  his
       wife.  It was when the appellant told him to leave her alone, that he
       became aggressive and she was raped.  Against that factual matrix, in
       my judgment, it was open to the Judge to find that  on  the  evidence
       before her, the appellant had  not  established  even  to  the  lower
       standard that the rape and assault was politically motivated,  rather
       than being fundamentally criminal behaviour.   In  my  judgement  the
       finding is neither irrational,  nor  unreasonable,  or  one  that  is
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   27. In my judgement, a careful reading of the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge establishes the Judge's thought process when  she  was
       making material findings. It was open to the Judge to  conclude  that
       the appellant would not be at risk upon return to  Zimbabwe  for  the
       reasons set out at paragraphs [39] to [50] of her decision.


   28. Mr Mtisi, rightly in my  judgment  concedes  that  the  appellant  is
       unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
       276ADE(1) of the  Immigration  Rules.    There  is  in  my  judgement
       nothing exceptional or compelling about  the  appellant's  Article  8
       claim, that  would  enable  such  a  claim  to  succeed  outwith  the
       immigration rules.  In my judgement it  was  therefore  open  to  the
       Judge to dispose of that claim, as she did, in short form and for the
       reasons set out at paragraph [56] of her decision.


   29. It follows that the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   30. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       stands.


   31. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.


Signed                                  Date 18th August 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD

The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  fee  award.   I  have   dismissed   the
appellant's appeal and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                  Date 18th August 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
