
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: AA/02074/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/23229/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th June 2015                            |On 23rd June 2015             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                  mr Damian Damian Iliazi AKA Damat Iljazi
                          (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Komusanac, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent cancelled the appellant's refugee status by  a  decision
    dated 19 March 2014  and  served  IS151B  on  19  March  2014  for  the
    appellant's removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act
    1999.  In addition the respondent refused the appellant's leave to  re-
    enter the United Kingdom as a  returning  resident  and  cancelled  his
    leave by a decision dated 15 May 2014.   The  appellant  appealed  both
    decisions claiming that he is firstly a refugee, secondly  entitled  to
    be granted Humanitarian Protection and thirdly that  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under  the
    1950 Convention for the Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
    Freedoms with particular reference to Articles 2, 3 and 8.

 2. The appellant's appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cameron on 13 August 2014.  In a decision  dated  26  August  2014  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeals.   At  the  hearing  the  appellant's
    representative indicated to the judge that the appellant was no  longer
    seeking to raise risk on return and that the matter  to  be  considered
    was therefore under  Article  8  and  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law as it  did  not  follow  the  respondent's  own
    policy in relation to revoking leave.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    on 1 October 2014.  However, on 22 January 2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen granted permission.  His reasons for so doing were:-

         "It is arguable, as is argued in the grounds, that the judge  erred
         in not finding that the respondent had not acted in accordance with
         the law in not considering the relevance  and  application  of  her
         policy concerning revocation and indefinite leave to remain."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. The nub of Mr. Komusanac's argument was that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not consider  the  appellant's  appeal  in  the  framework  of  the
    statutory grounds of appeal, namely that the  decision  to  revoke  the
    appellant's indefinite leave to remain is contrary to the  respondent's
    own policy and thus not in accordance with the law.

 6. Mr. Avery resisted these arguments asserting there was no evidence that
    the Secretary of State had failed to consider her own policy  and  that
    the submission to that  effect  was  no  more  than  speculative.   The
    refusal letter highlighted evidence which amounted to  incontrovertible
    proof that the  respondent  was  entitled  to  revoke  the  appellant's
    refugee status.  There was no evidence before me to  suggest  that  the
    respondent did not give consideration to her own policy.  The appellant
    had partaken in a comprehensive deception and  his  claim  was  flawed.
    The appeal had properly been considered on its merits.

 7. In the course of making his submissions I asked Mr. Avery if there  was
    any evidence he could point to which would assist me in concluding that
    the respondent did consider her own policy.  He was unable to do  this.
    He accepted that  the  refusal  letter  makes  no  mention  of  it  but
    contended that there was no obligation upon the respondent to refer  to
    it there.

 8. I find in all the circumstances that the judge has materially erred  in
    not finding that the respondent had not acted in  accordance  with  the
    law in not considering the relevance  and  application  of  her  policy
    concerning revocation and indefinite leave to remain.  I am  unable  to
    find any evidence to suggest that this was done.  It is unfortunate and
    I appreciate the respondent's frustration, but in all the circumstances
    the  appellant  is  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  that  policy  being
    considered and accordingly, having not applied the policy contained  in
    "Asylum Policy Instruction, Revocation of Indefinite Leave Version  3.0
    of 10 June 2013" to the appellant's case, the respondent's decision  is
    not in accordance with the law.

Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

10. I set aside the decision.

11. I remake the decision in the appeal  by  allowing  it  to  the  limited
    extent that the appeal is remitted  back  to  the  respondent  for  the
    lawful decision to be made.






Signed                              Date         19 June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



