
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02869/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice-Belfast      |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 27 October 2015                            |On 22 December 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                              MR MD ABU SOAIEF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Natur, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  27  June  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK on 2 July 2009 as a student.  He was granted  further
    leave as a student until September 2011.

 2. He was arrested by immigration authorities when he was found working in
    a restaurant, on 6 February 2013.  He  claimed  asylum  on  8  February
    2013.  That application for asylum was refused and a decision made on 9
    March 2013 to remove him to Bangladesh.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly at  a  hearing  on  18  March  2014,
    whereby the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Thus, the appeal came before me.

    The appellant's claim and the First-tier Judge's determination

 5. The appellant's claim in summary is that in 2005 he joined the  Hizb-ut
    Tahrir  Party  in  Bangladesh.   His  role  within  the  party  was  to
    distribute leaflets and to give  speeches  to  influence  people  about
    Islamic values, as well as to gather people to support Hizb-ut  Tahrir.
    He claims that he was arrested by police on 6 March 2009 for holding  a
    demonstration which caused a road to be blocked.  He was  detained  for
    one night.

 6. After he had come to the UK he learnt that an arrest warrant was issued
    in March 2011 and served on his father.  He fears that if  returned  to
    Bangladesh he would be arrested because of his association with Hizb-ut
    Tahrir and because of the arrest warrant.

 7. Judge Farrelly referred to background  evidence  which  indicated  that
    Hizb-ut Tahrir had been banned in Bangladesh,  being  described  as  an
    Islamist  group.   He  considered  documents  that  the  appellant  had
    produced but found that those documents  could  not  be  relied  on  as
    evidence that the appellant was the subject of any court proceedings in
    Bangladesh or subject to an arrest warrant.

 8. He found that the circumstances in which the appellant  claimed  asylum
    adversely affected the credibility of his claim.

    The grounds and submissions

 9. It is asserted that the delay between the hearing of the appeal and the
    promulgation  of  the  determination  materially  affects  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility.  The decision in Sambisavam v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [1999] All ER  (D)  1168  is  relied  on.
    Although the delay is less than the three months referred  to  in  that
    case, it is just short of that period, being eleven weeks.

10. It is contended in the grounds that the judge's  consideration  of  the
    documentary evidence relied on by the  appellant  is  inadequate.   The
    judge had not identified the documents by title and he did not refer to
    the contents of them.  It is  argued  that  he  did  not  identify  the
    positive features of that  documentary  evidence  which  supported  the
    appellant's appeal.

11. Furthermore, it is suggested that in relation to a particular a  letter
    from the attorney in Bangladesh, the respondent had  failed  to  verify
    that document, in circumstances  where  verification  would  have  been
    possible.

12. The original grounds of application for  permission,  also  relied  on,
    argue that the judge failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
    country background material in terms  of  the  risk  to  the  appellant
    because of his association with Hizb-ut Tahrir.

13. It is also contended that there was a general failure to  consider  the
    appellant's evidence and to give comprehensible reasons  for  rejecting
    those aspects of the evidence which were rejected,  the  judge  instead
    relying on the respondent's account of events, not taking into  account
    the appellant's explanations for some of the issues.

14. In oral submissions Mr Natur relied on  the  grounds  and  directed  my
    attention to specific aspects of some of  the  documents.   So  far  as
    verification of documents is concerned I was referred to PJ (Sri Lanka)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  1011,  in
    particular at [30].  In relation to the judge's  reasons  generally,  I
    was referred to the decision in MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)  Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).

15. The judge had failed to take into  account  the  knowledge  of  Hizb-ut
    Tahrir that the appellant demonstrated, for example in  his  interview.
    His evidence at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not
    considered in detail, although the appellant was cross-examined for  45
    minutes.

16. Mrs Saddiq submitted that there was no merit in the delay  point.   The
    determination had been completed within eleven weeks of the hearing and
    the judge who granted permission to appeal did not consider that  there
    was much merit in that point.

17. Otherwise, the judge gave adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  his
    findings.  I was referred to various paragraphs of the determination in
    which it was submitted the judge had considered the different documents
    relied on by the appellant.  The judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
    the documents were not reliable.

18. With reference to the decision in PJ (Sri Lanka) at [29], there  is  no
    rebuttable  presumption  that  documents  from  a  lawyer  in   another
    jurisdiction are reliable.  There was no obligation on  the  respondent
    to verify the advocate's letter.  I was also referred to  the  decision
    in MJ (Singh v Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed  unaffected)  Afghanistan  [2013]
    UKUT 253 (IAC).

19. The judge had  concluded  that  there  were  significant  gaps  in  the
    appellant's knowledge of Hizb-ut  Tahrir  and  the  references  to  the
    asylum interview and the questions the appellant answered on this point
    did not show significant knowledge of that group.

20. In reply Mr  Natur  referred  to  the  Operational  Guidance  Note  for
    Bangladesh ("OGN") dated September 2013 in terms of the  potential  for
    risk on return.



    My assessment

21. I do not consider that there is any merit in the  contention  that  the
    First-tier Judge's credibility assessment is flawed by  reason  of  the
    interval between the hearing of the appeal and the promulgation of  the
    determination.  The appeal was heard on 18 March 2014.  A printed  date
    of promulgation is given as 25 May 2014 with a further stamped date  of
    2 June 2014.  It seems reasonably apparent that the judge had completed
    his determination by 25 May 2014.  On that basis, the determination was
    completed just over two months after the hearing.  Even if the date  of
    2 June 2014 is taken as the date  on  which  the  judge  completed  the
    determination, that  is  still  short  of  a  period  of  three  months
    identified in Sambisavam as an appropriate yardstick.

22. Furthermore, there is nothing on the face of  the  determination  which
    would indicate that the credibility findings had suffered by reason  of
    that interval of time.

23. So far as verification of documents is concerned, I  am  not  satisfied
    that there was either any obligation on the respondent  to  verify  the
    letter from the advocate (or indeed any other  document)  or  that  the
    lack of any such verification has any significance in relation  to  the
    judge's credibility findings.  As was said in PJ at [29]:

         "there is no basis  in  domestic  or  ECHR  jurisprudence  for  the
         general approach that Mr  Martin  submitted  ought  to  be  adopted
         whenever local lawyers obtained relevant documents from a  domestic
         court, and thereafter transmit them  directly  to  lawyers  in  the
         United Kingdom.  The involvement of lawyers  does  not  create  the
         rebuttable presumption that the  documents  they  produce  in  this
         situation are reliable.  Instead,  the  jurisprudence  referred  to
         above  does  no  more  than  indicate  that  the  circumstances  of
         particular  cases  may  exceptionally  necessitate  an  element  of
         investigation by the national  authorities,  in  order  to  provide
         effective protection against mistreatment under  article  3  ECHR."



24. The court then gave a number of reasons as to why verification may  not
    be  feasible,  may  be  unjustified   or   may   be   disproportionate.
    Furthermore, it is worth quoting what was said at [30] as follows:

         "Therefore, simply  because  a  relevant  document  is  potentially
         capable  of  being  verified  does  not  mean  that  the   national
         authorities have an obligation to take this step. Instead,  it  may
         be necessary to make an enquiry in order to verify the authenticity
         and reliability of a document - depending always on the  particular
         facts of the case - when it is at the centre  of  the  request  for
         protection, and when a simple process of enquiry will  conclusively
         resolve its authenticity and reliability (see Singh v Belgium [101]
         - [105]). I do not consider that there is any  material  difference
         in approach between the decisions in  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  Singh  v
         Belgium, in that in the latter case  the  Strasbourg  court  simply
         addressed  one  of  the  exceptional   situations   when   national
         authorities should undertake a process of verification."

25. The general approach to issues of verification was also  considered  in
    the decision in MJ.  Whilst I am not bound by that decision, I  endorse
    and adopt its reasons.

26. So far as the judge's consideration of the documentation in  this  case
    is concerned, it is true to say that the determination could have  been
    clearer in its specific identification of documents and  assessment  of
    them.  For example, as was apparent  at  the  hearing  before  me,  the
    reference at [22] of the determination to an arrest  warrant  seems  in
    fact to be a reference to a document headed "Order,"  to  be  found  at
    page 9 of the appellant's 29 page bundle.  Nevertheless, as  the  judge
    pointed out, the document is written in a combination  of  English  and
    Bengali and contains numerous spelling and grammatical mistakes.   This
    document  is  also  referred  to  at  [26],  there  described  as  "the
    magistrates order," and in which paragraph the  judge  notes  that  the
    refusal letter pointed out that that Order referred to a case  dated  8
    December 2009, by which stage  the  appellant  was  no  longer  in  the
    country.

27. At [23] the judge considered the document said to be from  an  advocate
    in Bangladesh.  It is stated in that paragraph  that  the  document  is
    written in very poor English, but that seems to me to be a  failure  to
    take into account that this was a translation of the advocate's letter.
     However, the judge was entitled to reject  as  inherently  implausible
    the suggestion in that letter that court  documents  are  drawn  up  by
    officials who sometimes make mistakes and that it would depend on  what
    typing machine is used in terms of whether Bengali or English would  be
    written.  Insofar as it is possible to deduce what  is  being  said  in
    that letter, by the translation, the judge's summary of the  letter  is
    sufficiently accurate and on the basis of the explanation given  as  to
    the content of the letter the judge was not required  to  say  anything
    other than that the explanation was not credible.

28. At [24] reference is made  to  a  Bangladesh  Supreme  Court  judgment,
    apparently submitted on behalf of the  appellant  to  demonstrate  that
    courts in Bangladesh use both languages, English and Bengali.  However,
    as Judge Farrelly pointed  out,  that  judgement  does  not  contain  a
    "random mix" of language but illustrates the high level of English used
    in  the  superior  courts.   Thus,  he  concluded,  it  supported   the
    respondent's contention that a higher standard  would  be  expected  of
    official court documentation.  This again  was  a  conclusion  open  to
    Judge Farrelly.

29. There was sufficient consideration of the documents to make the judge's
    conclusions on them sustainable.  It was not encumbent on him to  refer
    to each document, particularly in circumstances where not all  of  them
    referred specifically to the appellant.  Furthermore,  although  not  a
    matter referred to by the First-tier Judge, documents  involving  other
    individuals, for example that at page  10  of  the  appellant's  bundle
    described as an order for remand of certain accused by  the  magistrate
    in Dhaka, refer to an incident on 8 December 2009.  Of course, by  this
    time the appellant was in the UK and the Order said to  relate  to  the
    appellant, and referred to by the First-tier Judge  at  [22]  also  has
    that date of 8 December 2009, a  date  apparently  therefore  involving
    persons other than the appellant.

30. Furthermore, in relation to  the  arrest  warrant,  at  [31]  there  is
    reference to the appellant having been asked in  cross-examination  how
    his father came by the arrest warrant.  It seems that the appellant was
    unable to recall how his father got the document, which the  judge  did
    not find credible.  Again, he was entitled to come to that  conclusion,
    bearing in mind the potential importance of the arrest warrant.

31. In addition, in the judge's summary of the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
    from [10],  the  respondent's  identification  of  adverse  credibility
    factors relating to  the  documents  are  summarised,  for  example  in
    relation to the arrest warrant making no mention of the appellant being
    involved in a case dated 8 December 2009 "as  referred  to  in  another
    document."  That other document is the Order to which I have  referred.
    The judge himself made reference to this at [26].  At [25] reference is
    made to the question of why the authorities would  issue  documents  in
    relation to the appellant so long after he had left.  This relates to a
    document concerning the arrest of one Tanveer Ahmed on 10  March  2011,
    whom the appellant claimed must have named him to the police  resulting
    in the warrant for the appellant's arrest.

32. The renewed grounds suggest  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  rely  on
    information from the Country of Origin Information Report as set out in
    the refusal letter, in part because that extract from the report refers
    only to "forged identity documents" whereas the appellant had submitted
    various court documents and a letter from an  advocate  in  Bangladesh.
    Those sorts of documents are not referred in the COI  Report  as  being
    easy to obtain.  It is also suggested  in  the  grounds  that  the  COI
    Report, relying on information from the  Canadian  High  Commission  in
    Dhaka, states that verification of documents is relatively easy.

33. The extract from the COI Report appears at  [27]  of  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  However, the grounds do  not  quote  that  extract  in
    full, omitting the passage which states that "The rampant corruption in
    various  levels  of  the  government  weakens  the  integrity  and  the
    credibility of officially issued documents."  The judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to factor into his assessment  of  the  documentary  evidence,
    "the level of false documentation from Bangladesh" [26].

34. In all these circumstances, considering the determination as a whole in
    which the judge considered the documentary evidence holistically, I  am
    satisfied that he was entitled to find that those  documents  were  not
    reliable, as expressly stated at [34].

35. I am not satisfied that there is any merit either,  in  the  contention
    that the judge failed to have regard to relevant  background  evidence.
    It is apparent from the determination that he was  aware  that  Hizb-ut
    Tahrir had been banned in 2009.  At [21] there  is  reference  to  that
    banning and to the authorities describing Hizb-ut Tahrir as an Islamist
    group considered a threat to peace.  At [19] there is further reference
    to Hizb-ut Tahrir and how it is viewed by the government in Bangladesh.
    These paragraphs are all within the reasons part of the determination.

36. I am not satisfied that there is any merit  in  the  complaint  to  the
    effect that the judge failed to have sufficient  regard  to  background
    evidence when assessing the appellant's claim, in terms of  credibility
    or indeed in terms of risk on return.

37. The First-tier Judge rejected the appellant's account  of  there  being
    any adverse interest in him, for example in terms of  any  magistrates'
    order or any arrest warrant.  At [34] he referred  to  the  appellant's
    account of his involvement with Hizb-ut Tahrir as being a very  limited
    involvement, and only claiming one  "very  minor  encounter"  with  the
    authorities.  The  appellant's  account  was  also  that  he  wants  to
    disassociate himself from Hizb-ut  Tahrir.   Accordingly,  and  in  the
    light of the judge's  conclusions  that  there  is  no  active  adverse
    interest in the appellant, he concluded that the appellant would not be
    at risk on return.  Indeed, he concluded that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he had not returned home because of any fear.

38. It is not suggested in the grounds that there was  an  absence  of  any
    concrete finding in terms of whether the appellant had given a credible
    account of involvement with  Hizb-ut  Tahrir,  or  of  his  arrest  and
    detention overnight on one occasion.  No such complaint appears in  the
    grounds and none was referred to in  submissions  before  me.   In  any
    event, even if it could be argued that this aspect of  the  appellant's
    account was accepted, the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  there
    would be no adverse interest in him on return, he not  suggesting  that
    he had any intention of reviving his association  with  Hizb-ut  Tahrir
    with whom, on his case, he was involved in a very modest way  over  ten
    years ago.

39. In the original grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  it  is  argued
    that there was a failure  on  the  part  of  the  judge  adequately  to
    consider the appellant's evidence, either as set  out  in  his  witness
    statement, asylum interview  or  cross-examination  which  it  is  said
    lasted for approximately 45 minutes.

40. At [6]-[9] the broad basis of the appellant's claim  is  set  out.   At
    [17]-[18] the appellant's evidence at  the  hearing  is  summarised  in
    terms of the aspects of that evidence that the appellant relies  on  in
    support of the claim, explaining for example his fear  of  return,  his
    father's obtaining of the summons, and why there was  a  delay  in  his
    claiming asylum.  The explanation as to why he was unable  to  describe
    the logo of Hizb-ut Tahrir is also  given.   At  [20]  is  a  condensed
    description of the appellant's claimed role with Hizb-ut Tahrir and his
    arrest and detention in  March  2009.   At  [27]  one  finds  the  more
    detailed explanation for the appellant's late  claim  for  asylum.   At
    [30] there is reference to the appellant's account of  why  he  stopped
    studying and at [31] evidence he gave in cross-examination in  relation
    to the arrest warrant is set out.  In the following paragraph, what  he
    said in the asylum interview about his intention to return  when  there
    was a change of government is described.

41. Read as a  whole  the  determination  does  reveal  a  description  and
    appreciation of the appellant's account and his explanations  for  some
    of the adverse credibility issues relied on by the respondent.

42. In  the  original  grounds  two  specific  matters  are  identified  as
    illustrative of the judge's lack of adequate evaluation or appreciation
    of the appellant's account.   The  first  relates  to  the  appellant's
    apparent loss of his passport.  At [29] the judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant was not honest with immigration officials when encountered in
    the UK, initially denying being employed and being untruthful as to how
    long he had been working. Specifically in relation to the passport  the
    judge summarised the position as being  that  the  appellant  initially
    said he lost his passport but "then thought better  of  this."   It  is
    said in the grounds that this is a nearly verbatim  recitation  of  the
    UKBA minute sheet at annex D of the respondent's  bundle.   Materially,
    that minute states that the appellant was  arrested  and  taken  to  an
    address to retrieve his passport  and  pack  a  bag.   It  states  that
    "Subject had initially claimed he lost his passport in  Manchester  but
    on arrival at staff house, he then admitted his  passport  was  in  his
    room.  He then retrieved his passport from his top drawer and packed  a
    bag."

43. In his witness statement the appellant said that he was  told  by  UKBA
    that he needed his passport as he would be deported to Bangladesh,  but
    that he was unsure of whether or not his passport was at his  house  or
    at a previous address.  He was told by UKBA that if  the  passport  was
    lost they would need to contact the Bangladeshi High Commission or  the
    Embassy.  He then states that he was taken to his house to collect some
    belongings and found his passport in a drawer which he handed  over  to
    UKBA.

44. In my judgement there is no error in the  judge's  evaluation  of  this
    evidence.  He was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had,  in
    effect, dishonestly claimed to have lost his passport in  circumstances
    where the evidence from the respondent was that the passport was  found
    in a top  drawer;  and  the  appellant's  own  account  is  hardly  any
    different.  He stated that he found  his  passport  in  a  drawer.  The
    'minute' states that the appellant "then admitted"  that  his  passport
    was in his room. None of that suggests that  it  was  lost;  quite  the
    contrary.  For the judge to characterise this as the  appellant  having
    been untruthful in the beginning about losing  his  passport  and  then
    thinking better of the matter is entirely sustainable.

45. Although it is said in the grounds that it remains unclear what  weight
    if any was afforded to the appellant's explanation given in his witness
    statement, it is readily apparent that the judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim that he had lost his passport.

46. Furthermore, adequate reasons were given  for  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the appellant had not given a credible account of why  he  stopped
    his studies.   He  found  the  account  of  difficulty  experienced  in
    transferring money from his father to be unbelievable given the banking
    systems between the two countries.  The judge explained why he did  not
    accept the appellant's account of why he  stopped  his  studies,  aside
    from the issue of  transferring  funds,  namely  in  terms  of  English
    language requirements.  He was entitled to conclude that the  appellant
    subsequently abandoned studying in order to work.

47. Those matters, and his initial attempts at  deception  in  relation  to
    immigration authorities, and the circumstances of the  late  claim  for
    asylum, were all factors the judge was entitled to take into account in
    assessing the credibility of the appellant's claim to  be  in  fear  of
    return.

48. Although the judge  did  not  set  out  specific  detail  of  what  the
    appellant said in the asylum interview in terms  of  his  knowledge  of
    Hizb-ut Tahrir, he did nevertheless summarise  the  refusal  letter  in
    this respect at [14], in terms of the  suggestion  that  the  appellant
    displayed a fundamental lack of understanding of the ideals and aims of
    Hizb-ut Tahrir and that it is  trans-national,  and  in  terms  of  his
    inability to provide details of its emblem or slogan.   At  [32]  Judge
    Farrelly concluded that if the  appellant  was  involved  with  Hizb-ut
    Tahrir it would have been apparent to him  that  they  oppose  all  the
    political parties in Bangladesh  and  that  there  are  no  alignments.
    Whilst it is apparent that in the asylum interview  the  appellant  did
    display some knowledge of Hizb-ut Tahrir, I do not find that  there  is
    any error in the judge's characterisation of the appellant's  knowledge
    of Hizb-ut Tahrir as being that there are  "significant  gaps"  in  his
    knowledge of the group [34].

49. It is  true  that  there  are  criticisms  that  can  be  made  of  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge. For example,  the  determination
    would have benefitted from a more structured approach to the assessment
    of the appellant's account, including for example in terms of the  oral
    evidence and what the appellant  said  in  interview.   However,  I  am
    satisfied that it is possible to deduce from the determination all  the
    essentials sufficient to make  it  sustainable.   There  is  a  correct
    appreciation of the basis of the  appellant's  claim,  identifying  the
    evidence relied on including documentary evidence,  and  a  sustainable
    evaluation  of  that  evidence  against  relevant  country   background
    material.   Legally  sufficient  reasons  are  given  for  the  adverse
    credibility assessment and for the conclusion that the appellant  would
    not be at risk on return.

50. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that it has been established that there
    is any error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Accordingly, its decision to dismiss the appeal on all  grounds  is  to
    stand.

     Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            17/12/15


