
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/02835/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 February 2016                    |     On 7 April 2016                 |
|Prepared 17 February 2016              |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     hg
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Bartram, instructed by The Migrant Law
Partnership Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Turkey, date  of  birth  1  January  1993,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 2 February  2015,  to
    make removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 1999, a form IS151A having been served  on  3  March  2014  and  an
    asylum/human rights based claim having been refused.
2.   The Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  contained  within  the  Respondent's
    bundle at Annex C relates to HG, dated 19  April  2011,  and  contained
    within the case file is the appeal HG made  against  that  decision  to
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese, promulgated on 29 May  2015.   Also
    within the bundle from the  Respondent  was  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter dated 2 February 2015.

3.   The  matter  in  respect  of  this  Appellant  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zahed (the Judge) who, on 9 November 2015, dismissed the
    appeal made under the Refugee Convention and made no reference  to  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  No challenge is made  in  respect
    of that aspect of the judge's decision.

4.   In relation to the judge's decision [D] it was essentially said in  the
    grounds seeking permission that the judge has placed undue weight  upon
    findings of fact made in the Appellant's  brother's  MG's  decision  by
    Judge Abebrese and that the Appellant's was supported  by  three  other
    witnesses.  It was said thereafter that nowhere  in  the  determination
    was there a summary of the evidence they gave or any reasons given  why
    the evidence was rejected save, at the last line of paragraph [D22]  of
    the judge's decision where the judge commented upon the  weight  to  be
    attached to those witness's evidence.  Further, it was said it  was  an
    error of law to so lightly  dismiss  and  give  little  weight  to  the
    evidence of the three witnesses.  In short the determination was:-

         "Completely  silent  in  respect  of  the  evidence  of  the  three
         witnesses.  If the evidence was not material to the  findings  this
         is not set out.  It is contended that  the  evidence  was  material
         evidence of three witnesses which was of relevance."


5.   It is clear that the judge at paragraph [D10]  noted  the  identity  of
    those three witnesses, FD, MA and SS and said that a full record of the
    proceedings had been taken.  I have seen that Record of Proceedings and
    noted the brief evidence given by those three witnesses.  In  addition,
    I have seen the witness statements made,  one  of  which  runs  to  two
    unnumbered paragraphs from MA, a very short note by FD dated and signed
    24 June 2015, and a short statement of SS.  I set out their  respective
    evidence.  MA said:

         "I am a cousin of HG.  I would like to confirm that my family is  a
         Kurdish family and a political family.  Most  of  our  village  are
         Kurdish and involved in some way in the  Kurdish  struggle.   I  am
         aware that my cousin lost her mother and her father disappeared and
         she went to live with her grandmother.  I remember this because  it
         was a great tragedy because her mother was pregnant when she  died.



         I keep in touch with relatives who  remain  in  our  village.   The
         Kurdish people in our village defend themselves and are politically
         active.  Our grandfathers and grandmothers were persecuted as  were
         our fathers and mothers, that is why the new  generation  struggles
         for the recognition of our rights.  We have constant problems  with
         the local gendarme station and from traitors.  HG's father was well-
         known  for  his  political  affiliations  and  respected   in   our
         community.  I knew this as a child.  He is missing now so far as  I
         know."


6.   I note in passing that the document, and indeed the evidence,  did  not
    disclose what those political affiliations were but I  assume  them  in
    some form or other to be pro-Kurdish but not for example pro-PKK.  If I
    am wrong in that it makes no material difference to the decision I have
    to make.

7.   The statement of FD said that she was the aunt  of  the  Appellant  and
    continued:

         "...My mother is HG's grandmother.  I speak to  her  about  once  a
         month.  I can confirm that before HG fled  my  mother  informed  me
         that she had been detained.  My mother and father were very upset.


         I confirm they told me that the authorities have come  looking  for
         HG after she fled.  This has happened more than once."


8.   SS said this:

         "I am a cousin of HG.  I would like  to  confirm  my  family  as  a
         Kurdish family and a political  family.   I  am  a  member  of  the
         Halkevi Kurdish community centre in London.


         I speak to family in  Turkey  on  the  telephone,  particularly  my
         grandmother.  I was aware that my cousin had difficulties in Turkey
         though not the detail and that she had to flee Turkey.  I was aware
         she had difficulties with the authorities.  My relatives are mainly
         in Sakcagozu village."


9.   In the grounds of appeal, bearing in mind  the  Appellant  was  at  the
    hearing represented by Counsel, Ms E Daykin, it was not  asserted  that
    there were matters of evidence  advanced  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing itself which were particularly pertinent or relevant which  the
    judge had failed to recite or make reference to and thus it is not said
    in the grounds that the judge had failed to take into account  material
    evidence or has taken into account immaterial evidence.   As  a  matter
    of approach that the judge was entitled to take the view that the scope
    of the evidence provided by  those  three  witnesses  was  limited  and
    whilst it was, in this respect, generally supportive of the  Appellant,
    it did not demonstrate matters within the  witnesses'  knowledge  which
    particularly bore on the issues  of  the  ill-treatment  the  Appellant
    claimed to have met in June and October 2013 nor  did  it  particularly
    explain the Appellant remaining in Turkey before coming to  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2014.

10.  Be that as it may the judge was entitled to take into account,  bearing
    in mind the proximity of the Appellant's relationship between  MG,  his
    evidence and claim to be at risk of persecution  was  set  out  in  the
    decision of Judge Abebrese of 29 May 2015.  The judge was  entitled  to
    take those matters into account and it was clear that the judge did not
    regard himself in any 'Devaseelan' sense as bound  by  those  findings.
    Rather the Judge found that the claim  of  the  Appellant  for  reasons
    given by the judge was not buttressed or supported by the case for  her
    brother.

11.  In these circumstances [D  21  and  22]  set  out  bases  on  which  he
    rejected the claim of the  Appellant  and  found  her  credibility  was
    undermined.  I agree with Mr  Bartram  that  the  judge's  reasons  are
    somewhat light in detail as to why  he  indicated  he  attached  little
    weight to family members who had given evidence to the effect, which he
    had rejected, namely the Appellant's mother had died and her father was
    missing, without any further independent corroborative evidence.

12.  Mr Bartram said where  and  what  might  be  expected  to  be  produced
    reasonably bearing in mind it was an asylum case.   The  case  law  was
    substantial now to indicate that the lack of corroboration  was  not  a
    basis  to  dismiss  a  claim.  The  question  arose  of  course   where
    corroboration could be obtained but was not and that  was  unexplained:
    This may be a matter to which a judge was  entitled  to  give  material
    weight in the circumstances of the case.

13.  In answer to Mr Bartram's case it may be  that  there  are  independent
    sources such as, as  argued  by  Ms  Sreeraman,  a  death  certificate.
    Similarly, in such cases, frequently  there  may  be  evidence  from  a
    village head man or the town mayor  or  whoever  may  be  the  official
    involved to confirm factual matters.  Similarly there may be a  medical
    note or evidence recording of the death of a person.  I do not seek  to
    set out in any sense what the limits of such independent  evidence  may
    be, nor do I ignore the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  may  well
    dismiss it all as being self-serving, but  that  is  not  to  say  such
    evidence could not be obtained. Similarly,  the  political  side  of  a
    family and the involvement in Kurdish politics may be matter which  may
    attract the attention or support from a political party who  again  may
    confirm the extent to which a person was or was not a  supporter  of  a
    party.

14.  In these circumstances, whilst I agree  with  Mr  Bartram  the  judge's
    reasons are rather terse.  Given the material that was actually  before
    the judge it did not seem to me, were another Tribunal to look at  that
    evidence again, that any different conclusion was likely to be reached.
     In the circumstances I do not find that there is any material error of
    law
NOTICE OF DECISION
15.  The original Tribunal decision stands.  The appeal is dismissed.

16.  An anonymity direction was given in the decision  of  9  November  2015
    and it seemed to me appropriate  and  necessary  bearing  in  mind  the
    nature of the claimed ill-treatment of the Appellant that the anonymity
    order should continue.

Signed                                  Date 20 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 20 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


