
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02918/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Sent           |
|on 7 October 2013                             |on 9 October 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                      BC
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mrs F Farrell, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant, a citizen of China, appeals  against  a  determination  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie, promulgated on 7 May 2013,  dismissing
   his appeal, which was brought on the basis  of  Chinese  Family  Planning
   Policy and of the best interests of his two children.

2)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  permission  to  appeal.   A  renewed
   application to the Upper Tribunal was made on the grounds that the First-
   tier Tribunal failed to  make  a  specific  finding  on  whether  or  not
   children would be registered,  without  which  there  could  be  no  full
   assessment of their best interests.  This was  said  to  be  a  point  of
   distinction from AX (Family Planning Scheme) China CG [2012]  UKUT  00097
   (IAC), in which there was a positive finding that the children  would  be
   registered.

3) Mrs Farrell submitted further to the grounds as  follows.   The  argument
   put to the First-tier Tribunal Judge was that it would be  difficult  for
   the family to reside legally in any city or to register  their  children,
   because the children were not born within marriage, and no permission was
   obtained for either child.  There would be problems in finding  work,  in
   paying social charge and registration fees, and in the  children  gaining
   access to health and educational provision.  Even if the family  was  not
   destitute, this would punish the children for the parents' breach of  the
   family planning regulations, contrary to their interests.  On  a  finding
   that the children would not be registered the case could not  succeed  in
   terms of Article 3, because of AX, but a distinction was to be made as to
   Article 8, based on the best interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
   consideration.  A decision should be substituted to allow the appeal.

4) Mr Mullen said that at paragraphs 20 and 31-32 of the  determination  the
   judge concluded that the appellant was reasonably likely to  be  able  to
   obtain hukou (registration) for himself and his children.  He thus  would
   have the ability to support himself, and he would  also  have  assistance
   from his partner, as the judge found.  The determination did not  err  in
   law.

5) I reserved my determination.

6) Paragraphs 20 and 31-32 of the First-tier Tribunal determination set  out
   the respondent's case, rather than the judge's findings.  The  judge  may
   have shared the respondent's view, but he does  not  make  that  entirely
   clear.  However, he did go on to consider AX for himself and at paragraph
   56 found that even without an SCP certificate the consequences  for  this
   family would not reach the threshold of persecution or of Article 3.  The
   judge was aware that this  was  an  Article  8  case,  but  concluded  at
   paragraph 57 that the best interests of the children involved their being
   with both parents in China.

7) The following is taken from the headnote of AX:

    Multiple-child families

    (6)  Any second child, even if authorised,  entails  the  loss  of  the
    family's SCP certificate. Loss of a family's SCP  results  in  loss  of
    privileged access to schools, housing, pensions and  free  medical  and
    contraceptive  treatment.  Education  and  medical   treatment   remain
    available but are no longer free.

    (7)  Where an unauthorised child is born,  the  family  will  encounter
    additional penalties. Workplace discipline for parents in employment is
    likely to include demotion or even loss of employment. In  addition,  a
    'social upbringing charge' is payable (SUC), which is based on  income,
    with a down payment of 50% and three years to pay the balance.

    (8)  There are hundreds of  thousands  of  unauthorised  children  born
    every year.  Family planning officials are not entitled  to  refuse  to
    register unauthorised children and there is no real risk of  a  refusal
    to register a child. Payment for birth permits, for the registration of
    children, and the imposition of SUC charges for unauthorised births are
    a significant source of revenue for local family planning  authorities.
    There is a tension between that profitability, and enforcement  of  the
    nationally imposed quota of births for the town, county  and  province,
    exceeding which can harm officials' careers.


    (9)  The financial consequences for a family of losing its SCP (for
    having more than one child) and/or of having SUC imposed (for having
    unauthorised children) and/or suffering disadvantages in terms of
    access to education, medical treatment, loss of employment, detriment
    to future employment etc will not, in general, reach the severity
    threshold to amount to persecution or serious harm or treatment in
    breach of Article 3.

8) Crucially, there was no evidence or authority which would have  justified
   a finding of a real  risk  that  the  children  in  this  case  would  go
   unregistered.

9) If there was any error, it was in failing to make an explicit finding  of
   no risk  of  non-registration.   That  is  not  an  error  requiring  the
   determination to be set aside.  In any event, the argument  on  the  best
   interests of the children amounts to no more than vague reliance  on  the
   proposition that their future prospects are better  in  the  UK  than  in
   China.  That does not come close to rendering their return to China along
   with their parents a disproportionate step.  The  conclusion  reached  by
   the judge at paragraphs 57 and 58, insofar as it related  to  Article  8,
   was properly open to him and is based on legally adequate reasons.

10) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11)  An anonymity direction was made on the First-tier Tribunal and  remains
   in force.





                               [pic]
                                8 October 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
