

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02503/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Sent           |
|on 19th September 2013                        |23rd September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           IKECHUKWU ABBA ONYEANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr R Gibb, of Quinn Martin & Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  McGrade,  promulgated  on  24th  May  2013,  dismissing  on  all
    available grounds his  appeal  against  refusal  of  recognition  as  a
    refugee from Nigeria.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  one  ground
    only: reaching a conclusion  on  credibility  prior  to  considering  a
    medical report, an error of the  type  identified  in  Mibanga  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

 3. Mr Gibb argued that this was  an  error  of  such  a  nature  that  the
    determination required to be set aside in its entirety.  The  Appellant
    should have the opportunity of giving his oral evidence again.  He  was
    willing  to  tender  himself  for   cross-examination,   although   the
    Respondent had not been represented in the First-tier Tribunal  on  the
    last occasion.

 4. Mrs O'Brien submitted thus.  Although the judge gave good  reasons  for
    reaching a negative credibility conclusion, the determination  was  not
    sustainable, because he had clearly  done  so  before  turning  to  the
    report by Dr Ross at paragraph 40 of the determination.  The claim  was
    partly based on alleged seizure of the land of the  Appellant's  father
    in his home village twenty-eight years ago. Although it  appeared  that
    part of the claim  was  inevitably  defeated  by  the  internal  flight
    alternative in any event, there were alternative claims which  depended
    on credibility and did not turn on internal flight.   She  agreed  that
    the appropriate course was to fix a fresh  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. Mr Gibb correctly acknowledged that the internal flight alternative did
    defeat the claim based on land seizure.  That issue  need  not  trouble
    the First-tier Tribunal when it hears the case again.

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law, as set out above,
    and as conceded by the Respondent.   The determination  is  set  aside.
    Apart from the now undisputed findings on internal flight in respect of
    the land seizure claim, none of the previous stand.

 7. Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and  Practice  Statement  7.2
    the nature and extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s) of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    chosen to reconsider the case are not to include Judge McGrade.

 8. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.



                               [pic]
                                20 September 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


