
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02083/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     HG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Montague
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N. Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Mr H.G.,  a  citizen
         of  Turkey  against  the  respondent's  decision  to   refuse   his
         application for asylum and to remove him from the UK.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.

    Background

      3. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 17  August  1990.   He
         entered the United Kingdom clandestinely, he states on 17 May  2012
         (having been refused a Tier 4 (General) Student visa).  On  30  May
         2012 Mr G claimed asylum.

      4. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim on  4  December
         2014 and decided to remove the appellant by way of directions under
         section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

      5. The appeal against that decision came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Bennett on 5 June 2015.  The judge, in a decision promulgated
         on 3 August 2015, dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

      6. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  on  the
         following grounds:  firstly the judge in deciding not to follow the
         Country Guidance decision of IK (Turkey) [2004] UKIAT 00312, on the
         basis of the most recent  background  material  was  misguided  and
         perverse.  The grounds of appeal are discursive but in essence  the
         second ground was that the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons
         and resorted to speculation and the third ground was that the judge
         failed to analyse the IK risk factors.

      7. The hearing came before me.

      8. Mr Gilbert submitted that there was a new ground that was  Robinson
         obvious in that the judge had referred  at  paragraph  17(c)  to  a
         piece of evidence not before  the  Tribunal  from  the  Netherlands
         Immigration Service.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted  that  she  was
         not in a position to comment and submitted that  the  material  may
         have been in the  material  and  that  the  ground  should  not  be
         permitted.

    New Ground - Procedural Fairness

      9. This ground was not in the original grounds of appeal and I am  not
         satisfied that this was  a  Robinson  obvious  point.  Although  Mr
         Gilbert argued that the information quoted by the judge  at  [17c],
         which  indicated  that  those  undertaking  military  service  were
         unlikely to be posted to their  own  region,  was  not  before  the
         judge, the judge refers to an extract from the Netherlands Ministry
         of Foreign Affairs report on Turkey and Military  Service  (1  July
         2001).  The respondent did not have an opportunity to consider  all
         the material to verify where this reference appeared and  I  accept
         Ms Willocks-Briscoe's submission that it may have been a  reference
         in one of the Country Guidance cases before the judge (I note  that
         there is a reference to a different part  of  the  same  report  at
         paragraph 3.13.2 of the Turkey OGN which suggests that this  report
         is one that is quoted from in the papers before me).   I  have  not
         therefore considered this ground (and even if I was in  a  position
         to do so I am not satisfied that it has been shown to have merit  -
         the alternative argument  that  the  judge  having  discounted  the
         Country Guidance because of its age was incorrect  to  consider  an
         old  report  is  also  without  merit  as  the  judge  specifically
         indicates that there was no evidence placed before him  to  support
         the proposition that the appellant would be  sent  to  fight  in  a
         Kurdish area.  The appellant cannot now  seek  to  rely  on  a  new
         report  which  it  purports  provides  contrary   evidence).    The
         appellant cannot therefore succeed on this ground.

    Ground 1

     10. Although the respondent's refusal letter made no reference  to  the
         relevant country guidance case law as the  respondent  refused  the
         appellant's claim as it was  not  considered  credible,  the  judge
         embarked on a detailed assessment of the current  country  guidance
         case law for Turkey.  The judge at paragraph [15] (page 21) of  the
         determination,  having  set  out  at   considerable   length   from
         paragraphs [10] onwards a discussion  as  to  the  current  country
         conditions prevailing in Turkey, reached the conclusion that:

             'I am not satisfied that the circumstances in Turkey  are  now
             as they  were  at  the  time  when  A  (Turkey)  and  IK  were
             determined, I do not consider the factual conclusions in those
             determinations to be binding.  Crucially, I am  not  satisfied
             that there is now or was in either 2010 or 2012  the  risk  of
             torture which there was in 2003/4 or that  torture  and  other
             forms of physical abuse in places  of  detention  occurred  in
             either the numbers or with the frequency which they did in and
             before 2003/4'.

     11. However although the judge stated that he  did  not  consider  'the
         factual conclusions' binding, the  judge  went  on  to  follow  the
         country guidance including at paragraph [18  (4)(e)],  [21],  [22],
         [23], [25], [26] and [28].  It is clear therefore that the  judge's
         findings related only to the narrower issue of the risk of  torture
         and physical abuse of persons in places of detention.

     12. SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 endorsed the country  guidance
         system and reminded  that  Tribunals  must  take  Country  Guidance
         determinations into account:

             '... decision makers and tribunal judges are required to  take
             Country Guidance determinations into account,  and  to  follow
             them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,
             are adduced justifying their not doing so.'

     13. The Tribunal in NM and others (Lone  women  -  Ashraf)  Somalia  CG
         [2005] UKIAT 00076 discussed the country  guidance  system  and  at
         paragraph 140:

             '... they should be applied except where they do not apply  to
             the particular facts which  an  Adjudicator  or  the  Tribunal
             faces and  can  properly  be  held  inapplicable  for  legally
             adequate reasons; there may  be  evidence  that  circumstances
             have changed in a material  way  which  requires  a  different
             decision, again on the basis that proper reasons for that view
             are given; there may be significant new evidence  which  shows
             that the views originally expressed require consideration  for
             revision or refinement, even without any  material  change  in
             circumstances.  It may be that the passage of time  itself  or
             substantial new evidence itself warrants a  re-examination  of
             the position, even though the outcome may be unchanged.

             ....

             The system does not have the rigidity of the  legally  binding
             precedent but  has  instead  the  flexibility  to  accommodate
             individual  cases,  changes  fresh  evidence  and  the   other
             circumstances which we have set out'.

     14. The Tribunal Guidance Note 2011 No 2 states at paragraph 11 that:

             '... if there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue
             that has not been considered in the Country Guidance case  or,
             if a subsequent case includes further  issues  that  have  not
             been considered in the CG  case,  the  judge  will  reach  the
             appropriate conclusion on the evidence,  taking  into  account
             the conclusion in the CG case so far as it remains relevant.'

         At paragraph 12:

             '... Where Country Guidance has become outdated by  reason  of
             developments in the country in  question,  it  is  anticipated
             that a  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  have  such
             credible fresh evidence as envisaged in paragraph 11 above'.

     15. The judge made a detailed consideration of the background  evidence
         before him and contrasted the evidence referred  to  in  IK  and  A
         (Turkey) [2003] UKIAT.  It is not correct, as  the  grounds  state,
         that the judge's justification was that the  Country  Guidance  was
         too old.  I am satisfied that the judge's approach was in line with
         the case law  and Presidential Tribunal Guidance Note  referred  to
         above, in that the judge looked at the current evidence and came to
         a reasoned view that  there  had  been  a  'reeling  back'  of  the
         evidence in relation to torture.  For example the judge  contrasted
         the recording in the country guidance that the background  evidence
         was that 'torture continues to be endemic in Turkey'  and  that  it
         'might well deserve the categorisation of systematic'.   The  judge
         contrasted this with the  current  background  country  information
         including the 2013 US  State  Department  Report  which  the  judge
         states at [12]:

             '...  recorded  the  existence  of  reports  of  arbitrary  or
             unlawful killings by the government or its agents'.

     16. The judge went on  to  record  and  discuss  the  current  evidence
         including (in the 2013 US State Department Report) in  relation  to
         torture:

             'The constitution and law prohibit such practices,  but  there
             were reports that some  government  officials  employed  them.
             Human rights organizations continued to report allegations  of
             torture and abuse, especially of persons who  were  in  police
             custody  but   not   in   a   place   of   detention,   during
             demonstrations, and during transfers  to  prison,  where  such
             practices were more difficult to document.'

     17. The judge went on at [13] and [14] to discuss in  some  detail  the
         evidence that there were still reports and allegations  of  torture
         but not in places of  detention.   He  also  relied  on  background
         country information in the same report that 297 digital  audio  and
         video  systems  had  been  installed  'in  provincial   anti-terror
         directorates' between 2007 and 2012.  Although paragraph 11 of  the
         appellant's grounds of appeal referred to their being  no  evidence
         of  audio and video recording  being  installed,  that  is  clearly
         incorrect and has no merit.  The  judge  also  considered,  in  the
         round, the government campaign of 'zero tolerance' for torture.

     18. The skeleton argument before me purported to expand the appellant's
         argument in relation to the judge's consideration  of  the  Country
         Guidance.  Although  it  was  argued  that  the  judge  misdirected
         himself by requiring systemic/systematic breaches of  Human  Rights
         as a condition precedent to found a real risk of a breach, that  it
         not what the judge did; the judge was  not  considering  conditions
         precedent for a real risk, but rather was contrasting the  evidence
         at the time of the Country Guidance which showed that  torture  was
         systematic and pervasive, and the evidence before the  judge  which
         he found showed that the situation had improved.  That is  entirely
         different from a consideration of whether there was a real risk and
         the relevant standard of proof, which the judge correctly  directed
         himself on at [7].

     19. It was argued  that  the  judge  also  departed  from  the  country
         guidance as the 2013 US  State  Department  Report  indicated  that
         there were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.   It
         was argued that the absence of politically motivated disappearances
         did not automatically lead to the  inference  that  there  was  not
         widespread torture.  Although the judge considered this  issue  and
         was of the view that if torture was still endemic there would  have
         been  at  the  very  least   reports   of   politically   motivated
         disappearances, that is not  the  same  as  equating  torture  with
         disappearance.  Instead the judge  was  evaluating  the  background
         evidence, including of no reports of political  disappearances,  in
         the round.

     20. It was argued that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  why
         evidence of 950 reports of torture in the 2013 US State  Department
         Report and cited by the judge at [13] was irrelevant  to  the  real
         risk  that  it  was  stated  the  appellant  faced.   That   is   a
         misunderstanding of the judge's findings.  The judge did  not  find
         that there was no evidence of torture  but  that  (again  at  [13])
         there was nothing to indicate that  the  'practice  of  torture  in
         places of detention was systematic'.  The judge  was  of  the  view
         that the evidence indicated that there were reports of  torture  in
         police custody,  during  demonstrations  and  during  transfers  to
         prison but not in places of detention.  In relation to  the  report
         of 950 reports  of  torture  the  judge  noted  that  this  extract
         supported the proposition that unlawful violence was  practised  in
         the course of disrupting  protests  and  rallies,  rather  than  in
         detention.  The judge  also  relied  on  the  evidence  that  those
         arrested for ordinary crimes were as likely to suffer  torture  and
         mistreatment in detention as those arrested for political offences,
         as not supporting the proposition  that  torture/maltreatment  were
         inflicted on account of political opinions.

     21. In relation to evidence of torture it was  argued  that  the  judge
         failed to consider, I was pointed to page 17 of the 2013  US  State
         Department Report which referred  to  assertions  that  there  were
         several thousand political  prisoners  from  across  the  political
         spectrum.  However Mr Gilbert was unable  to  say  how  reports  of
         political prisoners represented evidence of torture that the  judge
         had not considered.  I am satisfied that the judge  considered  all
         of the reports, including through his detailed consideration of  it
         and his reference at footnote 7 on page 16 of his determination  to
         having been provided with a 'copy of  the  relevant  parts  of  the
         report'.  The appellant's bundle, which was before me and the First-
         tier Tribunal indicates that the judge was provided with the entire
         report.  Although I was also referred to page 5 of the same  report
         in  relation  to  allegations  of  torture,  the  judge   recorded,
         including at [12], the references in the 2013 US  State  Department
         Report to torture.  As already noted, it was  the  judge's  finding
         that the current evidence did not support a finding that  the  risk
         of torture specifically in places of detention were at  the  levels
         found in the Country Guidance.

     22. It was argued that the judge made an unsupported finding that  CCTV
         would deter abuse.  However as noted above, the original grounds of
         appeal, as well as the skeleton argument, referred to  evidence  of
         proposed installation of CCTV whereas the judge clearly  considered
         evidence in [13] that 297 digital audio and video systems had  been
         installed.  The judge made a number of other findings properly open
         to him as to why this would be of relevance.  Mr Gilbert's argument
         that the judge had failed to consider all the  relevant  background
         information has no force.  Although he pointed to  the  extract  of
         the Turkey Operational Guidance Note  that  was  before  the  judge
         including  3.9.5  which  refers  to  police  'routinely   detaining
         demonstrators for a few hours at a time' and 3.9.12 which refers to
         numerous allegations in a 2010 report  about  the  use  of  torture
         particularly in unofficial places of detention, this was a  general
         overview.  In addition I am satisfied that it  is  clear  that  the
         judge did consider this information; I note that at paragraph [14d]
         the judge indicated that he was not directed to:

             '... any part of the Operational Guidance Note or to  any  new
             evidence in it post-dating the determinations in A(Turkey) and
             IK indicating that torture remained at  the  level  at  which,
             consistently with the evidence before the  Tribunal  in  those
             appeals, it was found to be.'

         The fact that the judge did not specifically list  each  and  every
         item before him does not detract from the judge's  overall  rounded
         assessment and finding in relation to the evidence  that  there  no
         reports of systematic torture  in  official  places  of  detention,
         including as the judge considered the installation of CCTV  systems
         of importance in reducing such practices in  places  of  detention.
         That was a finding open to the judge.

     23. Although it was also argued that the judge had speculated that  the
         Rule of Law  in  the  UK  was  comparable  to  Turkey,  that  is  a
         misreading of the findings.  The judge in his discussion of the use
         of CCTV systems used the analogy of the introduction  of  recording
         systems in the United Kingdom as an example that  the  installation
         of such systems did not mean that torture and maltreatment remained
         endemic, but rather that such systems would deter  such  practices.
         Even if the judge was mistaken in using this  analogy,  it  is  not
         material as the judge gives clear reasons, aside from this example,
         for considering the installation of  these  systems  would  prevent
         abuse.

     24. It was also argued that the judge speculated at  [14a]  that  there
         would be a continuing improvement  from  2003.   I  note  that  the
         judge's first finding in [14a] was that his  findings  at  [11]  to
         [13] in relation to the differences in evidence from  the  time  of
         the Country Guidance cases and 2013 applied.  The judge also relied
         on the comments made by the Tribunal in IK that it recognised  that
         conditions were improving and that there  had  been  a  significant
         decrease in the number of complaints of torture.  The judge went on
         to state that there was nothing before  him  to  indicate  that  he
         should not have assumed that there would not have been a continuing
         improvement.  That comment must be seen in  light  of  the  judge's
         determination in its entirety  including  the  evidence  which  the
         judge considered and set out at [13] and [14] and  his  conclusions
         in relation to this issue at [15].  Those were findings which  were
         open to him.

     25.  Although  reference  was  also  made  to   the   judge   allegedly
         misdirecting himself at paragraphs [14b] to [14e] as to the  nature
         of Country Guidance determinations  there  is  no  merit  in  those
         arguments.  Even if the judge was in error in his discussion as  to
         the passage of time in itself (although in doing so he  echoed  the
         presidential  guidance  referred  to  above  that  credible   fresh
         evidence that has not been considered in the Country Guidance  case
         should be considered) any error  was  not  material  as  the  judge
         identified  elsewhere  the  material  evidence  which  led  to  his
         conclusions (as set out at [15]).

     26. Although reference was made to the judge's reference at the end  of
         [14] to his own experiences as a judge, again any error in doing so
         was not material, including as the judge confirmed that it was  not
         a foundation for his conclusions.

     27. In conclusion therefore, the judge's  findings  were  detailed  and
         carefully reasoned including that  at  [12]  the  Country  Guidance
         tribunal  expressly  indicated  (at  paragraph  110)   that   these
         'questions  will  require  review  as  further   evidence   becomes
         available.'  The judge gave adequate reasons for what was a limited
         departure from IK.

     28. In any event, even if the judge had not given adequate reasons  for
         that departure, the argument on the Country Guidance  is  something
         of a red herring.  The judge at  paragraphs  16  to  18  gave  very
         detailed reasons why the appellant was not found  to  be  credible.
         Even if it were considered that the judge erred in not  considering
         IK binding, the judge made a detailed assessment of the appellant's
         evidence in the round including of  his  claim  that  he  had  been
         detained and tortured at police stations which the judge  said  did
         not accord with the extract from 2013 US  State  Department  Report
         (that there were allegations of torture/abuse of persons  who  were
         in police custody 'but  not  in  a  place  of  detention').   I  am
         satisfied that such a finding, which the judge  considered  in  the
         round in light of a number of other negative credibility  findings,
         is  not  inconsistent  with  following  IK.   Therefore,   in   the
         alternative, any error made by the judge in his  assessment  of  IK
         was not material.

     29. In conclusion there is no merit in Ground 1.

    Ground 2

     30. The second ground in the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  was  in
         relation to the adequacy of  the  judge's  reasoning  and  that  he
         resorted to speculation.  These grounds were set out at  paragraphs
         12 to 14 of the grounds of appeal on which permission was  granted.
         Although the judge is  criticised  for  his  findings  at  [16]  in
         relation to medical treatment, this is no more than a  disagreement
         with the judge's findings that there was no documentary evidence to
         support the proposition (which underpinned one of  the  appellant's
         claims) that medical practitioners would have not  treated  him  or
         provided him with a report/ or that they would have reported him to
         the authorities.  The judge was entitled to find that there was  no
         independent documentary evidence supportive of these issues. I note
         that this was not pursued by Mr Gilbert and I find it to be without
         merit.

     31. Paragraph 13 of the grounds argues that  the  judge  made  findings
         that the authorities would not have asked the appellant  to  become
         an informer.  The grounds argue that this is based on  the  judge's
         personal assumptions and was not supported by  the  evidence.   The
         grounds refer to the fact that one of the risk factors in IK is  if
         an individual has been asked to become an informer,  which  it  was
         stated suggests that this was common practice.  However  the  judge
         gave detailed reasons for not accepting that it was the practice at
         the relevant time in Turkey  to  ask  someone  in  the  appellant's
         situation to be an informer.  The  judge's  reasoning  included  an
         indication that he was aware that 'whether the appellant became  an
         informer or was asked to become one' was included  as  a  potential
         risk factor in IK, but gave adequate reasons, including the lack of
         up to date evidence, for not accepting that it was the practice  at
         the relevant time.  This was a finding open to the judge.

     32. Although Mr Gilbert made a number of submissions in relation to the
         judge's credibility findings at [18] which were not in the  grounds
         of appeal; in any  event  these  arguments  were  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with the judge's reasoned findings.   The  judge  drew
         together the various strands of the  appellant's  account  and  the
         evidence that was before the judge and considering the entirety  of
         the judge's findings, he came to conclusions that  were  reasonably
         open to him.

    Failure to analyse IK risk factors

     33. It was argued (at paragraph 19 of the grounds of appeal) that:

             'the immigration judge's 'in the alternative' analysis of  the
             Determination 'in the event' he is wrong about IK  is  equally
             flawed'.

         However this ground is misconceived.  The judge  did  not  indicate
         that he was analysing the risk factors in the  event  that  he  was
         wrong about IK.  The judge had set out in conclusion at  [19]  that
         he did not accept the appellant  to  be  a  reliable,  credible  or
         truthful witness and set out specifically that he  did  not  accept
         any  of  his  account  of  any  interest  in  him  by  the  Turkish
         authorities, other than in relation to his requirement  to  perform
         military service (and the judge did not accept that  the  appellant
         had  a  genuine  conscientious  or  moral  objection  to   military
         service).

     34. It  was  in  this  context  that  the  judge  then  considered  the
         appellant's risk  on  return  as  someone  who  has  not  performed
         military service and who is a failed asylum seeker.

     35. Therefore Mr Gilbert is incorrect in his submission that the  judge
         should have considered the risk factors not at the airport  but  in
         the  appellant's  home  area.    In  addition,  the  assessment  at
         paragraph 25 was only made in the alternative that  the  judge  was
         wrong in relation to the judge's very specific finding at [24] that
         there would be no suspicion or belief that Mr Gilbert was or  might
         be assisting the PKK in the mountains.

     36. Although Mr Gilbert argued that the approach to IK was  wrong,  any
         error was therefore immaterial.   The  judge  did  not  accept  the
         appellant as credible so there was no requirement to assess risk in
         his home area.  In any event the factors which the Tribunal  in  IK
         adopted from A (Turkey) are not to be  treated  as  'some  kind  of
         checklist'.

     37. In relation to the judge's assessment of the  appellant's  risk  at
         the airport although it was argued that the  judge  ought  to  have
         considered IK in light of RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and  whether
         the appellant would be required to lie about his asylum application
         to avoid a risk of harm.  Although the judge did  not  specifically
         cite RT (Zimbabwe) the judge implicitly considered  the  rationale,
         as he indicated at [27] that the appellant  'can  truthfully  state
         that his account was disbelieved'.  Mr Gilbert's argument that  the
         appellant would have to lie about being a Kurdish supporter ignores
         the judge's credibility findings including at [19] that it  is  not
         accepted that the appellant was 'a reliable, credible  or  truthful
         witness' nor was it accepted that after 2009 that he took  part  in
         rallies and or demonstrations or that he was involved in the BDP or
         the DTP.

     38. Mr Gilbert's arguments on this ground were again therefore no  more
         than a disagreement with the judge's findings.

    Decision:

     39. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 2 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

