
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02905/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 24th August 2015                  |On 28th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 Caiyun Xue
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clough, promulgated on  2nd  June  2015,  dismissing  her  asylum
    appeal.

 2. Her first ground is  that  the  judge  erred  in  reaching  an  adverse
    credibility finding at paragraph 12 "by not  relying  on  any  fact  or
    evidence to support the finding" and "by falling into speculation".

 3. The judge granting permission thought  it  arguable  that  the  judge's
    reasoning "contained in less than  four  lines  of  paragraph  12"  was
    inadequate.

 4. Mr Winter submitted that the case raised a short point,  and  that  the
    grant of permission hit the nail  on  the  head.   The  judge  did  not
    provide reasons for her conclusion.  The case fell into the category of
    a bare and therefore insufficient statement of disbelief, as  described
    in MK (duty to give reasons) [2013] UKUT 00641.

 5. Mr Winter acknowledged that it might be construed that the judge  found
    the claim to fail even "taken at highest" at paragraph 13, based on  QH
    (Christians - risk) China [2014] UKUT 86.  However, he said that if the
    appellant had been accepted as entirely credible it would  follow  that
    all her  close  relatives  had  been  arrested  for  reasons  of  their
    religion, and in those circumstances QH might not provide the  complete
    answer.  The appellant might be at risk in the light of the fate of her
    family, being perceived as engaging  in  assertive  religious  activity
    which did attract a risk.  In her witness statement, the appellant  had
    said that her relatives did proselytise.

 6. Although there were three other grounds, Mr Winter did not press  them.
    He submitted that a fresh hearing was required.

 7. In a Rule 24 response the respondent says that  the  finding  that  the
    appellant is not credible is supported by the explanation that she  was
    evasive when questioned.  The judge considered the  relevant  case  law
    regarding risk on religious grounds.  The appellant's evidence was that
    her parents were "rumoured" to have been taken by the authorities.  She
    produced no evidence of risk on return.  It was  implausible  that  any
    further consideration would lead to a different conclusion.

 8. Ms Aitken added that the judge was entitled to form the view  that  she
    did, based  on  having  heard  the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant,
    including cross-examination.  She also submitted that even at highest a
    reported rumour that the appellant's parents  had  been  taken  by  the
    authorities, which she had made no real attempt to investigate, did not
    support a risk to her  for  any  religious  activities,  and  that  the
    determination should stand.

 9. I pointed out that the determination at paragraph 22 endorsed the "very
    detailed  reasons"  in  the  respondent's  refusal  letter,  and  asked
    representatives whether that carried any significance.  Ms Aitken  said
    that the reference further supported the judge's conclusion.  Mr Winter
    said  that  paragraph  22  lacked  substance.   It   came   after   the
    consideration of the family planning and Article 8 aspects  (no  longer
    pursued) and possibly did not relate to the  credibility  finding.   If
    there were any ambiguity, the  point  could  not  add  to  the  judge's
    reasoning.  There was danger in the adoption wholesale of  the  reasons
    of one party, especially after further evidence had been led.

10. I reserved my determination.

11. Paragraph 12 of the determination reads:

         "I did not find the appellant credible as to the persecution of her
         family in China because they were Christians  nor  did  I  find  it
         credible that she has lost contact with them.  She was evasive when
         questioned about her evidence.  I do not accept the  appellant  was
         unaware of the possibility of claiming asylum either."

12. The concise and focused presentation of the case by Mr Winter  went  to
    the determination's apparent weak point.   However,  I  find  that  the
    reasoning although brief is nevertheless adequate,  once  analysed  and
    put in context.

13. The appellant allegedly lost contact with her parents at the  beginning
    of 2011.  Her attempt to find out about them  has  been  limited  to  a
    telephone call to an old school friend in the village.  That is feeble.
     It was for the judge to assess whether the appellant was a direct  and
    truthful or an evasive and unreliable witness, as to which she had  the
    advantage of hearing directly from her.  The judge relates at paragraph
    11 that the appellant's oral evidence included (a) for the  first  time
    the revelation of the existence of a  great  family  friend  living  in
    London who had given her financial support but who also  did  not  know
    what had happened to her parents, and (b) that her Christian group were
    called "shouters" but she did not know the name until she consulted her
    lawyer.  Paragraph 7 notes the appellant's explanations  for  her  late
    claim.  All of these are self-evidently weak points in the evidence  of
    someone claiming to be in need of international protection due to  real
    risk to her person, and paragraph 12 connects to them.

14. Paragraph 13 notes the country guidance and the risk  which  may  exist
    "for  certain  individual  Christians  who   choose   to   worship   in
    unregistered churches and who conduct themselves in such a  way  as  to
    attract the local authorities' attention to them",  and  goes  on  that
    there was "no evidence or suggestion from the appellant's evidence that
    she would fall into this category".   I  think  that  is  plainly,  and
    irrespective of the adverse credibility finding, a  finding  that  this
    case failed even if the appellant's evidence were to be taken  at  face
    value.  Mr Winter said there might have been a finding that the  rumour
    that the appellant's family had been taken by the authorities supported
    a real risk that the appellant might be  at  risk  of  persecution  for
    reasons based on perceptions of her religion.  Rather than a reasonable
    inference, it appears to me that would have been quite  a  considerable
    leap.

15.  The  refusal  letter  annexes  detailed  reasons.    The   aspect   of
    Christianity is dealt with at paragraphs 15 to 26, ending as follows:

         "... Your answers regarding the arrest of your father  and  brother
         and summons for interview of your sister have been vague.  You were
         born in 1988.  That would make you at least 15 years old  when  the
         arrest  and  detention  of   your   brother   and   your   sister's
         investigations took place.  Bearing in  mind  the  significance  of
         these events and your age ... it is expected that you would be able
         to provide additional information regarding events  which  you  now
         claim leave you in fear for your safety.  It is not  accepted  that
         your family were arrested, interviewed and questioned as  you  have
         claimed."

16. There is danger in endorsing wholesale the  case  for  one  party,  but
    subject to that caveat, judges are entitled to agree with the  position
    of a party who has provided good reasons.  The analysis in the  refusal
    letter on this particular point and in general has not been shown to be
    less than sound.  I see nothing wrong  with  the  judge  endorsing  it,
    particularly as it comes after her own consideration.  It does  add  to
    her reasoning.

17. Mr Winter was correct not to press grounds  2,  3  and  4.   Ground  2,
    complaining that  the  judge  did  not  take  into  account  background
    evidence regarding risk to worshippers in unregistered churches,  added
    nothing to the country guidance which the judge did  cite.   Ground  3,
    based on the appellant's membership of the "shouters", is feeble  given
    her evidence at the hearing.  Ground 4, based  on  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's knowledge of English, leads nowhere.

18. The  dicta  of  courts  on  the  extent  of  reasoning  required  in  a
    determination range from those which can be used to suggest that  every
    detail must be inspected and considered, to those  which  suggest  that
    provided the judge says what she believes or disbelieves, a  brief  but
    clear explanation will suffice.  The  extent  of  explanation  required
    depends on the circumstances of the case.

19. While  determinations  should  not  be  prolix,  this  one  might  have
    benefited from a few further sentences.  Although the appellant's  oral
    evidence did not need to be repeated word for word, one or two specific
    examples of evading the question might have  been  given.   However,  I
    find that the determination is a legally adequate  explanation  to  the
    appellant and her advisers of why she was not found  credible  and  why
    her appeal failed.   The judge made it clear that she did not find  the
    witness a reliable witness in the essential aspects  of  her  evidence.
    Her determination should not be made good by finding additional reasons
    which are not in it, but read fairly and as a  whole  it  contains  the
    reasons for that adverse credibility conclusion  and  for  the  overall
    rejection of the case, which was manifestly weak.

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                           [pic]
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                           27 August 2015
