
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02416/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd October 2015                  |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr Hafiz Awais Arif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Spicer, promulgated on 23rd June 2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 15th  June  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Hafiz  Awais   Arif.    The   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  24th
    April  1988.   He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State refusing his claim for asylum under paragraph 336 of
    HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that  he  risks  persecution  if  returned  to
    Pakistan because he is gay and it is not permitted in Islam to  be  gay
    "but he cannot control his feelings" (paragraph 35).   In  the  UK,  he
    shares accommodation with other Pakistani nationals,  but  he  has  not
    told them he is gay.  He relies on them for help when he has no  money.
    He worries that if he told them that he was gay that they would  reject
    him.  His claim is that he has attended the gay pride parade in the UK,
    where he took three photographs, which he submitted in evidence.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In this case, the  Appellant  was  unrepresented,  on  account  of  his
    solicitor having a medical appointment on the day in question, which it
    was alleged by the solicitor, made it difficult for him to  attend  the
    hearing.  Through no fault of his own, therefore, the Appellant did not
    have the legal assistance that he expected at the hearing.   The  judge
    had before him a request for an adjournment on the day of the  hearing.
    This was based on a clerical  error  that  the  Appellant's  bundle  of
    evidence had not been received by Counsel at 12  Old  Square  Chambers,
    with the result that the Counsel had been unable to attend the  hearing
    (see paragraph 13).

 5. The judge gave proper consideration to the Procedure Rules  2014  which
    empowers the Tribunal to adjourn a hearing  under  Rule  4(3)(h).   The
    judge undertook to remedy any disadvantage to the Appellant  by  taking
    extra care to ensure that he was not unfairly prejudiced, but  applying
    the Procedure Rules before him, and  bearing  in  mind  the  overriding
    objective, the judge decided to proceed (see  paragraph  14(ii)).   The
    judge heard evidence from the Appellant's witness, Mr Nouman Al Haq, as
    well as from the Appellant, and  there  was  cross-examination  of  the
    witnesses.

 6. The judge considered the evidence of the Appellant's gay  relationships
    in the UK.  It was alleged that the Appellant had  short  relationships
    with a Mr Jay Kumar from Sri Lanka, and  then  with  Mr  Radhu  Radesh.
    However, "the Appellant has no photographs or any other evidence of his
    two relationships because he wanted to  keep  them  secret"  (paragraph
    34).  Consideration was given to the Appellant's attendance at the  gay
    pride parade, where he took three photographs, but the judge  concluded
    that "the photographs were all taken on the same day"  (paragraph  38).
    Moreover, "the Appellant did not claim asylum earlier because, when his
    visa expired, he applied for further leave to remain".  The Appellant's
    argument was that he did not realise  it  was  possible  to  apply  for
    asylum as a gay man (see paragraph 39).

 7. The Respondent Secretary of State's  position  was  that  she  did  not
    accept that the Respondent was a gay man at  all  (see  paragraph  50).
    For example,

         "There was no plausible reason why the Appellant should say he  was
         in a relationship with 'Lee' in September  2014,  if  'Lee'  was  a
         nickname for Mr Radhu Radesh, when according to his  own  evidence,
         his relationship with Radhu Radesh had ended almost a year  before"
         (see paragraph 15(ii)).

 8. Under the heading "is  the  Appellant  a  gay  man?",  the  judge  gave
    consideration to his sexual  orientation  and  stated  that,  "I  place
    little weight on the evidence of Mr Ulhaq, whose  evidence  was  solely
    based on information given to him by the Appellant.  He had  never  met
    either Mr Radhu Radesh or Mr Jay Kumar ..." (paragraph 61).

 9. Ultimately, the judge reasoned that,

         "Although I accept  that  corroboration  is  not  necessary  for  a
         positive credibility finding, I agree with the Respondent  that  it
         would be expected that the Appellant would  have  some  documentary
         evidence of his relationship with  Mr  Radhu  Radesh,  and  Mr  Jay
         Kumar, such as photographs or emails, or even tickets for entry  to
         XOYO club, where  he  said  that  he  met  Mr  Radhu  Radesh.   The
         relationship with Mr Radhu Radesh is claimed  to  have  lasted  for
         some nine months, and that with Mr Jay  Kumar  some  three  months.
         The lack of  such  evidence  which  might  reasonably  be  expected
         adversely affects the Appellant's credibility.   I  do  not  accept
         that the Appellant had a gay relationship with Mr Radhu  Radesh  or
         Mr Jay Kumar" (paragraph 64).

10. Similarly, the judge placed no weight on the copy email evidence of the
    Appellant  having  registered  with  a  number  of  lesbian   and   gay
    organisations (see paragraph 65).  Indeed, the judge  observed  how  on
    the Appellant's own evidence, he had no gay relationships  in  Pakistan
    and he was not viewed as being a gay man in Pakistan (paragraph 67).

11. The judge proceeded to dismiss the asylum claim as well as the claim to
    humanitarian protection, and after giving consideration  to  Article  3
    ECHR claims, rejected these also.  As far as the Appellant's Article  8
    claims are concerned, these were also rejected.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state that the judge's reasoning in terms of
    the Appellant's sexual orientation was  flawed  in  the  light  of  the
    latest cases from the European courts.  However,  it  was  also  stated
    that the judge was wrong to have refused an adjournment.

13. On 29th July 2015, permission to  appeal  was  granted  solely  on  the
    ground that the judge may have erred in law in refusing an adjournment.
     This was despite the fact that the judge gave  full  reasons  for  her
    conclusions that she was not satisfied that the Appellant was gay  (see
    paragraphs 60 to 66).  In granting permission, it was also  noted  that
    there was nothing in the specific point made in the  grounds  that  the
    adjournment until the afternoon was only necessitated by  the  need  to
    read evidence sent at the last minute (see  paragraph  16).   This  was
    because it might be said that if the solicitors had been made aware  in
    the morning that the case was being put back  to  the  afternoon,  they
    would have had a further opportunity to arrange representation.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 2nd October 2015, Mr Waheed,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that permission to appeal  had  only
    been granted on the specific issue of whether the refusal to  grant  an
    adjournment was an error of law.  Mr Waheed  made  two  submissions  in
    this regard.

15. First, he stated that there were complex cases in  relation  to  sexual
    orientation from the highest courts of the land and from  the  European
    courts in the form of HJ (Iran) and the A, B and C  v  Staatssecretaris
    van Veiligheid cases.  They  had  been  referred  to  in  the  skeleton
    argument  submitted  on  behalf  of  the   Appellant   by   his   legal
    representatives.   What  the  Appellant  needed  at  the  hearing   was
    Counsel's assistance in being  able  to  demonstrate  how  these  cases
    really impacted upon the Appellant's case.  The judge does not  explain
    that she brought these cases to the attention of the Appellant and gave
    him time to consider them so that he might have something to say  about
    these cases.

16. Second, there were other issues of wider importance such as sufficiency
    of protection and internal relocation that the judge could have alerted
    the Appellant to which she did  not.   Therefore,  although  the  judge
    maintained that every care had been taken to assist the Appellant,  the
    evidence shows that this was not necessarily so.

17. For his part, Mr Kandola submitted  that  the  judge  directed  herself
    entirely appropriately in circumstances where the Appellant was without
    representation.

18. First, she had said,

         "I explained to the Appellant that his case would not be prejudiced
         by the absence of his representative.  I set out the procedure  and
         told him that I would assist him in putting his case.  I told him I
         am independent.  I told him that I had read the Appellant's  bundle
         which had been prepared by his solicitors" (paragraph 20).

19. Second, it was in this context, that the judge had informed herself  of
    the duties that lay on her under the Procedure Rules 2014  in  relation
    to the application  for  an  adjournment  and  applied  the  overriding
    objective appropriately.  Third, the background to this case  does  the
    Appellant's side no credit  whatsoever.   This  shows  that  there  was
    initially a faxed request on 12th June 2015 for the appeal time  to  be
    set for 3pm on 15th June to enable the solicitor to  attend  a  medical
    appointment.  However, there was no evidence to show that this  was  an
    urgent medical appointment that could not be altered.  The  application
    was rejected.  Thereafter, on the morning of 15th June 2015 there was a
    faxed request at  11.11am  requesting  an  adjournment.   It  is  quite
    obvious that this is rather late because hearings start at 10am in  the
    morning.  The basis of this application was that  "due  to  a  clerical
    error the Appellant's bundle of  evidence  had  not  been  received  by
    Counsel at 12 Old Square Chambers".

20. Why this should have been so is not made clear by the  reference  to  a
    "clerical error".  Plainly  proper  instructions  were  not  set  in  a
    timeous fashion.  In any event, the request was after  start  of  court
    business at 10am on 15th June  2015.   The  Tribunal  would  have  been
    entirely right to have refused a request for an  adjournment,  applying
    the overriding objective, in  circumstances  such  as  these,  and  the
    Appellant's  remedy  lay  against  his   own   solicitors   and   legal
    representatives for such  fundamental  errors  in  providing  him  with
    representation.

21. In reply, Mr Waheed submitted that the Procedure  Rules  refer  to  the
    overriding objective and that this has the  principle  of  "fairly  and
    justly" disposing of an appeal.  The appeal here could  not  have  been
    fairly and justly disposed given that the leading cases  of  HJ  (Iran)
    and A, B and C were not brought to the attention of the Appellant.

No Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  Notwithstanding Mr Waheed's valiant efforts to  persuade  me
    otherwise, this application is without merit.

23. The judge has bent over backwards to be extraordinarily  fair  to  this
    Appellant, has acted entirely in accordance with the  law  in  applying
    the overriding objective and bearing in mind that she had to deal "with
    the case in ways which are proportionate to the importance of the  case
    ..." and "using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively" (see
    paragraph 14(ii)).

24. She has explained  to  the  Appellant  that  "his  case  would  not  be
    prejudiced by the absence of his representative" and that she then "set
    out the procedure" for him and told him that she would  assist  him  in
    putting  his  case.   The  suggestion  that  leading   cases   in   the
    jurisdiction were not explained to him is a hopeless point.   It  would
    be otherwise if the judge herself was  unaware  of  cases  such  as  HJ
    (Iran) and A, B and C.

25. The judge was so aware, and no doubt was aware of how the argument  was
    being put in the skeleton argument before her, and applies  herself  of
    these cases, and indeed then applied them to the appeal before her.   A
    layperson, is not required to get to grips with  such  a  complex  case
    when the judge herself is fully aware of how it affects and applies  to
    the situation before her.

26. As the judge had explained, "I told him that I am independent" and that
    "I would assist him in putting his case" (see paragraph 20).  The  same
    applies  to  any  argument  in  relation  to  internal  relocation  and
    sufficiency of protection.

27. This was  a  case  where  the  Appellant's  applications  to  join  gay
    organisations all postdated the refusal of his application for  further
    leave to remain on 28th June 2013.  He had provided  photographs  taken
    at the gay pride parade in London but these do not show him  as  a  gay
    activist.

28. The judge's essential findings are at paragraph 64, where she makes  it
    quite  clear  that  corroboration  is  not   necessary   for   positive
    credibility findings, but given that his  relationship  with  Mr  Radhu
    Radesh extended for some nine months and  his  case  was  that  he  had
    tickets for entry to XOYO club, some evidence of  some  sort  at  least
    would have been expected.

29. The judge was entirely correct in  holding  that,  "the  lack  of  such
    evidence which might reasonably  be  expected,  adversely  affects  the
    Appellant's credibility" (paragraph 64).  The reasoning  is  meticulous
    and the care shown by the judge beyond question.

Notice of Decision

30. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

31. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    2nd November 2015

