
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02797/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                           |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On: 18 December 2018                            |On 9 January 2019             |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 14 May 1974. He  arrived
    in the UK on 11 July 2009 on a visit visa valid until 24 December  2009
    and overstayed. He claims to have returned to Pakistan in June 2014 and
    to have come back to the UK in December 2014. On 4 January 2015 he  was
    arrested whilst attempting to fly to Northern Ireland  and  was  served
    with removal papers as an overstayer. On  8  January  2015  he  claimed
    asylum. His claim was refused on 12 February 2015.

 2. The appellant's claim is based on events that occurred during his visit
    to Pakistan from June to December 2014. He claims to have been arrested
    by five or six police officers in July 2014 when walking  with  friends
    in an outside garden near his home. His friends were also arrested.  He
    was blindfolded and taken to a police  station  and  was  detained  for
    seven or eight days. He was asked whether he knew some men and  whether
    he had links to any organisations. He told the police that he  did  not
    know anything. He was ill-treated and has retained scars as  a  result.
    On the day of his release they left him on the side of a street as they
    believed him to be dead. He was found by some people  and  taken  to  a
    clinic where he was given stitches. He contacted his brother who picked
    him up and took him to his sister's house in Jhelum because the  police
    had  been  coming  to  his  house  in  Rawalpindi  and  searching   his
    belongings. He stayed in Jhelum for six months and  did  not  encounter
    any problems, although the police went to his house in  Rawalpindi  six
    or seven times and asked his family where he was. He left Pakistan with
    the assistance of an agent and came back to the UK. The police had  not
    been to his family home since September  2014.  He  feared  persecution
    from the police if he returned to Pakistan  as  they  believed  he  had
    links with some organisation.

 3. In refusing the appellant's application, the respondent did not  accept
    the appellant's account of having returned to Pakistan in June 2014 and
    therefore rejected his claim to have encountered problems in 2014.  The
    respondent in any event found the appellant's account of his arrest  to
    be inconsistent and lacking in credibility. It was  not  accepted  that
    the appellant was at any risk on return and it was  not  accepted  that
    his removal to Pakistan would breach his human rights.

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig. Judge Pullig considered that  it  was
    clear from the grounds of appeal that Article 8 was not relied upon and
    he therefore only addressed the claim to be  at  risk  on  return.  The
    judge had regard to three expert reports, a country expert report  from
    Dr Livia Holden, a scarring report from Dr Andrew Mason and  a  medical
    report from Dr Rachel Thomas, Consultant Clinical Consultant. In  light
    of the medical evidence and on the lower standard of  proof  the  judge
    found the appellant's account of  being  arrested,  detained  and  ill-
    treated to be a credible one. However he did not accept that the police
    had any ongoing interest in the appellant and concluded that  he  would
    be at no risk on return  to  Pakistan.  Accordingly  he  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    seven grounds. Firstly, the judge failed to direct himself properly  on
    the principles of risk on return following past persecution;  secondly,
    the judge failed to take into account the country expert report  of  Dr
    Holden; thirdly the judge mistakenly  believed  the  reference  to  the
    appellant's imputed affiliation to a banned organisation came from  the
    respondent, whereas it was the appellant's own evidence;  fourthly  the
    judge made no clear finding on the appellant's account  of  the  police
    coming looking for him  six  or  seven  times;  fifthly  there  was  no
    evidential basis for the judge's finding that the appellant was not  as
    unwell as  he  claimed  when  he  was  released;  sixthly  the  judge's
    conclusion on risk on return was unreasonable; and seventhly Article  8
    ought to have been considered by the judge as it was  a  matter  before
    him.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,
    but was granted by the Upper Tribunal on a renewed application,  on  27
    August 2018.

 7. At an error of law hearing on 23 October 2018 I found no errors of  law
    in the judge's decision on asylum, humanitarian protection and  Article
    2 and 3 human rights grounds, but found that the judge had erred in law
    by failing to consider Article 8, as follows:

    "12. As I advised the parties at the hearing I agreed  that  the  judge
    had erred by failing to consider Article 8 when it seems that it was  a
    matter before him. Mr Avery conceded as much and accordingly a  resumed
    hearing is required for that aspect  of  the  appellant's  case  to  be
    decided.

    13. As for the remaining grounds of appeal, I  do  not  find  that  the
    judge erred in law. The judge was plainly mindful of the principles  in
    Demirkaya v Secretary Of State For Home Department [1999] EWCA Civ 1654
    in regard to past persecution being a strong indicator of  future  risk
    and indeed expressly referred to that at [135]. The judge gave  careful
    consideration to the nature and basis of the past  persecution,  noting
    that the appellant knew nothing of the reasons for  his  detention  and
    had no political involvement. It is asserted in ground three  that  the
    judge  made  a  mistake  of  fact  in  that  the  question  of  imputed
    association with a banned organisation  was  raised  by  the  appellant
    himself and not by  the  respondent  and  Ms  Butler  referred  to  the
    appellant's answer in his screening interview in that respect.  However
    what the judge was plainly saying at [127]  was  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was essentially that he did not know what was  the  basis  for
    the accusations by the police beyond the fact that he was asked whether
    he was linked to any organisations. As  the  judge  properly  found  at
    [126] and [127] there was no evidence to  show  that  the  police  were
    referring specifically to a political association and that the question
    of a Convention reason was therefore speculative. In any event,  it  is
    clear that the judge found that the police had exhausted  all  interest
    in the appellant after questioning him and searching his  home.  Taking
    the judge's findings at [131] and [132] together, it is clear that  the
    judge rejected the appellant's claim that the police were continuing to
    look for him and that they maintained an interest in  him,  given  that
    they had released him from detention and had  conducted  the  necessary
    searches of his home and  belongings,  with  no  further  visits  since
    September 2014.

    14. It was Ms Butler's submission that the country expert's  conclusion
    was that the appellant nevertheless remained at risk and that the judge
    had failed to consider that conclusion. However the judge plainly  took
    the expert's opinion into consideration when reaching  his  conclusions
    on risk on return. His consideration  of  the  expert  report  was  not
    simply confined to his findings at [133], but was plainly part  of  his
    overall consideration of the question of  risk  from  [129]  to  [135].
    Having carefully considered the expert report myself, it  seems  to  me
    that the expert's view was no more than that the appellant, as a failed
    asylum seeker returning to Pakistan who had previously  been  known  to
    the police, may be questioned by them on return to  Pakistan,  but  she
    does not then go on to explain why that would then lead  to  him  being
    persecuted on return. There is no view given by the expert  as  to  why
    the previous interest in the appellant prior to September 2014 would be
    maintained on his return  to  Pakistan  and  would  lead  to  the  ill-
    treatment described.  Paragraphs  21  and  26  do  not,  as  Ms  Butler
    submitted, provide such a view. That  was  precisely  the  point  Judge
    Pullig was making at [133] and I find no error in such a  finding.  The
    judge was fully entitled to conclude that the appellant had  failed  to
    show that there was any ongoing interest in him and that there was  any
    risk of his previous experiences being repeated on return to  Pakistan.
    Such a conclusion followed a full and careful  assessment  of  all  the
    evidence before him, including the expert  reports,  and  was  entirely
    open to him on the basis of that evidence.

    15. For all of those reasons I find no errors of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision on the question of risk on return and I uphold the decision in
    that respect. The judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights  (Article  2  and  3)  grounds
    therefore stands.

    16. However the appellant's challenge  in  relation  to  Article  8  is
    upheld and accordingly the case will be listed for a resumed hearing in
    the Upper Tribunal for a decision to be made on Article 8."

 8. The appeal came before me again for a resumed hearing  on  18  December
    2018, for a decision to be made on the appellant's Article 8 claim.

 9. At the hearing, Ms Fitzsimons sought to rely on Article 3  as  well  as
    Article 8 in relation to the appellant's mental health and the risk  of
    suicide, in light of a further medical report from  Dr  Rachel  Thomas,
    the Consultant Clinical Psychologist, dated 8 December 2018.  Mr  Avery
    had no objection to Article 3 being raised as a ground  of  appeal.  As
    the appellant had been identified by Dr Thomas, and recognised  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, as a vulnerable person,  I  ensured  that  he  was
    comfortable with the proceedings. He chose to wait outside the  hearing
    room whilst Ms Fitzsimons made her submissions.

10. Ms Fitzsimons submitted that the  starting  point  was  Judge  Pullig's
    positive  credibility  findings  and  his  acceptance  of  the  medical
    evidence. She referred to Dr Thomas's initial  report  and  conclusions
    and to the recent  report  in  which  Dr  Thomas  considered  that  the
    appellant's mental health had deteriorated and that he was at  risk  of
    committing suicide if he had  to  return  to  Pakistan.  Ms  Fitzsimons
    referred to the relevant test in Y & Z (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 in relation to the risk  of
    suicide. She submitted that the appellant had a subjective and  genuine
    fear of return to Pakistan and that he would be incapable, as a  result
    of his fear, of accessing facilities  in  that  country.  He  therefore
    satisfied the test in Y and Z and his removal would  be  in  breach  of
    Article 3. For the same reasons, there were very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration in Pakistan for the purposes of  Article
    8. Ms Fitzsimons relied in that regard on Dr  Thomas's  conclusions  on
    the appellant's inability to live a life  without  fear,  the  risk  of
    suicide, his inability to access  family  and  other  support  and  his
    inability to  find  work.  Ms  Fitzsimons  submitted  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances outside the immigration rules on the basis of
    the medical evidence and the impact of removal on the appellant and  he
    therefore also succeeded on Article 8 grounds.

11. Mr Avery submitted that, whilst  Judge  Pullig  found  the  appellant's
    account to be true, there were question marks over the  genuineness  of
    his claim, as he had overstayed and used false documents to  leave  and
    return to the UK  and  had  therefore  flagrantly  ignored  immigration
    control. This was not a matter of a  straightforward  genuine  account.
    The appellant's lack of honesty had not been included in  the  expert's
    assessment. Dr Thomas's assessment of risk  and  suicidality  was  only
    based on what the appellant had told her, but he had  a  motivation  to
    stay in the UK. It was necessary to look at the appellant's evidence in
    the context of the whole case and decide if his account could be relied
    upon. If it could not, then the expert's opinion carried little weight.
    In concluding that the appellant could not be supported by  his  family
    in Pakistan, Dr Thomas had not explored the fact that he had lived with
    them previously and why they would not now help him. Mr Avery submitted
    that there was nothing other than the medical issues in this  case  and
    the appellant could not, therefore, succeed on Article 8 grounds.

12. In reply Ms Fitzsimons submitted  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine
    victim of torture and would not be  able  to  cope  to  the  extent  of
    accessing any support in Pakistan.

Consideration and Discussion

13. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that his mental  health  has
    deteriorated to such an extent that he is at risk of  suicide  and  now
    meets the high threshold to establish an Article 3 claim.

14. The relevant test in such cases is set out in J v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629, as endorsed in Y and Z.

    "26. First, the test requires an assessment to be made of the  severity
    of the treatment which it is said that the applicant  would  suffer  if
    removed. This must attain a minimum level of severity.  The  court  has
    said on a number of occasions  that  the  assessment  of  its  severity
    depends on all the circumstances of the  case.  But  the  ill-treatment
    must  "necessarily  be  serious"  such  that  it  is  "an  affront   to
    fundamental humanitarian  principles  to  remove  an  individual  to  a
    country where he is at risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah  paras
    [38-39].

    27.  Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act  or
    threatened act of removal or expulsion and the inhuman treatment relied
    on as violating the applicant's article 3 rights. Thus  in  Soering  at
    para [91], the court said:

         "In so far as any liability under  the  Convention  is  or  may  be
         incurred, it is liability incurred by the  extraditing  Contracting
         State by reason of its having taken action which has  as  a  direct
         consequence the  exposure  of  an  individual  to  proscribed  ill-
         treatment."(emphasis added).

    See also para [108]  of  Vilvarajah  where  the  court  said  that  the
    examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the  foreseeable
    consequences of the removal of the applicants to Sri Lanka..."

    28.  Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the article 3 threshold
    is particularly high simply because it is a foreign  case.  And  it  is
    even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment is not  the  direct  or
    indirect responsibility of the  public  authorities  of  the  receiving
    state, but results  from  some  naturally  occurring  illness,  whether
    physical or mental. This is made clear in para [49] of D and para  [40]
    of Bensaid.

    29.  Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a suicide
    case (para [37] of Bensaid).

    30.  Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach  of
    article 3 in a suicide case, a question of importance  is  whether  the
    applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state upon which the
    risk of suicide is said to be based is objectively well-founded. If the
    fear is not well-founded, that will tend to weigh against there being a
    real risk that the removal will be in breach of article 3.

    31.  Sixthly, a further question of considerable relevance  is  whether
    the removing and/or the receiving state  has  effective  mechanisms  to
    reduce the risk of suicide. If there are effective mechanisms, that too
    will weigh heavily against  an  applicant's  claim  that  removal  will
    violate his or her article 3 rights."

15. The evidence in support of the appellant's claim to be suicidal is  the
    psychological report from Dr Thomas. Ms Fitzsimons' skeleton  argument,
    at [21] to [29], quotes relevant sections from Dr Thomas's two reports.
    In her first report Dr Thomas diagnosed  the  appellant  as  presenting
    with significant psychiatric symptoms of Major Depressive Disorder with
    a secondary diagnosis of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) but  did
    not consider him to be a suicide risk. By the time of her second report
    she considered that the appellant's  mental  health  had  significantly
    deteriorated and that he was a suicide risk. The decline in his  mental
    health was mostly due, she concluded, to the delay in the resolution of
    his immigration status and the dismissal of his appeal and prospect  of
    removal, as stated at [42] of her second report.

16. Judge Pullig accepted the medical and other expert opinions,  including
    Dr Thomas's report, at [118] of his decision,  and  made  his  positive
    credibility findings on that basis, and with regard to  the  fact  that
    the appellant only had to prove his  case  to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof. I cannot, and do not, go behind Judge Pullig's findings in  that
    regard and do not reject the conclusion that the appellant  has  mental
    health issues. However, having  said  that,  I  have  to  make  my  own
    assessment of the weight to be attached to Dr Thomas's  conclusions  on
    the risk to the appellant in terms of suicide and self-harm and ability
    to cope on return to Pakistan in light of those mental  health  issues.
    Dr Thomas is an expert in her field and I do not doubt her  opinion  on
    the basis of how the appellant presented before her  and  fully  accept
    that she would be able to recognise symptoms of  psychological  decline
    based upon the evidence before her. However I cannot  ignore  the  fact
    that Dr Thomas did not have an entirely complete and  accurate  picture
    of the appellant's circumstances when making her assessment.

17. It is relevant to note, as Mr Avery submitted, that there were areas in
    which Judge Pullig did  not  find  the  appellant's  account  credible.
    Whilst he accepted the core of the appellant's account, as he  said  at
    [119], he made it clear at [129] that he  had  reservations  about  his
    claim to have been released because the police believed him to be dead,
    he expressed concerns at [130] and [131] about the  account  of  police
    visits to his home and at [132] he concluded that he  did  not  believe
    the appellant's claim that the police continued to have an interest  in
    him. It is also relevant to note, as Mr Avery submitted, that this  was
    not a straightforward case of an applicant who had  been  found  to  be
    honest  in  all  respects.  The  appellant  has  admitted  using  false
    documents and a false identity to  leave  the  UK  and  return  to  the
    country, having paid an agent in the UK �3000 to leave  illegally  with
    an intention to return here and join his  wife  whom  he  had  left  in
    Northern Ireland. He  had  made  his  asylum  claim  only  after  being
    arrested when attempting to fly to Northern  Ireland.  Furthermore,  he
    had given no indication of any mental health problems when  interviewed
    about his claim and, on the contrary, had said that he  had  no  health
    concerns, the Rule 35 report referred only to physical scars and not to
    any mental health problems  and  his  grounds  of  appeal  included  no
    indication of any mental health problems. Although  Dr  Thomas  was  in
    possession of the respondent's refusal  decision  and  other  documents
    when preparing her report, there is no indication in  her  report  that
    she had taken account  of  these  matters  in  making  her  assessment.
    Rather, her assessment was based upon an acceptance of the  information
    provided to her by the appellant at the interview.

18. It is also a relevant consideration that the appellant did not  provide
    Dr Thomas with a complete and honest account of  his  circumstances  in
    other respects. It is notable that her assessment was based at [31] and
    [109] of her initial  report  upon  him  being  socially  isolated  and
    withdrawn and effectively living alone, whereas that was not the  case.
    Contrary to Dr Thomas's understanding that the appellant's wife was  in
    Pakistan ([19]), he had in fact been living with his wife for over  two
    years in the UK at  that  time  of  the  psychological  assessment  (as
    referred to in his wife's statement of 25 October 2017 at [7]). That is
    particularly relevant when considering Dr Thomas's view, at [130], that
    being reunited with his wife would be a significant protective  factor.
    In the most recent report Dr Thomas was under the impression  that  the
    appellant had only recently been reunited with his wife, as is apparent
    at [7], whereas that was clearly not the case. It is also of note  that
    in her first report, at [50]  and  [51],  Dr  Thomas  referred  to  the
    appellant's account of feeling claustrophobic in his house and  needing
    to be outside, whereas in her second report at  [18]  his  account  was
    that he rarely left his house. Dr Thomas did not  specifically  address
    that change in circumstances, but no doubt would have  been  influenced
    by the appellant's wife's apparent re-appearance.  The  fact  that  the
    appellant lied to Dr Thomas about such a significant aspect of his life
    in the UK certainly  raises  concerns  about  the  reliability  of  the
    account  he  gave  to  her  of  the  extent  of  the  symptoms  he  was
    experiencing  and  his  suicidal  ideations.  It  also  undermines  the
    conclusions reached by Dr Thomas.

19. It is relevant at this point to consider the observations made by  Lord
    Justice Sedley in Y and Z:

    "12. While no tribunal is bound simply to accept everything  that  such
    experts  say  because  they  have  gone  uncontradicted,  it  is   well
    established that the tribunal must  have,  and  must  give,  acceptable
    reasons for rejecting such evidence. ...

    13.  Similarly, where the factual basis of the psychiatric findings  is
    sought to be undermined by suggesting that  the  appellants  have  been
    exaggerating their symptoms, care is required."

and

    62.   None  of  this  reasoning  represents  a  licence  for  emotional
    blackmail by asylum-seekers. Officials and immigration judges  will  be
    right to continue to scrutinise the  authenticity  of  such  claims  as
    these with care. ..."

20. The latter  part  of  those  observations,  in  [62],  is  particularly
    pertinent in considering Dr Thomas's second report at  [34]  and  [57],
    where she refers to the appellant's stated intention  to  kill  himself
    rather than returning to Pakistan.

21. As I mentioned earlier, I have no doubt as to Dr Thomas's expertise  in
    assessing the appellant's psychological state, but it seems to me  that
    there are good reasons for being cautious in accepting her  conclusions
    on the extent of his mental health problems and the reality of  a  risk
    of suicide. I find myself in agreement with Mr Avery that only  limited
    reliance can be placed on Dr Thomas's  report  for  the  reasons  given
    above at [17] and [18]. There is no history of suicide attempts or self-
    harm. The assessment of suicidality is based upon the  appellant's  own
    assertions of his experiences and  feelings.  For  the  reasons  given,
    there is good reason to question the genuineness of those assertions.

22. In the circumstances, it seems to me that the appellant  fails  at  the
    first hurdle of the test in J. I do not  accept  that  his  threats  of
    suicide or self-harm are genuine and nor do I accept  that  his  mental
    health is at a level of severity that he  would  be  unable  to  access
    relevant medical treatment in Pakistan and that he would be  unable  to
    look to his family in Pakistan for support on his return. Judge  Pullig
    did not consider the appellant to be at risk on return to his home area
    and there is therefore no reason why he could not access  support  from
    his family as he had previously  done,  either  in  his  home  area  or
    elsewhere in Pakistan. Dr Thomas was of the view that  the  decline  in
    the  appellant's  mental  health  was  mainly  due  to  his   uncertain
    immigration status and therefore once he returns to Pakistan that would
    no longer be an issue.

23. For all of these reasons I do not accept that the appellant  has  shown
    that his removal to Pakistan would be in breach of Article  3.  Neither
    do I find that he has made out a claim on Article 8 grounds. I  do  not
    accept  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
    integration in Pakistan. He has close family members  in  that  country
    and would have their support on return. He would also have the  support
    of his wife who would return with him. He cannot, therefore,  meet  the
    criteria within the immigration rules on Article 8  grounds  and  there
    is, furthermore, nothing sufficiently compelling about his private life
    ties to the UK and his circumstances overall including  his  health  to
    justify a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

DECISION

24. The original Tribunal was found  to  have  made  an  error  of  law  in
    relation to Article 8 and the decision was set  aside.  I  re-make  the
    decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal on Article 3 and 8  human
    rights grounds.




    Anonymity

    The anonymity order previously made is continued, pursuant to  rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   [pic]    Dated: 19 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

