
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02703/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24th August 2017                       |On 13th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    mr pp
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V P Lingajorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [  ]  1989.   He  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 1st October 2009 on a Tier 4 (General)
    Student visa valid until 28th June 2012.  Subsequent applications  that
    he made to extend that visa were granted until 22nd May 2014.  Prior to
    the expiry of that visa the Appellant applied  for  further  leave  but
    that was refused.  He  claimed  asylum  on  10th  December  2014.   The
    Appellant's claim for asylum was based upon a fear that if returned  to
    Sri Lanka he would face mistreatment due to his  political  opinion  in
    supporting the LTTE.  That application was refused by Notice of Refusal
    dated 11th February 2015.  Thereafter there were considerable  hearings
    before the judiciary.  It is not necessary to recite them  all  herein,
    save for the fact that following  two  remittals  the  matter  returned
    before Immigration Judge Griffith at Taylor House on 14th  March  2017.
    In  a  Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on  30th  March  2017   the
    Appellant's appeal was again dismissed on all grounds.  It had prior to
    that appeal before being sent to the Upper  Tribunal  been  allowed  by
    Immigration Judge Majid back in March 2016.   Grounds  of  Appeal  were
    lodged to the Upper Tribunal.  That application was refused  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 11th May 2017.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal were lodged on 2nd June 2017.  Those grounds were
    considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb and permission was granted  on
    3rd July 2017.

 2. It is important to note the basis upon which permission to  appeal  was
    granted.  Judge Grubb stated:-

         "Ground 2 is arguable to the extent that the Judge does  not  fully
         take into account the sur place activities of the Appellant set out
         in  paragraph  14  and  15  of  his  witness  statement,  including
         fundraising in France and meeting there with  the  ex-commander  of
         the LTTE.

         Ground 1 is not arguable.  ... permission to appeal is  granted  on
         Ground 2 only".

 3. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Lingajorthy.  Mr Lingajorthy is familiar with this  matter.
    He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Clarke.

 4. The Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of Appeal  pursuant  to
    Rule 24 on the 20th July 2017.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  As a preliminary issue Mr Lingajorthy seeks
    to expand his Grounds of Appeal on the basis that  because  one  ground
    has been granted it is open to him to raise other issues that  were  in
    the Grounds of Appeal.  That is objected to by Mr  Clarke  and  I  rule
    that the direction given by Judge Grubb was extremely  clear  and  that
    the issue extant before me solely relates to Ground 2 of the Grounds of
    Appeal.  Those grounds are set out in the grounds originally drafted at
    paragraphs 11 to 17.  I am prepared to consider  the  grounds  as  they
    stand therein despite the narrowness that is set out within  the  grant
    of permission by Judge Grubb.

Submission/Discussions

 6. Mr Lingajorthy acknowledges that there is  a  unique  feature  to  this
    matter and contends that the Appellant was found credible on  the  core
    argument of his claim by Judge Griffith.   He  submits  the  judge  has
    failed to consider all the evidence in full and that  she  has  "cherry
    picked" the evidence upon which she has relied.  He  submits  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider it likely that the Appellant
    would be of interest to the authorities due to  his  very  limited  sur
    place activities and submits that the meeting of the leader of the LTTE
    in Europe in France was  not  considered  by  the  judge  nor  was  the
    Appellant's fundraising activities as set out at paragraphs 14  and  15
    of his witness statement dated 26th February 2016.

 7. He refers me to paragraphs 66, 67 and 68  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision and to paragraphs 14 and 15 of the witness  statement.
    He submits that the judge has not factored in the risk of return of the
    Appellant to Sri Lanka and a meeting with  Colonel  P  in  France.   He
    submits that the Appellant's  risk  on  return  is  undermined  by  the
    failure to give due and proper consideration to that  meeting  and  his
    activities.

 8. There is a further limb to Ground 2 in which the Appellant through  his
    legal representatives contends that the  report  of  the  International
    Truth and Justice Project of July 2015 was not properly considered  and
    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  take  into
    account the totality of the Appellant's LTTE involvement which included
    overt  fundraising  in  France,  funding  in  the  UK  and   being   in
    communication with the late leader of the LTTE  diaspora  post-conflict
    in France and that further the background  evidence  demonstrates  that
    the reasons for the authority's visits in 2012  and  2013  were  wholly
    consistent with the most recent evidence emanating from the Respondent.
     Mr Lingajorthy submits that the evidence of the  Appellant  would,  on
    his profile, attract attention and for the above reasons he asked me to
    find that there are material errors of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal and to set it aside and to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 9. In response Mr Clarke states that there is no material  error  of  law.
    He takes me to paragraph 14 of the witness  statement  and  points  out
    that a First-tier Tribunal Judge does not have to identify every  piece
    of evidence unless it is material and he submits that the complaint  is
    immaterial.  He  asked  me  to  look  and  give  due  consideration  to
    paragraphs 131 to 135 of the Appellant's asylum interview pointing  out
    that there is a staggering difference from the answers to the questions
    given therein to the allegations of sur place  activities  set  out  at
    paragraph 14 and that it cannot be construed  that  the  Appellant  has
    been  totally  credible  as  is  contended  by  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives.  He takes me through the decision of  Judge  Griffith.
    He points out that at paragraph 58 there are credibility issues  raised
    in the appeal and that these are noted at paragraphs 59 and 60 and that
    at paragraph 61 the judge considers that the Appellant has  embellished
    his evidence about the reasons his father fled to  India  and  that  at
    paragraph  62  credibility  issues  are  again  raised  by  the  judge.
    Further, at paragraph 64 Mr Clarke refers me to  the  fact  that  Judge
    Griffith did not accept the Appellant was subject to the level of  ill-
    treatment  described  and  submits  that  generally  it  was  the  view
    expressed by the judge that there has been an over-exaggeration of  the
    Appellant's case.  Further, he emphasises that  given  the  allegations
    made there is no attempt to withdraw the responses given  to  questions
    131-135 at the Appellant's asylum interview and  that  the  failure  to
    make an express finding  regarding  paragraphs  14  and  15  is  not  a
    material error and that the judge was aware of the  meeting  that  took
    place by the Appellant with the former LTTE leader.   He  asked  me  to
    find there is no material error of law and to dismiss the appeal.

10. He briefly turns to the second  point  raised  within  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal at Ground 2 relating to policy guidance pointing out  that  this
    was published a day after the decision was  promulgated  and  therefore
    any suggestion that  that  ground  is  made  out  because  of  this  is
    unsustainable.

11. In brief response Mr Lingajorthy emphasises strongly that he  considers
    paragraphs 14 and 15 to be of considerable relevance and not  merely  a
    piece of evidence that the judge has given scant consideration  to  and
    that the fact that the Appellant did not  boast  about  his  activities
    should not in any way detract from the strengths of his case.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. As set out above the issue upon which permission  to  appeal  has  been
    given in this matter is very limited.  It turns on the extent to  which
    the Appellant's meeting with an ex-commander of the LTTE in France  and
    his purported fundraising activities in France and  the  UK  have  been
    overlooked by the judge.  I am satisfied that that  is  not  the  case.
    The judge has given very detailed reasons in reaching her findings  and
    at paragraph 16 she has noted that:-

         "After arriving in the UK he (the Appellant)  went  on  holiday  to
         France, where he has relatives.  There he met a  person  called  P,
         whom he described in his witness statement as the person in  charge
         of the French LTTE movement in the diaspora, who  was  subsequently
         assassinated.  P had created an organisation called Tamil Forum and
         he advised the Appellant to attend the meetings in London.  He  has
         been to one meeting."

15. I am satisfied that that represented the Appellant's evidence and  that
    it was noted and duly considered by the judge in reaching her decision.
     It is true,  as  Mr  Clarke  sets  out,  that  there  is  considerable
    discrepancy between paragraphs 131 and 135 inclusive of the Appellant's
    asylum interview and paragraphs 14 and 15  of  his  witness  statement.
    That may not be explained but it really does  not  matter  because  the
    judge has gone on to give due consideration to the witness statement in
    her decision.  It is therein noted in paragraph 16.  I acknowledge that
    it may not be set out in detail in the decision paragraphs, but  it  is
    clear as Mr Clarke has set out, that a judge does not have to  identify
    every piece of evidence, but in this case she has identified it  and  I
    am satisfied that she has given due consideration to it.

16. Further, it is  abundantly  clear,  despite  Mr  Lingajorthy's  valiant
    attempts to submit that the Appellant was found to  be  credible,  that
    paragraphs 59 to 64 of the judge's decision  shows  that  there  was  a
    considerable exaggeration of the Appellant's case and  that  the  judge
    did not find the Appellant to be completely credible.   The  judge  has
    used words such as "an evolving story" and "an embellished account" and
    that generally issues of credibility are raised by his account.

17. Overall this is a very thorough decision.  The judge had accepted  that
    the Appellant had previously been involved with the  LTTE  up  to  2009
    when released from detention.  The judge concluded that  the  Appellant
    would not be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities today  based  on
    his previous LTTE involvement and  his  sur  place  activities.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge gave full  and  proper  consideration  to  the
    relevant evidence and that these were findings that she was entitled to
    make.  Consequently no material error of law is disclosed.

18. Turning very briefly to the Home  Office  guidance  on  Sri  Lanka  the
    Country Information Note was published on 31st March 2017.  That is the
    day after the judge promulgated her decision.  I am satisfied that  the
    judge considered all the evidence that was available  for  her  at  the
    time of decision and that the  contention  that  she  has  consequently
    erred in law by virtue of the documentation that she considered is  not
    made out.  For all the above reasons I am satisfied that  there  is  no
    material error of law  in  the  decision  of  Judge  Griffith  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error  of
law and the appeal is dismissed.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity has been granted in this matter to the Appellant.  No  application
is made to  vary  the  original  order  and  the  Appellant's  anonymity  is
maintained.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

