
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02463/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 March 2016                        |On 5 April 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                            mr Aryan Foad Mohamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Solicitor, Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, an Iraqi national from Baghdad,  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Mather
    sitting at Bennett House on  11  August  2015)  dismissing  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds his appeal against the
    decision of the respondent to refuse to recognise him as a refugee  and
    to make directions for  his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Section 10 of the 1999 Act.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the appellant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 2 November 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley gave her  reasons  for
    granting the appellant permission to appeal on a renewed application to
    the Upper Tribunal:

         3.   The grounds of appeal  contend  firstly  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal erred by failing  to  make  proper  findings  on  the
             evidence of the appellant regarding his father. It was  unfair
             that the respondent was not required to  confirm  whether  the
             documents were genuine or not as the documents  emanated  from
             her and thus she was uniquely in the best position to do this.
             Secondly the grounds  contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             erred by failing to make findings as to whether return of  the
             appellant would breach Article 15(c  )  of  the  Qualification
             Directive.

         4.   It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal has erred  in  law
             in relation to the consideration of the  appellant's  father's
             status in the UK as at paragraph  18  of  the  conclusions  it
             states that the appellant's father was given exceptional leave
             to remain whereas at paragraph 24 it seems that the  documents
             relating to the appellant's father are to be given no  weight.
             If it was accepted that the appellant's father had been in the
             UK and granted exceptional leave  following  an  asylum  claim
             consideration ought to have been  given  as  to  whether  this
             would give rise to any risk on return for the  appellant  even
             if the rest of his history were found not to be credible.

         5.   It is also arguable that the decision that the  appellant  was
             not  at  risk  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  a
             situation of  international  or  internal  armed  conflict  is
             unlawful as no reasons  are  given  at  paragraph  28  of  the
             decision.

         6.   The parties should be ready to remake the decision immediately
             if an error of law is found.

         7.   In relation to an error of law  based  on  Article  15(c)  the
             parties should acquaint themselves with the decision in AA (15
             (c )) CG [2015] UKUT 544 and be ready with instructions on all
             relevant matters. If further documentation or  statements  are
             required these should be filed with the Tribunal and served on
             the other party 10 days prior to the date of the error of  law
             hearing.

         8.   The respondent is directed to check her records and  be  ready
             to provide to the Upper Tribunal at the hearing  on  error  of
             law  any  information  held  by  her  concerning  whether  the
             appellant's father was granted refugee status  or  exceptional
             leave, and if exceptional leave the basis for such a grant and
             the period of any grants of leave to remain relating to either
             status.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, I reviewed the judge's manuscript Record of Proceedings.  I  drew
    the parties' attention to the fact that Counsel who appeared on  behalf
    of the appellant had not advanced a case that the  appellant  qualified
    for humanitarian protection  or  subsidiary  protection  under  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  He had submitted  to  the  judge
    that the appeal turned on the appellant's credibility. If the appellant
    was credible, the appellant could not internally  relocate.   The  only
    issues  arising  under  the  protection  claim  were  the   appellant's
    credibility and the viability of internal relocation.

 4. Mr Mohzam acknowledged that the country guidance case  cited  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Lindsley had not been promulgated until 30 October 2015,
    which  was  after  Judge   Mather   had   promulgated   his   decision.
    Nonetheless, he submitted that the judge had not given adequate reasons
    for finding at paragraph [28] that the appellant had not discharged the
    burden of proof on him to show that on return he would face a real risk
    of suffering serious  harm  by  reference  to  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Among other things, the new country  guidance  case
    drew a distinction between Baghdad city,  where  the  degree  of  armed
    conflict was not such as to give rise to indiscriminate  violence  such
    as to engage Article 15(c), and certain parts of  the  "Baghdad  belts"
    (the urban environs around Baghdad city)  where  the  degree  of  armed
    conflict was of an intensity which gave rise to a  generalised  Article
    15(c) risk.

Discussion

 5. The appellant's asylum claim was primarily  based  on  the  proposition
    that his life was in danger from the current Iraqi Government and  also
    from Kurdish political parties on account of his father being a  member
    of the Baath Party, who was arrested and detained in 2002, and had then
    fled to the UK in order to claim asylum.  The  appellant  claimed  that
    his father had been  granted  refugee  status  in  the  UK;  and  as  a
    consequence of that grant, he had sought to bring his mother and sister
    to the UK in November 2007, but the application was unsuccessful.   The
    appellant said he had not been included in the application  because  he
    was over the age of 18.

 6. By way of supporting  evidence  for  this  aspect  of  his  claim,  the
    appellant submitted a bundle of papers which were said to relate to the
    November 2007 application.  In oral evidence, the appellant said he had
    recently made contact with a friend who had  e-mailed  these  documents
    from Iraq, having obtained them from his  mother.   No  originals  were
    available.  At paragraph [15], Judge Mather  said  that  the  documents
    comprised correspondence said to be  between  the  appellant's  claimed
    father and his MP.  It also included copies of  incomplete  application
    forms, as well as refusal notices which did not contain the first page.
     The judge observed that, as the documents are copied, there was no way
    of ascertaining whether the documents had been tampered with.

 7. At paragraph [18], the judge found that it was not the  case  that  the
    appellant's father had been granted asylum.  The true position was that
    he was given exceptional leave to remain for four years.

 8. At paragraph [24] the judge returned to the bundle of papers which  the
    appellant said he had recently received by  e-mail  from  a  friend  in
    Iraq.  As they were not originals, he placed  little  weight  on  them.
    Taken  at  their  highest,  he  found  the  documents  related  to  the
    unsuccessful visa application made by the appellant's mother and sister
    to come  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  and  child  of  the
    appellant's claimed father.  He was not prepared to accept the validity
    of these documents, and he did not discount the possibility  that  they
    might have been changed or tampered with in their reproduction.

 9. The first arguable error identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley is
    that there is an inconsistency between what the judge said at paragraph
    [18] and what the judge said at paragraph [24];  and  that,  since  the
    father had been granted exceptional leave following  an  asylum  claim,
    consideration ought to have been given as to whether  this  would  give
    rise to any risk on return for the appellant, even if the rest  of  his
    history was not found to be credible.

10. I find that the error of law challenge does not stand up  to  scrutiny.
    It is apparent from the judge's Record of Proceedings that the grant of
    exceptional  leave  to  remain  was  confirmed  to  the  judge  by  the
    Presenting Officer, who had checked the Home Office database.

11. The appellant's claimed father would not have been granted  exceptional
    leave to remain for four years if his asylum claim had  been  accepted.
    It was implicit in the grant of exceptional leave to  remain  that  the
    then Secretary of State had not accepted that  the  appellant's  father
    had a well-founded fear of persecution on return to Iraq on account  of
    his connection to the Baath Party.

12. In the course of his conclusions, the  judge  identified  a  number  of
    inconsistencies in  the  appellant's  evidence,  and  he  concluded  at
    paragraph [27] that the events which were said  to  have  befallen  the
    appellant in Iraq had not occurred.  He did not  accept  the  appellant
    had been persecuted in Iraq in the past on any basis, or that he  would
    face persecution on return.

13. The judge thereby rejected the appellant's claim that his father was  a
    member of the Baath Party, thus creating  problems  for  the  appellant
    after he left the country.

14. Since there was incontrovertible evidence that the father had not  been
    recognised as  a  refugee,  the  evidential  status  of  the  documents
    relating to the family reunion application of November  2007  was,  and
    is,  of  only  tangential  relevance.   The  appellant  relied  on  the
    documents as showing by inference that his father had  refugee  status.
    But as he had not  been  granted  refugee  status,  as  the  Presenting
    Officer confirmed, the documents were not capable of  fulfilling  their
    intended purpose.  In any event, there was no procedural unfairness  in
    the judge attaching little weight to  the  documents  for  the  reasons
    which he gave in paragraph [24].

15. The documents produced  by  Mr  McVeety  before  me,  pursuant  to  the
    direction of Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley, confirm that  Fuad  Mohamed
    Rasheed (date of birth 4 May 1954) was refused asylum  on  7  September
    2002, and was granted exceptional leave to remain instead.   The  claim
    advanced by Mr Rasheed is not consistent  with  that  advanced  by  the
    appellant.  Mr  Rasheed  claimed  to  fear  persecution  in  Iraq  from
    Government Authorities on account of his suspected involvement with  an
    opposition party.  He claimed that security forces came  to  his  shop,
    searched it and arrested him after finding opposition  party  leaflets.
    This runs counter to the appellant's claim that his father was a member
    of  the  Baath  Party,  which  was  the  governing   party   in   2002.
    Accordingly, the information in the Reasons for Refusal Letter directed
    to Mr Rasheed does  not  retrospectively  cast  doubt  on  the  judge's
    adverse credibility finding.

16. The other arguable error identified by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley
    was that the judge had given no reasons in paragraph [28]  for  finding
    that the appellant was not at risk by reason of indiscriminate violence
    in a situation of international or internal armed conflict.

17. It is not the case that the judge did not give any reasons for  finding
    that the appellant did not qualify for  humanitarian  protection.   The
    judge gave his reasons at the beginning of paragraph [28].  In view  of
    "the facts found in this appeal", the appellant did not make out a case
    under paragraph 339C.  The judge's  reasoning  was  sufficient  in  the
    circumstances.  The appellant did not rely on any additional  facts  in
    support of an alternative claim for humanitarian protection. Since  the
    the factual basis for his asylum claim was not made out, it necessarily
    followed that the factual basis for  a  humanitarian  protection  claim
    also fell away.

18. As previously noted, it was not part of the case  advanced  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the appellant  might  qualify  for  subsidiary
    protection under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.   It  is
    also not shown that any objective evidence was placed before the  judge
    that ought to have caused him to address the issue of his own motion.

19. On the evidence that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  appears
    that the appellant had been habitually residing in Baghdad  city  since
    the age of 2.  There is no suggestion that  he  lived  in  the  Baghdad
    belt.  Alternatively, the appellant originates from Sulaymaniyah, which
    is in the Iraqi Kurdish region ("IKR").  At paragraph [112] of AA,  the
    Tribunal noted Dr Fatah's expert opinion that  the  IKR  was  virtually
    violence free.  One of the reasons for refusing the asylum claim of  Mr
    Rasheed was that internal relocation to the Kurdish  Autonomous  Region
    of Iraq was a reasonable and not unduly harsh option for him.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
