
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02985/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th January 2015                          |On 22nd January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           Mr ajanthan nimalkumar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr R Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    K S H Miller, promulgated on 29th October 2014, following  the  hearing
    at Taylor House on 3rd October 2014.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal   of   Ajanthan   Nimalkumar.    The   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born  on  28th
    October 1988.  He appealed against the refusal of asylum in a  decision
    made by the Respondent Secretary of State dated  23rd  April  2014,  as
    well as appealing against his application for  humanitarian  protection
    and under the ECHR.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is linked with that of his brother  Mayuran,  who
    voluntarily joined the LTTE in 2006  and  was  involved  with  the  Sea
    Tigers, resulting in the Appellant being  visited  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    Army, taken to a camp, and detained,  and  mistreated.   The  Appellant
    claims to have been arrested on some five or six other  occasions  (see
    paragraphs 10 to 12).  Since arrival in  the  UK  on  16th  July  2011,
    concealed in a van, and travelling from France by ferry,  after  having
    been to Switzerland, the Appellant claims  to  have  been  involved  in
    political activity in the form of attending demonstrations in  the  UK,
    such that he had a claim based upon sur place activities.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not accept the Appellant's claim.  The judge  made  three
    specific findings.

 5. First, if the Appellant had been detained in 2007 and 2008 and received
    injuries he would have gone with his father to India in  2008  but  did
    not do so (see paragraph 39(i)).

 6. Second, in 2009 the Appellant married someone from Sri Lanka, who  went
    to India, and again the Appellant did not accompany her to  India.   If
    he was at risk this was quite inexplicable.  The judge held that it was
    "beyond belief, that the Appellant would not have  availed  himself  of
    his second opportunity to leave Sri Lanka, if what he stated  regarding
    his treatment at the hands of the  authorities  were  true"  (paragraph
    39(iii)).  Indeed, the Appellant remained in Sri Lanka for  some  three
    years before leaving that country (paragraph 39(iv)).

 7. Third, in rejecting the expert report  of  Professor  Lingam  that  the
    Appellant's injuries could have been sustained  in  other  ways,  given
    that he was  a  fisherman  in  Sri  Lanka,  the  judge  held  that  the
    Appellant's sole concern was "to come to London, rather than simply  to
    travel to a safe place.

 8. This was because India was much closer to Sri Lanka, and the  Appellant
    had also not sought asylum in Switzerland or  France,  and  that,  "for
    someone from what would appear to be a  poor  background,  the  journey
    must have been expensive, and unnecessary if his  only  desire  was  to
    seek safety" (paragraph 42).  The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge misdirected himself  as
    to the standard of proof in asylum cases, she erred in  law  by  making
    her findings on the Appellant's general credibility before  considering
    the expert evidence, and that the judge  failed  to  make  findings  on
    material matters such as the Appellant's sur place activities in taking
    part in activities on behalf of the British Tamil Forum in the form  of
    attending demonstrations.

10. In granting permission, the Tribunal held that Judge Miller  took  into
    account all relevant matters when  reaching  her  findings  as  to  her
    credibility and it could not be said that Professor  Lingam's  findings
    had been taken wrongly by the judge.  However, permission was given  on
    one particular point, namely, in relation to the Appellant's sur  place
    activities (at paragraph 18 of the determination) because the Appellant
    had maintained that he attended a demonstration in the United  Kingdom,
    but no findings were made in relation to this by the judge.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 13th January 2015, there was no  attendance
    by the Appellant and none by any legal representative  on  his  behalf.
    Nor was any explanation given for this non-attendance.  After  standing
    the matter  out  to  the  end  of  the  morning's  list,  I  eventually
    determined to hear it.

12. Mr Tufan, appearing on behalf of the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    stated that whereas there was old authority in the form  of  the  well-
    known case of Danian that sur place activities,  even  when  undertaken
    solely on the basis of opportunistic involvement,  may  grant  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution, nevertheless, the case of  GJ  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 was now  determinative  in
    respect of a case such as the present.

13. That case made it quite clear that sur place activities  in  themselves
    could not be the basis of a well-founded fear of persecution.   As  far
    as the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  were  concerned  the  "real  risk  of
    persecution" would lie only with respect to

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil separatism within the diaspora ..." (see paragraph 7(a)).

14. The Appellant could not remotely be seen as a threat to  the  integrity
    of the Sri Lankan state.  The same principle was set out at paragraph 8
    and paragraph 9 of this country guidance case.

15. Second, the case of GJ (Sri Lanka) was  subsequently  appealed  to  the
    Court of Appeal, only for the  Court  of  Appeal  to  affirm  what  the
    Tribunal had established in GJ.  In MP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829,
    Underhill LJ made it clear that

         "The clear message of the  Upper  Tribunal's  guidance  is  that  a
         record of past LTTE activism does not as  such  constitute  a  risk
         factor for Tamils returning to Sri Lanka, because the  government's
         concern is now only with current or future threats to the integrity
         of Sri Lanka as a unitary  state;  and  that  is  so  even  if  the
         returnee's past links with the LTTE were of a kind characterised by
         UNHCR as 'more elaborate'." (See paragraph 50).

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  This is  a  case
    where, by his  own  admission,  the  authorities  had  checked  on  the
    Appellant for a short period of time, and then this  stopped  when  the
    war ended, and he was released without charge.

17. Second, the Appellant remained in the country for  approximately  three
    years, during which time he did not express any further  problems,  and
    was clearly of no further adverse interests to the authorities,  before
    leaving Sri Lanka.

18. Third, the Appellant has maintained involvement in political  activity,
    and claimed to have attended a demonstration, which he did not know the
    name of or when it took place (see AIR 70 and 73) and  he  provided  no
    evidence of having been involved in any other demonstration or  in  any
    other political activities.

19. But most importantly, the cases of MP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA  Civ  829
    and of GJ [2013] UKUT 319 are determinative of the issues  before  this
    Tribunal.  There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  Judge  Miller's
    determination the conclusion by the judge that the Appellant  was  more
    interested "to come to London, rather than simply to travel to  a  safe
    place" (paragraph 42) was entirely open to the judge on  the  basis  of
    the evidence presented.

Notice of Decision

20.  There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in   the   original   judge's
    determination.  The determination shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction is made.

22.

Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        21st January 2015

