

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA023582015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision Promulgated                |
|On 25th May 2016                       |On 27th May 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                    AHAH
                          (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel instructed by AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sudan  born  in  1968.     On  the  31st
    October 2013 he arrived in the United Kingdom and sought  asylum.   His
    application was rejected and on the 27th January  2015  the  Respondent
    made directions for his removal from the United Kingdom  under  s10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The Appellant appealed  and  in  a
    determination dated 3rd July 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nicol)
    dismissed his appeal on asylum, humanitarian and human rights  grounds.
     The Appellant now has  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Nicol's
    decision.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he is a member of the Berti
    clan of the Darfur  region  in  Sudan.  He  gave  an  account  of  past
    persecution for reasons of his ethnicity and imputed political  opinion
    which had been  rejected  by  the  Respondent.   Although  the  dispute
    between the parties about these historical events was still  live,  the
    real issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant was in fact Berti as he  claimed:  AA  (non-Arab  Darfuris  -
    relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056, MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00010 (IAC).  If he could establish,  on  the  lower  standard  of
    proof that he was Berti, then his claim would succeed,  notwithstanding
    any adverse credibility findings that might arise from the rest of  his
    account.

 3. In order to establish that he was Berti the Appellant relied  on  three
    pieces of evidence:

              i) His own  testimony,  including  the  consistent,  'correct'
                 answers that he had given the Respondent when interviewed;


             ii) The live evidence and sworn statement of Ali Bashir Mortada
                 Ahmed, a recognised refugee who  is  accepted  to  be  from
                 Darfur and from the Berti  clan,  to  the  effect  that  he
                 personally knew the Appellant when they were both living in
                 Obdurman in 2008-2011;

            iii) An expert report by Mr Peter Verney,  who  interviewed  the
                 Appellant for 90 minutes in April 2015. Mr Verney concludes
                 that  the  Appellant  gave  "convincing   and   consistent"
                 evidence about his  ethnicity.  He  gave  information  that
                 would most probably not be known to persons outside of  the
                 Berti tribe.  Mr Verney believes that on  return  to  Sudan
                 the Appellant would "certainly recognise him as a  non-Arab
                 Darfuri" and that he would be at risk as a result

 4. The  First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the  Appellant's  account  in  its
    entirety and dismissed the appeal.


    Errors of Law


 5. The hearing before me was not long. That is because Mr Harrison for the
    Respondent  quite  properly  declined  to  make  any  defence  of  this
    determination bar the obligatory reliance on the 'Rule 24' response.




 6. I have no hesitation in setting this decision aside for  the  following
    errors of law.


 7. There has been a failure to make clear findings on the evidence of  the
    witness Mr Mortada Ahmed. He gave live evidence  before  the  Tribunal.
    This gentleman had been recognised as a refugee and no reasons had been
    advanced as  to  why  his  credibility  should  not  be  accepted.  The
    determination records that he attended the hearing, but  no  evaluation
    of his evidence is made, save the suggestion, at paragraph 32, that the
    Appellant may have 'learned' what to say from this witness in order  to
    fool Mr Verney:

         "Without in any way suggesting deliberate collusion, it is possible
         that many of the matters could have been discussed between them and
         experiences compared".


    That does not amount to an evaluation of Mr Mortada  Ahmed's  evidence.
    Nor, with respect, does it make any sense.  If  the  Tribunal  was  not
    alleging deliberate collusion it is hard to understand the  point:  was
    the Tribunal suggesting that the Appellant had "faked" being Berti when
    talking to Mr Mortada Ahmed in Obdurman market in 2008?   The  Tribunal
    was not obliged to accept the  evidence  of  this  witness  but  if  it
    considered that the witness was mistaken, misled  or  lying  it  should
    have said so, and clear reasons given for those conclusions.

 8. The approach to the report of Mr Verney is similarly flawed. Again  the
    Tribunal was not obliged to accept this evidence, but if it were to  be
    rejected, or only little weight placed upon it, clear reasons had to be
    given why. In this case the reasons that are given  are  unsustainable.
    Mr Peter Verney is a recognised expert on the Sudan who has,  he  notes
    in the introduction to his report, given evidence to this  Tribunal  in
    numerous appeals including a number of  country  guidance  cases.  Most
    recently his evidence was uncritically accepted in its entirety by  the
    Upper Tribunal in MM.  Given this pedigree it is unclear why the First-
    tier Tribunal describe him, at paragraph  27,  as  being  someone  "who
    claims to be" a country expert on the Sudan. The Tribunal  goes  on  to
    criticise Mr Verney  for  taking  the  Appellant's  evidence  at  "face
    value", and not contemplating that the Appellant may have  deliberately
    sought to deceive him by learning things about Berti culture  from  the
    internet. This is factually incorrect. As Mr Verney states in terms  in
    his report, he is  very  much  alive  to  the  possibility  that  those
    claiming  to  be  Berti  are  lying:  he  recognises  that  there   are
    "significant numbers of false applicants" [199] and that amongst  those
    he has interviewed personally, less than half manage  to  convince  him
    that he should write a positive report [200]. Mr  Verney  records  that
    the Appellant was able to answer questions about  Berti  culture  which
    would not be known to persons outside of that  ethnic  group.  For  the
    Tribunal to suggest that this internationally recognised country expert
    was just recording 'what he was told' without exercising any of his own
    critical faculties is a conclusion unsupported by the report itself and
    an error akin to that identified - in the context of medical reports  -
    in R (on application of Minani) v SSHD [2004] EWHC 583 (Admin).


      Decisions


 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.


10. Having regard to the extent of the fact-finding required,  the  parties
    agreed that the decision in the appeal should be remade in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

11. Having regard to the fact that this is a protection claim  I  make  the
    following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  the
        Secretary of State.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could
        lead to contempt of court proceedings".





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                25th May 2016
