
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: AA/02881/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 November 2015                           |On 22 December 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H J E LATTER


                                   Between

                                     GT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Querton, instructed by Ennon & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer

I make an order  under  rule  14(1)(b)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
Failure to comply with this direction may amount to a contempt of court.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Singapore  born  in  1976.   He  appeals
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oakley) dismissing
    his appeal against the respondent's decision made on 16  February  2015
    refusing his claim for asylum and proposing to give directions for  his
    removal.

Background

2.   In brief outline the background to this  appeal  is  as  follows.   The
    appellant entered the UK lawfully in 2012 with  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse until 2014.  In June 2014 he left the UK and travelled to Sweden
    where he subsequently claimed asylum.  His application was rejected  on
    third  country  grounds  and  following  a  request  under  the  Dublin
    Convention from Sweden, the UK authorities  undertook  to  examine  the
    claim for asylum and he was duly returned to the UK on 5 February 2015.



3.   His claim was based on a fear of persecution from  the  authorities  in
    Singapore and in particular the Criminal Narcotics Bureau (CNB) who  on
    his account had interrogated him in  the  past  and  subjected  him  to
    harassment.  His problems began in 2005 when he  was  arrested  by  the
    Singapore police for possession and consumption of a class C controlled
    drug and sentenced to six months imprisonment. He had  been  active  in
    the gay scene in Singapore.  He claimed he was then forced to become an
    informant for the CNB to help them entrap suspected  drug  abusers  and
    traffickers and that subsequently there were a number of deaths  linked
    to these activities.

4.   At the hearing the appellant relied on medical  evidence  showing  that
    he suffered from bipolar disorder with borderline  personality  traits,
    chronic anxiety, insomnia and was HIV positive.  It was argued  at  the
    hearing that the appellant experienced constant harassment from the CNB
    and was exposed within the gay community as a purported informant.   It
    was argued that the appellant  was  a  vulnerable  adult  with  a  long
    history of mental illness, was HIV positive and would be  returning  to
    Singapore in a vulnerable state to the place where he  had  experienced
    long-term harassment and harm.  It was submitted that his  account  was
    credible and in view of his mental health and  history  it  was  of  no
    importance that there  were  discrepancies  in  his  account.   In  the
    skeleton argument dated 11 August  2015  prepared  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal his claim is put in the following way:

         "His claim for asylum arises  not  from  treatment  meted  out  to
         homosexuals per se but because  of  his  background  including  the
         criminal conviction and his perceived  proximity  to  the  criminal
         world (it must be realised that male to male sexual activity  is  a
         crime in Singapore and the appellant has come out as gay).  It  was
         further argued that the  Convention  reason  was  membership  of  a
         particular social  group,  gay  men  in  Singapore  and  that  when
         considering whether there was sufficient protection there were  two
         factors  of  particular  significance,  the  fact  that  the   fear
         experienced derived from  a  state  agency,  the  duration  of  the
         harassment in the past indicating that it was not the action  of  a
         lone rogue officer and secondly that the state had  in  place  laws
         that punished gay men for being gay".

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   Having reviewed the evidence and the submissions,  the  judge  set  out
    his findings and conclusions in [38]-[51].  He was not  satisfied  that
    there was a Convention reason as the basis  of  the  appellant's  claim
    that he was being harassed by the CNB and this did not amount to a fear
    of persecution for a Convention reason [38].  He went  on  to  consider
    the claims the appellant had made about being active in the  gay  scene
    in Singapore and the problems that he would face as a result  of  being
    homosexual and coming to the adverse attention of the CNB.   The  judge
    noted that the appellant in his oral evidence had said that he  was  in
    fact bisexual [16] and that the appellant had been  married  but  found
    that there was no evidence to suggest that  he  would  be  targeted  on
    return to Singapore [39].  He commented that the appellant had provided
    some evidence about his drug conviction and contact with  the  NCB  but
    had provided no evidence of  their  interest  in  him  noting  in  this
    context that if he had been under pressure from the authorities he  had
    not made a claim for protection at the time when he came to the  UK  in
    2012 or during visits made in most years from 2005 to 2012.

6.   He described the appellant's  account  on  these  issues  as  "entirely
    speculation  on  his  part  that  the  authorities  in  Singapore   are
    interested in him at all or that the events alleged to have occurred in
    the UK had anything whatsoever  to  do  with  his  drug  conviction  or
    dealings with the NCB."  He found that there was  no  evidence  of  the
    deaths he alleged had taken place were linked to him  in  any  way  and
    that this  was  pure  speculation.   He  referred  to  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had sent a letter to the Chief Justice of the  Supreme
    Court in Singapore in 2007 and that he had received a reply, commenting
    that it was unfortunate that the appellant  had  failed  to  produce  a
    copy.

7.   The judge took into account  the  medical  evidence  at  [42]-[43]  and
    reached the following conclusion in [44]:

         "I have concluded from these medical reports that go back over  ten
         years that the appellant does have a mental condition that  affects
         his recall of events and in particular he may well imagine some  of
         the events that have occurred to  him  as  a  result  of  imaginary
         events that he relates and  that  these  go  back  to  the  claimed
         problems with the CNB."


8.   The judge went on to refer to s.377A of the  Penal  Code  in  Singapore
    which criminalised and punished male to male sexual  relations  but  he
    accepted evidence that in 2007 the Prime Minister had stated  that  the
    authorities  would  not  actively  enforce  the  Statute  and  that   a
    subsequent constitutional challenge had led to  the  section  as  being
    upheld as constitutional but on the basis that because the law was  not
    in force there was no  need  to  overturn  it  [47].   The  judge  then
    considered the appellant's sexual orientation and the fact that he  had
    confirmed clearly that he was bisexual, he had been in  a  heterosexual
    relationship for  a  period  of  time  but  claimed  that  he  had  now
    homosexual relationships [48].   He  considered  the  authority  of  HJ
    (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) [2010]  UKSC  31  and  the  need  to  consider
    whether the appellant was gay or whether he would be treated as gay  by
    potential persecutors in his country of nationality.  He answered  that
    question in the negative saying that as the appellant claimed  that  he
    was bisexual, he could therefore not conclude that he was gay or  would
    be treated as gay by the authorities in Singapore [50].  The appeal was
    dismissed on asylum grounds and also under articles 3 and 8.

The Grounds of Appeal

9.   In the grounds of appeal it is confirmed that the appellant's case  was
    put on the basis of his patent vulnerability including his paranoia and
    that this would lead to serious  harm  on  return  to  Singapore.   The
    grounds assert at [5] that:

         "The appellant did not put the case that  because  he  was  gay  he
         would suffer persecution.  Rather, it was an important part of  the
         context for his past involvement with the CNB and his vulnerability
         to pressure from them."


    It is argued that the judge concluded that the  appellant  on  his  own
    evidence was not gay and so the matter ended there.  It was perverse to
    find that the appellant was not gay because he was bisexual.   Further,
    the fact that the appellant had had some heterosexual relationships did
    not mean that he was not gay or would not be perceived as gay.


Submissions

10.  Ms Querton's primary submission was that the judge had made a  perverse
    finding of fact on the issue of whether the appellant was gay and  that
    this undermined his subsequent  assessment  of  the  evidence  and  his
    conclusions.  The fact that the appellant described himself as bisexual
    did not justify the judge failing to consider all the issues set out in
    HJ and HT [2010] UKSC 31 and that he had been wrong simply  to  proceed
    no further than the first question where, in any event, he had  reached
    a conclusion not properly open to him.  The appellant's claim was based
    on his personal circumstances: the fact that he was targeted by the CNB
    to become an informant because of his sexuality and access to  the  gay
    scene, he was linked to the drugs scene due to his previous  conviction
    and was a vulnerable person due to his mental  health  conditions.   He
    feared return to Singapore where he was pressured and threatened by the
    CNB and where it was  known  by  the  gay  community  that  he  was  an
    informant.  The analysis carried out by the judge failed to engage,  so
    it is argued, with this underlying claim.  Ms  Querton  further  argued
    that the judge had been wrong at [44] to find that  the  appellant  may
    well have imagined some of the events, which had occurred to him.

11.  Mr Norton submitted that even if the judge had erred in his  assessment
    at [48]-[50] of whether the appellant was gay that  did  not  have  any
    material bearing on the outcome of the appeal.  The judge had found not
    only that there was no Convention reason but also  that  the  appellant
    had failed to establish that  the  authorities  in  Singapore  had  any
    adverse interest in him: [40]-[41].  The judge  had  been  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant's mental condition was such that the events
    he described were speculative or imaginary.  It has not been argued  on
    the appellant's behalf that he was at risk  simply  by  reason  of  his
    sexual orientation.




Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

12.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law such that  his  decision
    should be set aside.  The appellant's claim was not put  on  the  basis
    that he would be at risk of persecution simply by reason of his  sexual
    orientation whether as gay or bisexual.  It is clear from the  skeleton
    arguments and from the submissions that the appellant's case was put as
    depending on his own personal circumstances as  someone  who  had  been
    targeted by the CNB to become an informant because of his sexuality and
    access to the gay scene, was linked to  the  drugs  scene  due  to  his
    previous conviction and was a  vulnerable  person  due  to  his  mental
    health conditions.

13.  However, the judge was not satisfied that the  appellant  had  provided
    sufficient evidence to show the NCB had any interest in him  describing
    it as entirely speculative  that  the  authorities  in  Singapore  were
    interested in him or that events subsequently taking place  in  the  UK
    had anything to do with the drug conviction or his  dealings  with  the
    NCB.  The appellant had given evidence about writing a  letter  to  the
    Chief Justice of the Supreme Court in Singapore but  having  failed  to
    produce a copy of the reply the judge was entitled to comment  that  it
    was suggestive of the fact that the appellant had not been harassed  as
    he claimed by the CNB although he may have had some contact  with  them
    around the time of his drug conviction [41].

14.  When assessing what facts had been established to  the  lower  standard
    of proof the judge took into account the medical evidence. It  was  for
    the judge to assess what weight to give to the medical evidence and  in
    any event Dr Bashir in his report of June 2015 commented at 13.1.2 that
    a number of the appellant's claims about events of  the  past  and  his
    treatment by NCB "may be based on reality however  the  explanation  of
    many other experiences are product of a suspicious mind and  paranoia."
    There is no substance in the  argument  that  the  judge's  finding  on
    whether the appellant's account was reliable or credible was  not  open
    to him.

15.  The main challenge to the judge's findings  is  based  on  the  way  he
    dealt with the questions set out by the Supreme Court  in  HJ  and  HT.
    The judge rightly  identified  as  the  first  question,  the  need  to
    consider whether the appellant was gay and whether he  would  therefore
    be  treated  as  gay  by  potential  persecutors  in  his  country   of
    nationality.  He said that as the appellant claimed he was bisexual, he
    could not therefore conclude that he was gay or  would  be  treated  as
    such by potential discriminators in Singapore.  There is some force  in
    the argument that this was not in itself an adequate treatment  of  the
    issue of whether the appellant would be regarded as gay or bisexual  on
    return to Singapore.  However, in the context of the present case, this
    has no material bearing on the outcome of the appeal.   The  judge  had
    already dealt with the issue of whether the appellant in the  light  of
    his own personal circumstances would be at real risk of serious harm on
    return and then went on to consider whether there would be a real  risk
    arising from the appellant being gay as he had described himself  until
    the hearing before  the  judge  when  he  gave  evidence  that  he  was
    bisexual.  However, it had not been the appellant's case that he  would
    be at risk simply as a gay or bisexual man in Singapore.  There was  no
    adequate evidence to support a claim that activities as gay  man  would
    lead to a real risk of serious harm  any  more  than  activities  as  a
    bisexual man.  For these reasons any error by the judge in his analysis
    of the first question in HJ and HT  has  no  material  bearing  on  the
    outcome of this appeal.

16.  In summary, I am satisfied that the judge's  findings  and  conclusions
    were properly open to him for the reasons he gave and the  grounds  and
    submissions do not satisfy me that he has  erred  in  law  in  any  way
    requiring his determination to be set aside.

Decision

17.  The First-tier did not err in law such that the decision should be  set
    aside and this appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 17 December 2015


H J E Latter
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




