
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02717/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th March 2016                   |On 28th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                              [Krishnapillai V]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Fidiwale - Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by [Krishnapillai V], a citizen of Sri Lanka born [ ]
    1965.  He appeals against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  made  on
    30th January 2015 to refuse to grant asylum and to remove him from the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant appealed against that decision  and  the
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Liddington  on  11th
    September 2015.  Permission to appeal was granted and on 10th  December
    2015, having heard submissions, I found that there was a material error
    of law in the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Liddington  in
    that she had failed to give adequate reasons for her  findings  on  the
    question of risk on return to Sri Lanka.  In particular she had  failed
    to take account of evidence that  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  had
    continued looking for the Appellant after his departure.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK  on  24th  December  2012  and  claimed
    asylum on 24th January 2013.

 3. I now proceed to re-make the decision.

 The Basis of the Appellant's Claim for Asylum

 4. The Appellant's evidence is set out in a screening and asylum interview
    and in witness statements that  were  provided  for  the  hearing.   He
    claims to have joined the LTTE in 1990 at which point he underwent  six
    months of training including the use of arms.  He carried  weapons  and
    was involved in fighting until 1993.  Between 1993 and 2001  he  ceased
    to have a military role and  began  working  for  the  LTTE  collecting
    money, arranging  meetings  and  looking  after  the  welfare  of  LTTE
    members.  When the truce that had been declared in  the  Civil  War  in
    2001 ended in  2005  the  Appellant  moved  to  Vaagarai  and  then  to
    Batticaloa where he was arrested on 12th March 2007 by the  Sri  Lankan
    Army.  He claims to have been "severely tortured".  He  says  that  his
    front teeth and gums were damaged and he was beaten with iron bars.  He
    suffered injury to his spine.  He was released after five days when his
    sister lodged a human rights complaint but had to sign on every  month.
    He did this until 2008 when he rejoined the LTTE.  In Vanni  he  joined
    the  Tamil  Rehabilitation  Organisation  (TRO)  looking   after   LTTE
    casualties.  When the LTTE were defeated in 2009 the Appellant left  by
    boat but was arrested by the Sri Lankan navy on 13th May 2009 and taken
    to Vavuniya camp where he remained until 27th November  2009.   He  was
    released after payment of a bribe and told  to  report  to  the  police
    station at Trincomalee.  He and his family moved again but he continued
    to sign on at the police station.  He says that early in  2012  he  was
    asked by the CID to identify a cousin of his  who  had  been  a  senior
    member of the LTTE.  This  frightened  him.   He  feared  he  would  be
    arrested so came to the UK in December 2012.  He did spend one week  in
    France en route to the UK but did not ask for asylum there.   Since  he
    arrived in the UK he has attended Heroes'  Day  on  two  occasions  but
    apart from that has taken no part in political activities  relative  to
    Sri Lanka.

The Decision of the Secretary of State

 5. The copy of the refusal letter which I have appears to be some sort  of
    draft.  Large swathes of it have been deleted and alternative  versions
    written in ink in the margins.  It is  not  very  easy  to  read.   The
    Secretary of State accepts it to be likely that the Appellant  actively
    supported the  LTTE.  She  did  however  find  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's account of his detentions and the reporting conditions that
    he was subjected to over the years.  He had said for  example  that  he
    stopped signing on in 2008 when  he  went  to  Vanni  but  Home  Office
    records show that his fingerprints were taken in  France  on  22nd  May
    2007 and that he applied for asylum (which he had previously denied) at
    the French Office of Protection of Refugees and  Stateless  Persons  on
    11th September 2007. This is inconsistent with his claim to  have  been
    fingerprinted in France when he visited his  sister  in  2006.  He  was
    there for three days before returning to Sri Lanka.  The  Secretary  of
    State said there is indeed no evidence that he did return to Sri Lanka.
     She noted the Appellant's claim that the  authorities  had  approached
    his wife on 17th January  2015  and  informed  her  that  although  the
    government may  have  changed  during  the  recent  election  the  army
    remained the same and would return to look for him.  The Appellant also
    claimed that two of his brothers were killed, one in 1989  and  one  in
    1988.  Death certificates had been provided.  The  Secretary  of  State
    took into account that neither of these certificates  makes  references
    to his brothers' claimed involvement with the LTTE and do not  say  who
    was responsible for their deaths.

 6. In short, the Secretary of State accepts that the Appellant was  a  low
    level supporter of the LTTE collecting  taxes  from  local  farmers  on
    their behalf.  She does not accept that he had a  military  role.   She
    does not accept his account of his detention.  She does not accept that
    he would be at risk on  return.   She  does  not  accept  that  he  was
    arrested, tortured or detained because  of  his  perceived  involvement
    with the LTTE.  She does not accept that he had any  difficulties  with
    the Sri Lankan authorities.  She does not accept that he  would  be  on
    any list of people wanted by the authorities as his sister enabled  his
    release from detention through a bribe.  The Secretary of State  relied
    on the decision GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319.

Evidence at the Hearing

 7. I have an extract from the information book of the  Trincomalee  Police
    dated 18th May 2009.  This states that the Appellant's sister  reported
    that her brother had been missing since April 2009.  There  is  another
    entry confirming that the Appellant was apprehended by the  Sri  Lankan
    navy and kept in Vavuniya camp for six months between May and  November
    2009.  There is a letter confirming that  the  Appellant  had  been  in
    France.  There is a medical report from Professor S Lingam who examined
    the Appellant and provided a report dated 7th November 2013  confirming
    that the injuries to the Appellant's teeth and gums and injuries to his
    back are consistent with his account of torture.

 8. In a statement provided for the hearing the Appellant gave  a  detailed
    account of his involvement with the LTTE including  his  training.   He
    said that at the screening  interview  he  was  very  nervous  and  the
    questions were very brief.  He gave very general answers.  He says that
    he was detained three times in 1988 before  his  LTTE  involvement,  in
    2007 and then in 2009.  In 2011 he was  taken  and  asked  about  there
    whereabouts of his cousin.  In his screening interview he said he  went
    to France six years ago i.e. 2007 and not 2006  as  is  stated  in  the
    refusal letter.  He went for three days to visit  his  sister  who  was
    unwell.  He said it cannot be expected  that  death  certificates  will
    confirm membership of the LTTE or give  the  name  of  the  people  who
    killed his brothers.

 9. I am going to set out verbatim what the Appellant said in his statement
    about a visit to France because he was asked about this at the hearing.
     He said:

         "In response to paragraph 37, during my time in Bowini, France,  on
         22/05/2007 I was arrested by French police and they took me to  the
         police station where I was  fingerprinted.   I  had  never  claimed
         asylum in France  and  therefore  that  information  and  the  date
         11/09/2007 is incorrect.  My cousin, who is currently  in  the  UK,
         was granted asylum in the UK  and  he  had  links  with  very  high
         profile LTTE for organising funds and they made arrangements for me
         to come to France for a meeting.  I voluntarily left from France to
         Sri Lanka under the LTTE's arrangements.  The visa was arranged  by
         them for a week and they explained that my sister  was  unwell  and
         set up my visit to her.  They also set up my exit from the  airport
         and therefore I don't have a copy of my visa."

10. He says that he comes from  a  very  high  profile  LTTE  family.   His
    brother and cousin were accepted as refugees in the UK and  his  sister
    as a refugee in France.  He is known to  current  politicians.   He  is
    very well-known in the area and his life is at risk.   Members  of  his
    family supported a separate land for Tamils in Sri Lanka  from  France.
    His family has been very well-known since 1983 after the death  of  his
    brother and have many Tamil opponents.

11. There is a statement  from  the  Appellant's  brother,  Sivarajah,  who
    confirms that the Appellant went to train with the  LTTE.   He  himself
    has asylum in the UK.  He came here in 2001.  He is a British  citizen.
    He says that his family have been greatly affected by  the  Sri  Lankan
    Army.  Their house was destroyed by the army on three  occasions.   His
    brother would be  at  risk  if  returned.   The  Appellant  has  bonded
    strongly with his children in the UK and would be mentally  scarred  if
    he has to leave.

12. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant who  adopted  his  statements.
    He accepted that he had initially  denied  having  been  in  France  so
    amended his statement to correct that.  He was asked about what he  had
    said  at  paragraph  13  in  his  statement  about  the   LTTE   making
    arrangements for him to leave France.  (I have set this out above.)

13.  His response was that the LTTE had some financial  problems  and  sent
    him to France to collect money.  They did this because he was in charge
    in their area.  He was experienced.  He was well-known.  Three or  four
    others went with him.  He was asked why he was  asked  to  this  rather
    than simply asking their people in France to collect  money.   He  said
    that they had severe problems and they wanted them to go to  France  to
    tell the LTTE people there what was happening.   They  were  collecting
    money with the experienced LTTE people in France.  He said that he  did
    not ask the LTTE at that time if he could just stay in  France  because
    he had a lot of LTTE funds in his hand and they would not have  allowed
    it.  They might have tortured him.  I asked if it was cash that he  had
    and he confirmed that it was.  He also  had  some  important  documents
    such as income and expenditure details of the LTTE and details  of  the
    funds collected.   He  was  asked  why  the  authorities  would  become
    interested in his cousin in 2012 and responded that some people in  his
    group had surrendered to the authorities in 2009/10.  He was asked what
    was the catalyst for their interest in 2012 and did not respond to  the
    question.  Eventually he said he did not know.  He was  asked  when  he
    last spoke to his wife and said it was October 2015.  When he was asked
    why he has not spoken to her since he said that the authorities may  be
    monitoring her phone.  They  were  still  enquiring  about  him  up  to
    October 2015.

14. Miss Fidiwale in cross-examination asked the Appellant  at  what  point
    after his release from detention in March 2007 he went to  France.   He
    said he could not say an exact date.  He had a great deal of difficulty
    giving a date at all and eventually said  it  was  probably  about  two
    months after his release but he really did not know.  It was found that
    he had signed on for that two month period before he  left  for  France
    and was in France for a week.  He could not remember when  he  returned
    to Sri Lanka but said it was a 28 day trip by boat.  He did not  resume
    signing on when he returned.  In response to a question of  whether  he
    had any problems with the authorities because of his failure to sign on
    he said that he did have problems.  He could not remember  when.   When
    pressed on what the authorities did or said he responded  that  he  did
    not see them.  They went to his sister and asked about him.  He said he
    signed on in his sister's house.  He said the LTTE  knew  that  he  had
    claimed asylum in France.  He said "that's why they took me there".  He
    then said that he was staying in his sister's house and she was forcing
    him to claim asylum.  The others  who  were  with  him  did  not  claim
    asylum.  He said he did not tell all his story when he came to  the  UK
    because he was ill and confused.  He did not put it all in his  witness
    statement because he was ill.

15. In her submissions Miss Fidiwale said she would  rely  on  the  refusal
    letter.  She asked me to take into account that the Appellant  was  not
    truthful about having been in France and having claimed  asylum  there.
    She asked him why he did not put in his initial statement that  he  had
    been in France and claimed asylum and  had  no  satisfactory  response.
    Miss Fidiwale said that the Appellant was vague and inconsistent  about
    the interest the authorities in Sri Lanka had in him over  the  years.
    He was failing to sign on.  It is clear that  the  authorities  had  no
    interest in him.  He was discrepant about whether  or  not  he  carried
    weapons.  There are discrepancies about when he was  detained.   He  at
    one point said it was 2009 and 2011 and at another that  it  was  2007,
    2008 and 2009.  Professor Lingam in his report does not give any dates.
     Another letter provided simply  says  that  he  has  chronic  anxiety.
    There was no evidence of any LTTE activity by any of his family.  There
    was no evidence that he was a member of any party.  There is  a  letter
    from an MP.  It is not clear what involvement the  Appellant  had.   He
    was simply a low level supporter.

16. In his submissions Mr Murphy said that the Appellant has  rebutted  the
    doubts and inconsistencies raised in the refusal letter.  He said it is
    common knowledge that asylum will not be granted in France so there was
    no point in the Appellant making  an  application.    Professor  Lingam
    says that the Appellant's injuries are consistent with his account.  At
    question 161 of his interview the Appellant  gave  great  detail  about
    what had happened to him in  his  detention.   He  suggested  that  the
    Appellant had in no way attempted to exaggerate his  account.   He  was
    clear that he had not seen his cousin since 2007.  A comment  had  been
    made by the Presenting Officer about  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    brother had not come to court to give evidence.  Mr Murphy pointed  out
    that his brother was indeed the man who was sitting at the back of  the
    court but he had decided not to call him as he says he is confused  and
    cannot remember things.  He said that the MP's letter at page 14 of the
    bundle does  assist  the  Appellant.   He  pointed  out  too  that  the
    Appellant had not exaggerated his involvement in the UK.   He  did  not
    say that he has been attending demonstrations in the UK.  He  asked  me
    to consider the evidence in the round submitting that was said  in  the
    country guidance case is "not written on tablets of stone".

17. The letter at page 14 of  the  bundle  is  headed  "Eastern  Provincial
    Council"  and  dated  6th  June  2015.   It  is  signed  by  Kumarasamy
    Nageswaran, a member of the Provincial Council.  He states that  he  is
    from the same village as the Appellant and  knows  about  him  and  his
    family before 1970.  He was a member of EROS on a full-time  basis.   A
    lot of the people joined the LTTE when EROS was dissolved including its
    leader.  He was one of these people.  He said he  has  heard  that  the
    personnel attached to the intelligence group made  enquiries  from  his
    family who  were  staying  at  Trincomalee.   He  had  heard  from  the
    Appellant's family that the Appellant had left  the  country  and  gone
    abroad but the enquiries of the intelligence group continued.  His life
    is at risk.

Burden and Standard of Proof

18. The burden is on the Appellant to show with regard to the asylum appeal
    that returning him would expose him  to  a  real  risk  of  an  act  of
    persecution for reasons set out in  Regulation  6  of  The  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006.  With regard to Humanitarian Protection he  would  have  to  show
    substantial grounds for believing that he would face  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm as defined by paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  or
    face a real risk of a breach of his protected human rights.

My Findings

19. I have given very careful consideration to all the evidence put  before
    me in this case including the medical report by Professor  Lingam.   It
    is accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant may have had some  low
    level involvement with the LTTE.  It seems to me that  in  general  the
    Appellant's account is vague and there are lots of inconsistencies.  He
    was quite simply unable to remember any dates at all.  I do not  expect
    Appellants to remember specific dates for every single element of their
    claim but the Appellant was totally vague about everything.   I  cannot
    understand how he would not be able to say with some certainty how long
    it was after his release that he went to France.  Apart  from  anything
    else he was supposed to be signing on so  he  must  have  had  concerns
    about leaving Sri Lanka and about how long he was going to be away.  He
    embarked on a 28 day trip by boat and left his family  behind  to  face
    any repercussions.   Despite this he could not give any  idea  of  when
    this happened.  The account of why he went to France that  he  gave  at
    his hearing was completely different to that given  in  his  statement.
    He was asked in cross examination if there were any problems due to his
    failure to sign on and his response was extremely  vague.  He  did  not
    answer at first but eventually said that  he  did  have  problems.  The
    authorities had gone to his sisters. The difficulty with this answer is
    that the Appellant remained  in  Sri  Lanka  until  December  2012  and
    mentioned no problems arsing from his failure to sign on.

20. It is the case as was submitted on behalf of the Respondent that  apart
    from the letter from the MP the Appellant  did not provide any evidence
    at all  of any involvement of his family  in  the  LTTE.   There  is  a
    letter from the Eastern Provincial Council the writer of  which  speaks
    of knowing of the Appellant before 1970 but the Appellant was only born
    in 1965.  What the writer of the  letter  says  about  the  authorities
    still looking for the Appellant is clearly hearsay.  He had no personal
    knowledge of the authorities  looking  for  the  Appellant.   The  MP's
    letter says the whole of the Appellant's family was involved  with  the
    LTTE but does not confirm a high profile position or any detention.

21. The other thing that gives rise to some concern is the  fact  that  the
    Appellant did not say why the authorities were looking for him in 2012.
      He mentioned 2009 and 2010 but could offer no explanation at  all  as
    to why the authorities would be interested  in  his  cousin  two  years
    later and go looking for the Appellant.  The Secretary  of  State  made
    the point that the Appellant had not tried to  leave  Sri  Lanka  after
    having been released following his claimed torture.  I have to ask  why
    he would leave in 2012.

22.  I accept that two of the Appellant's brothers are dead but  they  died
    many years ago and apart from  the  Appellant's  account  there  is  no
    evidence of the circumstances of their deaths. It is  unfortunate  that
    the brother who attended the hearing chose not to give evidence. I know
    he said he was confused but it seems to me to that as he was  there  in
    any event he may have been able to assist, given the vagueness  of  the
    Appellant's evidence.

23. I accept that the Appellant may  at  some  point  have  been  arrested,
    detained and released on payment of a bribe. I do not  accept  that  he
    was detained as regularly as he said because I  really  do  not  accept
    that he would forget the dates of such traumatic  experiences  and  the
    years he gave were discrepant.    I do not accept his account of why he
    went to France or of what happened there. I am not  satisfied  that  he
    had a position in the LTTE that would have warranted him being sent for
    the reasons stated,  again because his  evidence  of  why  he  went  to
    France and what happened there was so confused. .

24. In GJ the Tribunal said:

         (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's  concern  has  changed
         since the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself
         is a spent force and there have been no terrorist  incidents  since
         the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
         activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
         to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan  Constitution in 1983, which  prohibits  the
         'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
         separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within
         Sri Lanka.

         (4) If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

         (5) Internal relocation is not an option within  Sri  Lanka  for  a
         person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.

         (6) There are no detention facilities at the  airport.  Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport. Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities  are
         or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
         in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
         or police within a few days.

         (7) The current categories of persons at real risk  of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri  Lanka  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

             (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka  as a  single  state  because  they
             are, or are perceived to have a significant role  in  relation
             to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b) Journalists (whether in print or  other  media)  or  human
             rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri
             Lankan  government, in particular its human rights record,  or
             who are associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri
             Lankan  government.

             (c) Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned
             and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri  Lankan
             security forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in
             alleged war crimes. Among those who  may  have  witnessed  war
             crimes during the conflict, particularly in the No-Fire  Zones
             in May 2009, only those who have already identified themselves
             by giving such evidence would  be  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities and therefore  only  they  are  at  real  risk  of
             adverse attention or persecution on  return  as  potential  or
             actual war crimes witnesses.

             (d) A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

         (8) The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on  sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities  know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.  In  post-conflict  Sri   Lanka   an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)  The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised   intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state or revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
         an individual's activities and responsibilities  during  the  civil
         war, the exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of  the  Refugee
         Convention and  Article  12(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive).
         Regard should be had to the categories for exclusion set out in the
         "Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing the International  Protection
         Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka published  by  UNHCR  on  21
         December 2012.

25. I have paid particular attention to paragraphs 7 and, 8 and 9 and  find
    that the Appellant does not fit into any of these risk categories.   He
    may have been detained at some point but he was released at least  once
    on payment of a bribe and there is little apart from  vague  assertions
    from him and the writers of the two letters to suggest any  further  or
    recent interest in him on the part of  the  authorities.  He  says  the
    authorities were visiting his wife asking about him but he proffered no
    up to date information and said he  was  unable  to  contact  his  wife
    because  her  phone  may  be  monitored.  In  the   light   of   modern
    communication systems I do not find that to be a credible  explanation.
    Indeed his wife could have  employed  a  very  old  fashioned  mode  of
    communication and written a letter giving details of these visits.   As
    I have already said there is no reasonable explanation why he would not
    leave the country for good in 2009 but left in 2012. He was supposed to
    be signing on in 2009 so I have to question why he  left  at  all  then
    returned to Sri Lanka and why there is  no  credible  evidence  of  any
    problems arising from his failure to sign  on.  There  is  no  evidence
    before me to support a claim that attending Heroes Days in the UK would
    bring him to the adverse attention of the authorities on return.

26. The Appellant has only been in the UK since December 2012. He may  have
    developed a private life whilst here but there is nothing to  establish
    that his removal would be disproportionate to the  need  for  effective
    immigration control in the UK. I accept that he has family here and may
    have  a  family  life  with  them  but  I  do  not  accept  that  these
    relationships go beyond normal ties such as to render interference with
    them disproportionate.

27.  The Appellant has not established a right to  Humanitarian  Protection
    in the UK.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The  appeal  is  dismissed  on  Humanitarian  Protection  and  Human  Rights
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date: 25th April 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







