
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02821/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14th July 2015                    |On 29th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr W M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Javed, instructed by Thompsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st  January  1936,  and
    appealed against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  4th
    February 2015 to remove him from the UK following a decision to  refuse
    him asylum, humanitarian protection and protection of his human  rights
    under the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. Following an application for permission to appeal, which was  initially
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted
    permission finding there was arguable merit in the assertion  that  the
    judge focussed on the appellant's evidence that he chose to seek refuge
    in the UK in order to access health facilities rather than address  the
    reason why he chose not to preach his religion in Pakistan.

 3. The matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal to consider the  matter
    with respect to MN and others (Ahmadis -  country  conditions  -  risk)
    Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).

 4. The respondent accepted that  the  appellant  was  an  Ahmadi  and  the
    appellant had been subject to discrimination  and  harassment  and  had
    some of his  property  destroyed  whilst  in  Pakistan.  The  appellant
    claimed that he had been attacked five to six years previously.

Conclusions

 5. At the hearing Ms Isherwood contended that there was no  error  of  law
    but accepted that the findings appeared essentially to be  confined  to
    one paragraph [34].  She also accepted that because the  appellant  had
    raised the issue of his health did not mean that his  claim  of  asylum
    should be given less weight.

 6. The Application for Permission to Appeal contended that the  judge  had
    failed to assess the evidence in the light of MN and I  find  this  has
    merit such that there is an error of law.

 7. There was no reference to the previous attacks on the  appellant  which
    the respondent accepted.

 8. The judge considered that the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association  letter  was
    good evidence as to his commitment to the  Ahmadi  faith  but  did  not
    appear to factor it into his assessment of the claim  contrary  to  the
    guidance in AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK:letters) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT
    whereby the more specific a letter is  the  more  it  should  be  given
    weight.

 9. Nor had the judge considered the headnote of MN  which  suggested  that
    the more of a profile an appellant might have  the  more  he  might  be
    targeted. The appellant's claim was that he was a landowner and  indeed
    the judge accepted at [32] of the decision that  the  appellant  was  a
    prominent Ahmadi.

10. MN confirms
         "The burden is in the claimant to demonstrate that  any  intentions
         or wish to practise the manifest aspects of the faith  openly  that
         are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal  Code  (PPC)  is  genuinely
         held and of particular importance to the claimant to  preserve  his
         or her religious identity. The decision maker needs to evaluate all
         the evidence.  Behaviour since  arrival  in  the  UK  may  also  be
         relevant.  If the claimant discharged this burden he is  likely  to
         be in need of protection."

11. In addition, the judge stated at [34]
         '... the appellant is not  likely,  given  his  age  and  his  poor
         health, to return to Pakistan and embark on a career  of  preaching
         the faith and converting others'.

12. MN, however, at 2(i) states that it has long been possible  in  general
    for Ahmadi to practise their faith on  a  restricted  basis  either  in
    private or in a community with other Ahmadi but it also states that the
    legislation  not  only  prohibits  preaching   and   other   forms   of
    proselytising  but  "also  in  practice  restricts  other  elements  of
    manifesting one's religious beliefs  such  as  holding  open  discourse
    about   religion   with   non-Ahmadi   although   not   amounting    to
    proselytising."

    and further
         (i)      If an  Ahmadi  is  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
         particular importance to his religious  identity  to  practise  and
         manifest  his  faith  openly  in  Pakistan  in  defiance   of   the
         restrictions in the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) under  sections  298B
         and 298C, by engaging in  behaviour  described  in  paragraph  2(i)
         above, he or she is likely to be in  need  of  protection,  in  the
         light of the serious nature of the sanctions that potentially apply
         as  well  as  the  risk  of  prosecution  under  section  295C  for
         blasphemy.
         (ii)     It  is  no  answer  to  expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
         description just given to avoid engaging in behaviour described  in
         paragraph 2(i) above ("paragraph 2(i) behaviour") to avoid  a  risk
         of prosecution.

13. HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 confirms that if the person  wishes  to
    preach but is restricted from doing because of his fear of  persecution
    then he may fall to be protected under  the  Refugee  Convention.   The
    evidence given by the appellant and recorded by the judge  appeared  to
    be that the appellant restricted his activities because  of  the  penal
    code within Pakistan. The judge does not appear to have  grappled  with
    that point.

14. I find therefore that MN has not been applied  in  full  and  that  the
    judge did not engage with all the  evidence  and  failed  to  apply  HJ
    correctly.  These are errors of law which are material.

Order

15. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the TCE 2007 and further  to
    7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   An
anonymity order is made because the matter involves an asylum appeal.


Signed      Date 14th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
