
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02507/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                     HTL
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Vyaj Lovejoy, HRS Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 20th July  2015  dismissing  his  appeal.   The
    judge dismissed his appeal on international protection grounds and also
    on Article 8  grounds.   The  grant  of  permission  in  this  case  is
    restricted to the issues in respect of Article 8 so that  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal making findings in respect of and dismissing
    the Appellant's international  protection  Grounds  of  Appeal  stands,
    including the adverse credibility findings.

 2. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals  an
    error of law in the assessment of Article 8 for the reasons set out  in
    the grant of permission namely that the judge has  applied  a  test  of
    exceptionality contrary to the relevant jurisprudence,  has  failed  to
    make a finding as to the best interests of the  child,  and  failed  to
    address the best interests of the child as a primary  consideration  in
    the evaluative Article 8 assessment.

 3. The parties are in agreement that in light of those errors the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal on Article 8 cannot stand and accordingly  I
    set it aside.  The grounds of appeal, limited to Article 8, need to  be
    reheard de novo. In that context, I accede to the request to remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing of the Article 8 Grounds of
    Appeal.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

