
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02293/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                  ALI AZARA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ali Azara, claims to be an  undocumented  and  stateless
    Bidoon who previously lived in Kuwait and who claims to have been  born
    on 13 May 1987.  He claims also to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on 20 February 2014 and to have been involved in demonstrations against
    the Kuwaiti authorities whilst he lived  in  Kuwait.   He  applied  for
    asylum but that application was refused and  a  decision  was  made  to
    remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 12 May 2015, dismissed the appeal  on  all
    grounds.  The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Amongst other evidence, the judge  had  before  him  a  Sprakab  Report
    indicating that the appellant was  Kuwaiti  Arabic  and  that  he  also
    speaks with a Kuwaiti accent.  The judge [24] accepted,  "the  language
    assessment supports the appellant's claim that he has lived  in  Kuwait
    and that he may even have been  for  the  vast  majority  of  his  life
    [there]."  However, the judge did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness and recorded the fact at [22]  that  he  had  "made  a
    biometric 'hit' on data" held at the United States of  America  Embassy
    in Baghdad where  he  had  made  a  visa  application  using  an  Iraqi
    passport.  The appellant claims that the Iraqi  passport  was  a  false
    document but the respondent (and Judge Hillis) concluded that it was  a
    genuine Iraqi passport  the  existence  of  which  indicated  that  the
    appellant was more likely to  be  an  Iraqi,  rather  than  a  Kuwaiti,
    national.

 3. Judge Hillis properly dealt with the core issue in this appeal,  namely
    the nationality (or statelessness) of the appellant.  It  may  well  be
    the case that the appellant is not a Kuwaiti Bidoon as he  claims  and,
    indeed, that he is also an Iraqi citizen but I am  not  satisfied  that
    the judge has adopted a valid route or process to deliver him  to  that
    conclusion.  At  [22],  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  visa
    application in Iraq had only  been  accepted  after  he  had  made  the
    "biometric hit."  That point is well made but the judge went on to  say
    that,

         "If the US Embassy had found the passport to be  false  they  would
         have  retained  it  and  would  very  probably  have  detained  the
         appellant for making an application based on deception for leave to
         enter the USA from Iraq as a terrorist suspect.  The appellant,  on
         his own account, states that he was told at the Embassy that  there
         was some paperwork missing and that  is  why  his  application  was
         refused."

 4. It was unclear to me by  upon  what  evidential  basis  the  judge  has
    concluded that it is "very probable" that the appellant would have been
    detained by the US forces for making a visa application using  a  false
    passport.  The fact that the appellant was not arrested or detained  by
    the US forces in Iraq cannot, without any evidence in support, properly
    lead to a conclusion that the appellant did not, as he claimed,  use  a
    false passport.  The judge goes on [23]  to  refer  to  the  "extremely
    thorough checks" which he believed the US authorities in Baghdad  would
    carry out but, again, he makes reference to no evidence  of  background
    material which would support his description.

 5. Further, at [24] the judge states that,

         "... the dialect of a person ... cannot alone or even when  covered
         with the knowledge of a country and its customs be determinative of
         his nationality.  A person may have lived for the majority  or  all
         of his life in a country where  his  nationality  is  that  of  his
         father or mother of birth which may be entirely  different  to  the
         country  in  which  the  appellant  lives  with  his  parents   and
         siblings."

 6. As a general observation that statement may not be  objectionable  but,
    coupled only with the judge's speculation as to how the US  authorities
    at the Iraqi Embassy  might  have  behaved  when  confronted  with  the
    appellant, it does not constitute  a  sound  basis  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim.  In the circumstances, I set aside the decision  and
    will remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Hillis)
    for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.  It  will  be  for  the  new
    Tribunal to carry out a proper examination of the evidence;  I  am  not
    suggesting  that  the  appellant's  account  must  be  accepted.    The
    appellant may continue to struggle to explain why the US authorities in
    Iraq accepted his passport as genuine.  However, those are matters  for
    the next Tribunal to consider.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 12 May  2015  is  set
aside.  The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge
Hillis) for that Tribunal to re-make the decision following a hearing

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

