
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/02008/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On January 29th, 2016                |On February 3rd, 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                               MR SALAH FINER
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Chopra (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, [a] citizen of Libya, last entered the United Kingdom as
    a student on February 11, 2010. He had  been  studying  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2008 when he entered on a  six-month  student  visa.  His
    visa expired on July 24, 2014 and he claimed asylum on August 18,  2014
    and was served with form IS151A as an overstayer.

 2. The respondent rejected his application on January 22, 2015 and took  a
    decision to remove him by way of directions pursuant to Section  10  of
    the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The  appellant  appealed  that
    decision on October 6, 2014 under section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appeal came before a panel of Judges consisting of Designated Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal McClure and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Buzzard on May 22, 2015. They  refused  the  appellant's  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on June 8, 2015.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision  on  June  23,
    2015 on the basis the panel had erred factually  and  placed  too  much
    emphasis on insignificant factors.

 5. The appellant was granted permission on July 6, 2015 on  the  basis  it
    was arguable that if the panel submitted a serious factual  this  might
    translate into an error in law.

 6. The appellant's representatives filed a Rule 24 response dated July 13,
    2015 in which it was argued that even if there had been a factual error
    the panel had correctly dismissed  the  appeal  having  regard  to  the
    country guidance  decision  of  AT  and  others  (Article  15(2);  risk
    categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 00318 (IAC).

 7. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Chopra submitted that the Panel had erred because factually they had
    erred in their recording of the evidence. He submitted the Panel  erred
    because at Q66 and 67 the appellant had stated that after the  fighting
    between the Mishasha and Zintan began in  June  2012  his  brother  was
    forced to help the militia, He stated his brother had been detained  by
    the  Zintan  authorities  for  ten  months  before  being  released  on
    condition he reported to their Tripoli branch office On July  21,  2014
    he was en-route to the Garaboli area, east  of  Tripoli,  when  he  was
    stopped at a Misratah checkpoint and then kidnapped.  The  Panel  erred
    because his brother had not been detained in 2012 but in 2014  and  the
    detention took place in Garaboli and not in Zintan as suggested by  the
    panel. Mr Chopra submitted this error infected the Panel's  finding  on
    credibility and ultimately their decision as to whether his family were
    high profile. The Panel failed to have regard to the fact  he  had  not
    completed his military service, he came from  an  area  that  supported
    Qadhafi, the Zintan group opposed Qadhafi or  that  they  continued  to
    look for him.

 9.  Ms  Johnstone  submitted  that  the  appellant's  answer  at  Q66  and
    subsequent statements do not state he was not in the  Zintan  area  and
    whilst the appellant may have meant that it was not something that  was
    made clear in either his statements  or  oral  evidence.  Even  if  the
    Tribunal had misunderstood/misread his evidence  it  was  not  material
    because the Panel went on to make numerous  other  adverse  credibility
    findings in paragraphs [50] to [52]. The Panel had regard to paragraphs
    [18]  to  [22]  of  the  refusal  letter  and  properly  considered  at
    paragraphs [53] to [55]  of  the  decision  how  the  country  guidance
    decision of AT would affect the appellant's case and concluded that  he
    did not fall within the risk categories set out in the case. There  was
    no error in law.

10. Having heard the above submissions, I reserved my decision.

DISCUSSION AND FINDING ON ERROR IN LAW

11. The appellant was by his own admission a member of the Zintan tribe who
    were supporters of the former Qadhafi regime. He had  effectively  been
    living in the United Kingdom since 2008 having entered as a student and
    although he visited Libya it is fair to say that he has spent  most  of
    his time in the United Kingdom since 2008.

12. The appellant's  claim  was  that  his  father  and  brothers  were  in
    Qadhafi's army with his father and one of his brothers being  sergeants
    and his other brother being a captain. His father had retired in  2002.
    The respondent rejected the appellant's claim that his family had  been
    targeted and at paragraph [20] of  the  refusal  letter  she  gave  her
    reasons for rejecting the account.

13. In paragraph [49] of the panel's decision they recorded  the  following
    matters:

      a. At SEF Q66  the  appellant  stated  that  his  brother,  Adil,  was
         kidnapped by the Misratah militia in 2012.

      b. This claim was inconsistent with his written statement  that  other
         militia were not able to enter the Zintan territory prior  to  July
         2014.

      c. In his oral evidence the appellant did not  identify  the  Misratah
         militia as one of those that had threatened him despite his earlier
         statement that it was they who had kidnapped his brother.

      d. The appellant's failure to be consistent in  his  statements  about
         the non-Zintan militia who had threatened and kidnapped his brother
         created  considerable  doubt  over  the  veracity  of  the  claimed
         threats.

      e. For these reasons we find the appellant's claim he  was  threatened
         not to be true.

14. In giving permission to appeal the Judge stated that a "serious factual
    error ... might translate into an error in law". The facts as  recorded
    by the Panel are, as argued by Mr Chopra, incorrect. He did  not  claim
    his brother was captured in 2012 but stated both at Q67 and 73 that  he
    was captured in 2014.

15. There is also an issue over where the kidnapping took place. That issue
    is not as clear cut because the appellant's evidence  was  his  brother
    was stopped at a checkpoint. That implies he could well  have  been  in
    Zintan.

16. However, other adverse findings were  made  on  credibility  and  these
    findings are not directly challenged. The grounds of appeal  argue  why
    the Panel was wrong to make and adverse  finding  but  simply  put  the
    Panel's findings in paragraphs  [50]  to  [52]  are  not  challengeable
    because they were open to the Panel to make. The Panel was entitled  to
    make an adverse finding on the timing of his asylum claim in  paragraph
    [50], the absence of the original documents when copies had  been  sent
    to him in paragraph [51] and the timing of him receiving the  documents
    in paragraph [52].

17. Ms Johnstone submitted that even if the Panel erred in  paragraph  [49]
    of its decision it was not material because the Panel properly  applied
    the latest country guidance on Libya and reached  the  only  conclusion
    open to it from paragraphs [52] onwards of the decision.

18. The headnote of AT and others (Article 15(2); risk categories) Libya CG
    [2014] UKUT 00318 (IAC) provides the Tribunal's  conclusions  on  those
    persons facing a risk of persecution.

19. The appellant's father was a sergeant in Qadhafi's army at a time  when
    Qadhafi was in power but he was not targeted by  the  militias  between
    2011 and 2014. One of his brothers  was  a  captain  and  the  other  a
    sergeant. The  evidence  presented  both  to  the  respondent  and  the
    Tribunal does not, despite Mr Chopra's arguments,  suggest  either  the
    appellant or the appellant's family were former high ranking  officials
    within the intelligence services of  that  regime  or  others  with  an
    association at senior level with that regime.

20. The appellant is a student who left the country in 2008. Contrary to Mr
    Chopra's submission the appellant did carry out  his  national  service
    and even if the Panel accepted his account he personally did  not  fall
    into the risk category identified at headnote 3 of AT.

21. Mr Chopra's argument has to be that if his account of what happened  to
    his brother was credible then he was a family member of someone who had
    problems with the militias.

22. However, the Tribunal in AT considered the position of  family  members
    and concluded at headnotes 5 and 6-

    "5. The majority of the population of Libya either worked for, had some
    association with, or has a member of the family who worked for  or  had
    an association with the Qadhafi regime. Such employment or  association
    alone is not sufficient to establish a risk of persecution or Article 3
    ill-treatment on return.

    6. In general, family members of those described in (3) and  (4)  above
    are not at risk of persecution or a breach of their protected rights on
    return. It is possible, however, that an individual  will  be  able  to
    establish such a risk but this will need to be demonstrated by specific
    evidence relating to the individual's circumstances. Mere assertion  of
    risk by association as a family member would not be sufficient  without
    fact-specific evidence of the risk to that particular family member."

23. The issue therefore is whether the Panel's error on  the  date  of  the
    kidnapping of the appellant's brother would bring the appellant  within
    headnote 6.

24. The Panel properly considered all of the evidence and whilst there  was
    a mistake over the date the circumstances were recorded  correctly  and
    the Panel went onto make other findings on credibility that led  it  to
    reject the appellant's claim.

25. Based on those findings I am satisfied that the mistake over  2012/2014
    was not material because the facts remained the same that  his  brother
    had  allegedly  been  kidnapped  by  the  Misratah  militia.  This  was
    something the Panel rejected in any event.

26. The Panel  applied  the  country  guidance  case  correctly  and  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant does not  fall  within  any  of  the  risk
    categories and consequently there is no material error.

DECISION

27. There was no material error and I uphold the earlier decision  for  the
    reasons set out above.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

No fee award was made in the First-tier and I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
