
AA 02450 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2013                               |On 21 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             SAKHEZADA NAMYAILAI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Redford, of counsel, instructed by Malik &
Malik, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  11  May,  1970.  He
      arrived in this country on 11 August, 2001 and applied for asylum.  He
      was removed to Austria in March 2002  on  third  country  grounds.  He
      returned to the UK on 7 May, 2002 making an  application  in  a  false
      identity. He was again  removed  to  Austria  on  17  June,  2002.  He
      returned on 26 August 2002. A fresh application for asylum was made in
      September 2007 which was refused in 2008. Further representations were
      made which were refused in August 2012  on  article  8  grounds  only.
      Following judicial review  proceedings  and  a  consent  order  on  13
      February, 2013 the appellant's asylum claim was accepted  as  a  fresh
      claim. However the claim was refused on 27 February, 2013.

   2. The appellant appealed the refusal and his appeal came before a First-
      tier Judge on 15 April, 2013. The judge  found  that  the  appellant's
      conduct-in pursuing an  asylum  claim  fabricated  by  his  solicitor-
      severely undermined his credibility. In 2002 his  pursuit  of  another
      asylum claim under a false identity served to deprive him entirely  of
      credibility and the judge could accordingly attach no credence to  the
      appellant's asylum claim as currently presented.

   3. The appellant's wife and children were in Pakistan. The judge did  not
      exclude the possibility of the appellant resuming his private life  in
      Afghanistan. His wife and children were living in  Pakistan  with  the
      appellant's father-in-law and  it  would  be  reasonable  to  approach
      article 8 on the basis that the appellant could resume if he chose his
      family life with his wife and children in Pakistan and his  father-in-
      law's home  in  that  country.  The  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds was dismissed.

   4. There was an application for permission to appeal and  permission  was
      granted by First-tier Judge Chohan on the basis that the judge had not
      considered the appellant's core asylum claim. The judge  had  arguably
      found the appellant not to  be  credible  based  simply  on  his  poor
      immigration history but he should  have  dealt  with  the  substantive
      asylum claim and given reasons.

   5. Counsel submitted that the judge had rejected the asylum claim on  the
      basis of the appellant's behaviour within the meaning of section 8  of
      the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.
      The judge had not considered  whether  his  claim  had  in  fact  been
      fabricated by his  solicitor  without  his  involvement.  He  had  not
      properly referred to the appellant's asylum claim and had  not  looked
      at the evidence in the round. Reference was made to SM  (Iran)  [2005]
      UKAIT 00116. Even when section 8 applied a judge should  look  at  the
      evidence as a whole. The  judge's  findings  had  been  untenable  and
      insufficient.  The judge had erred in his consideration of  article  8
      given that the appellant was to be returned to Afghanistan  and  would
      not live with his family in Pakistan. The judge had failed to consider
      humanitarian protection. If his family were to join him there might be
      accommodation issues in Kabul.

   6. Mr Deller was unable to support the determination. He pointed out that
      the Secretary of State had accepted the claim as a fresh claim and had
      not rejected it as manifestly unfounded.  While  the  appellant  might
      face an uphill struggle the  unreserved  wholesale  rejection  of  the
      claim on the basis of the previous history could not be sustained. The
      reasons challenge was difficult to resist in  relation  to  asylum  or
      humanitarian protection. The findings in relation to  article  8  were
      lacking.

   7. A point had been taken in relation to the legacy  programme  but  this
      might be difficult to sustain in  the  light  of  AZ  (Asylum-'legacy'
      cases) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00270 (IAC).

   8. Mr Deller submitted that justice had completely misfired as he put  it
      and that  there  had  been  no  effective  hearing  and  that  in  the
      circumstances the matter  should  be  remitted  to  be  heard  afresh.
      Counsel was in agreement.

   9. Mr Deller acknowledged that the First-tier  Judge  had  been  in  some
      difficulty because of the gaps in the documentary evidence  about  the
      appellant's history of applications to the Home Office.  This  was  in
      part due to the papers being held in two files as  the  appellant  had
      presented in more than one identity.  He  undertook  to  see  if  this
      difficulty could be addressed prior to the resumed hearing.

  10. By agreement this appeal is allowed and remitted for a  fresh  hearing
      as it was accepted that the First-tier Judge had not  dealt  with  the
      appellant's claim on its merits but had focussed  on  the  appellant's
      immigration history and rejected the case based on that  history.  The
      determination is materially flawed in law. None of the findings can be
      preserved. In these circumstances remittal is the appropriate course.

  11. I re-make the decision.

  12. Appeal allowed, to be heard afresh by a  different  First-tier  Judge.
      None of the findings are to stand.






                               Signed




                               20 June 2013


                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal

