
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02235/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                            MR ROHULLAH JABARKHEL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kiai, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Maka  promulgated  on  15  October  2015  ("the   Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
         decision  dated  26  January  2015  to  remove  the  Appellant   to
         Afghanistan and rejecting his protection claim. The Judge dismissed
         the Appellant's protection claim.  The  Judge  also  dismissed  the
         Appellant's Article 8 claim but refused to make a concluded finding
         on the Appellant's Article 8 claim  relating  to  his  relationship
         with an EEA partner and their  child  (who  was  born  twelve  days
         before the hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal) or to deal  with
         the best interests of that child.  That forms the basis of  one  of
         the grounds to which I will need to return below.

      2. The background facts are as follows.  The Appellant is  a  national
         of Afghanistan.  He claims to have arrived in the  UK  on  29  June
         2011 by lorry.  He claimed asylum on  13  July  2011.   His  asylum
         claim was rejected but he was granted discretionary leave until  26
         October 2012.  He made an in time  application  for  further  leave
         which led to the  Respondent's  decision  refusing  his  claim  and
         directing his removal.  There was  an  issue  in  relation  to  the
         Appellant's age.  He was assessed as having a date of birth  of  26
         April 1995 in an assessment on  30  December  2011  but  the  local
         authority thereafter apparently accepted his age  as  sixteen  when
         threatened with judicial review in May 2012.  The  local  authority
         had not however formally notified the Respondent that they withdrew
         their earlier assessment.

      3. The Judge rejected the Appellant's protection claim  on  the  basis
         that he did not find the Appellant credible. He  did  not  need  to
         deal with the age dispute issue because it was  accepted  that  the
         Appellant was no longer a minor by the date of  the  hearing.   The
         Judge did not accept that the Appellant would be  at  risk  in  his
         home area of Nangarhar and  therefore  did  not  need  to  consider
         relocation  to  Kabul.   The  Judge   accepted   the   Respondent's
         submission that the Appellant still has family in Afghanistan.  The
         Judge also did not accept that the Appellant could not relocate  to
         Kabul.  He did not accept that it would be unduly harsh for him  to
         do so.  In relation to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive
         ("Article 15(c)"), the Judge noted the case of AK  (Article  15(c))
         Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).  The Judge also  noted  the
         Upper Tribunal's decision in R (Naziri and others)  v  SSHD  [2015]
         UKUT 00437 (IAC) and noted that the Court  of  Appeal  had  granted
         permission to appeal in relation to that judicial  review  decision
         and  had  also  granted  an  injunction  to  prevent   removal   to
         Afghanistan where  persons  were  habitually  resident  in  various
         provinces in Afghanistan including  the  province  from  which  the
         Appellant comes.  The Judge noted  however  that  AK  (Afghanistan)
         remained good law unless and until it was overturned.  He  did  not
         accept that the Appellant would be at risk in Nangarhar because  he
         did not believe his  claim.   He  also  found  that  the  objective
         evidence did not show that the current security situation was  such
         as to show that Article 15(c) would be satisfied.  He found in  any
         event that there was no reason why the Appellant could not relocate
         to Kabul where there would be a sufficiency of protection.

      4. In relation to the Appellant's Article 8 claim, the judge  accepted
         that the Appellant had a private and family life in the UK and that
         there  would  be  interference.   He  addressed  the  new   factual
         situation about the relationship and child, however, on  the  basis
         that the Respondent's decision could not be impugned by failure  to
         refer to this circumstance since  she  was  unaware  of  it.   When
         considering proportionality, the Judge considered those  facts  but
         indicated that he did not reach any  concluded  finding  about  the
         claim as presented at the hearing because he  considered  that  the
         Appellant could present his claim to the Respondent  following  the
         appeal.  The Judge accepted that the removal of the Appellant would
         impact on his partner  but  said  that  this  could  be  considered
         further by the Respondent.  He indicated that he could not reach  a
         finding on whether the Appellant's partner had permanent  residence
         as her status depended on that of her mother and it was  not  clear
         whether her mother was exercising Treaty rights.  Their child could
         not be settled or British. He declined to make any findings on  the
         durability of the relationship because it was "not  before  [him]".
         The Judge said that this  could  be  considered  if  and  when  the
         Appellant made an application to  remain  as  the  extended  family
         member of an EEA national.  He also declined to make a  substantive
         finding on the best interests of the Appellant's newly born  child.
         In light of the recent  birth,  he  expressed  no  further  finding
         beyond noting that he had no evidence as to the Appellant's role in
         the child's life and noting the Appellant's precarious status.

      5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Lambert on all grounds.  This matter  comes  before  me  to  decide
         whether the Decision contains an error of law and if so to  re-make
         the Decision or remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal for re-
         hearing.

Submissions

      6. Ms Kiai clarified that this appeal is one which proceeds on the pre-
         Immigration Act 2014 statutory scheme.  This was important  because
         it impacted on the basis on which the Appellant said that the Judge
         could have allowed the appeal or alternatively on  the  reason  why
         the Judge erred in his consideration of the  Article  8  claim.   I
         agreed with Ms Kiai that this is a pre-Immigration Act 2014 appeal.
          Paragraph 8(2) of The Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement  No  4,
         Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions  and  Amendment)  Order  2015
         provides that the amendments to the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 come into force except in relation  to  deportation
         cases and some points-based system cases where the  decision  under
         appeal is made on  or  after  6  April  2015.   The  decision  here
         appealed was made on 26 January 2015  and  accordingly  the  appeal
         proceeds under the statutory scheme prior to  the  Immigration  Act
         2014 amendments.

      7. The Appellant's first ground is therefore to the  effect  that  the
         Judge was wrong to decline to deal with the Article 8 claim  as  it
         was at the date of the hearing.  It was accepted that a section 120
         notice had been served by which the Appellant was invited to submit
         a statement of additional grounds.  That is mentioned  at  [15]  of
         the Decision.  She submitted that the Judge's approach  in  failing
         to make concluded findings in relation to the Article 8  claim  and
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
         ("section 55") was in error.  Article 8 was raised as a  ground  of
         appeal.  The Judge was bound to deal with the claim as presented to
         him.  She accepted that there was an issue as  to  the  Appellant's
         paternity of  his  partner's  child  but  she  submitted  that  the
         appropriate course where that remained disputed was to  adjourn  to
         allow DNA  evidence  to  be  produced.  She  pointed  out  that  an
         adjournment had been sought.  She also pointed out  that  both  the
         Respondent and the Tribunal were aware of the Appellant's partner's
         pregnancy as the appeal had been transferred to enable the  partner
         to give evidence.

      8. Ground two focusses on Article 15(c).   Ms  Kiai  argued  that  the
         Judge erred in his approach by reference to a "risk of persecution"
         which is not relevant to that Article.  The grounds also take issue
         with the approach taken to the Appellant's relocation to Kabul.  Ms
         Kiai submitted  that  the  Judge  did  not  properly  consider  the
         Memorandum of Understanding which was at the heart of the  case  of
         Naziri.  She submitted that the Judge was  incorrect  to  say  that
         country guidance was binding until overturned  [135].   The  proper
         approach is to consider it binding unless there is further evidence
         to undermine it.  Ms Kiai submitted that the grant of permission in
         Naziri was such further evidence and the Judge erred in failing  to
         take account of the basis of that grant.

      9.  Ground  three  focusses  on  the  Judge's  consideration  of   the
         Appellant's credibility findings.  Ms Kiai relied  on  the  written
         grounds in this regard.  The Appellant's case  is  that  the  Judge
         impermissibly  engaged  in   speculation   when   considering   the
         plausibility of the  Appellant's  account  of  his  family  history
         rather than properly assessing the evidence on  the  basis  of  the
         facts before him. That speculation was not grounded on the evidence
         before the Judge and he paid no  regard  to  cultural  norms  which
         might exist in an Afghan family.

     10. Mr Kotas submitted that the Decision was carefully reasoned and did
         not contain an error of law.  In relation to ground one,  Mr  Kotas
         submitted that the real focus was section  55  as  the  Judge  made
         findings that the Article 8 claim could not succeed.  He  submitted
         that  the  reliance  on  section  55  was  a  wholesale  change  of
         circumstances and was new evidence.  He accepted that a section 120
         notice had been served and that no precise format was required  for
         the statement of additional grounds in response to that notice.  He
         noted  the  Appellant's  partner's  statement  in  the  bundle  but
         submitted that a statement  of  additional  grounds  could  not  be
         implied from that statement or the skeleton argument.  He  accepted
         that the Judge made only brief observations but he  submitted  that
         the grounds did not take issue with the inadequacy of findings.  He
         submitted that twelve days  was  ample  time  for  the  Appellant's
         solicitors to submit a brief statement putting section 55 at issue.



     11. In relation to Article 15(c), Mr Kotas took me to [137]  where  the
         Judge made findings on this issue.  He submitted that there was  no
         misdirection in the Judge's approach.

     12. In relation to ground three,  Mr  Kotas  pointed  me  to  the  very
         careful and detailed consideration of credibility  in  relation  to
         the protection claim at  [116]  to  [131]  of  the  Decision.   The
         findings which are challenged as speculation  appear  at  [116]  to
         [117].   The  submission  that  those   amount   to   impermissible
         speculation equates to a submission that reasons are  required  for
         the reasons already given.

Decision and Reasons

     13. I begin my consideration of the grounds with ground  one  as  if  I
         find in favour of the Appellant on this  ground,  the  appeal  will
         need to be re-heard at the very least on the Article 8 claim.

     14. The Judge considers the Article 8 claim at [142] to  [149]  of  the
         Decision.  The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant and from his
         partner which is set out at [81] to [90] and [91] to [102]  of  the
         Decision respectively.  The Appellant's  Counsel's  submissions  on
         this claim are at [110] to [111] of the Decision.

     15. I accept that the Judge has at least begun a consideration  of  the
         Article 8 claim in the section starting at [143] and has reached  a
         conclusion that the Article 8 claim should not succeed. The Judge's
         findings in this regard are however peppered with references to not
         making findings because it would be for the Respondent to  consider
         all  of  the  issues  holistically  when  a  claim  based  on  this
         relationship was made to her.

     16. Section 85 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
         ("the 2002 Act") provides as follows:-

             "(2)       If  an  appellant  under  section  82(1)  makes   a
             statement under section 120, the Tribunal shall  consider  any
             matter raised in the statement which constitutes a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84(1) against the  decision
             appealed against.

             (3) Subsection (2) applies to a statement made  under  section
             120 whether the statement was made before or after the  appeal
             was commenced.

             (4) On an appeal under section 82(1) against  a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider  evidence  about  any  matter  which  it
             thinks relevant to the substance  of  the  decision  including
             evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the  date  of
             decision."

             Section 85(4) is subject to exceptions set out in section 85A.
              None of those exceptions apply in this case.

     17. Section 86 of the 2002 Act provides:-

             "(1)      This section applies  on  an  appeal  under  section
             82(1) ...

             (2) The Tribunal must determine -

                  (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal ...

                  (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.

             (3) The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it  thinks
             that -

                  (a)  a decision against which the appeal is brought or  is
                  treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with  the
                  law (including immigration rules) or

                  (b)  a discretion exercised in making a  decision  against
                  which the appeal is brought or is treated as being brought
                  should have been exercised differently.

             ...

          5) In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the Tribunal shall
             dismiss the appeal."

     18. By virtue of  the  above  provisions,  the  Judge  was  obliged  to
         consider the evidence before him whether or not that  evidence  was
         before the Respondent.  It was not open to him to do as he has done
         and to effectively abdicate responsibility  to  the  Respondent  to
         consider the Article 8 claim on a later application (which might or
         might not give rise to  a  right  of  appeal  particularly  if  the
         Respondent were to use her certification powers).  It may  be  open
         to the Judge to remit the section 55 claim  to  the  Respondent  to
         reconsider and make a fresh decision (see MK (section 55 - Tribunal
         options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223  (IAC).   The  Judge  could
         therefore  have  allowed  the  appeal  to  the  limited  extent  of
         remitting to the Respondent to consider that aspect.  What  it  was
         not open to the Judge to do was to refuse to make  any  finding  on
         this issue on the basis that the Appellant  could  make  a  further
         application to the Respondent.  I am therefore satisfied  that  the
         Judge's approach to  the  Article  8  claim  and  particularly  the
         section 55 issue was in error.

     19. I infer from [12] of the Decision that the error may have  been  at
         least in part occasioned  by  the  way  in  which  the  Appellant's
         Counsel put her submissions.  It is there said that  she  submitted
         that the appeal should be allowed outright on the  basis  that  the
         Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.  Based on
         that submission, it is perhaps unsurprising that  the  Judge  began
         his consideration of the claim by finding as he did at  [143]  that
         the Respondent's decision could not be impugned  on  the  basis  of
         evidence which was not before her.  However, that approach  was  in
         error.

     20. For that reason, the appeal will need to be re-heard  at  least  in
         relation to the Article 8 and section 55 issues and  findings  will
         need to be made about the nature  and  extent  of  the  Appellant's
         relationship with his partner  and  child  which  will  also  quite
         probably require findings about  the  status  of  the  partner  and
         child.

     21. I go on to consider ground three as I need to consider whether  the
         credibility findings in relation to the protection claim should  be
         preserved on re-hearing.  I agree with Mr Kotas'  submissions  that
         the Decision at [116] to [131]  is  a  very  careful  and  detailed
         consideration of the evidence.  The Judge gives ample  reasons  for
         rejecting the Appellant's evidence.  He heard the Appellant  giving
         evidence and was clearly unimpressed by  that  evidence.   Further,
         the findings at [116] and [117]  do  not  amount  to  impermissible
         speculation in any event.  The finding that the Appellant's  mother
         would have told the Appellant about his  father's  involvement  and
         rank with the Taleban has to be read in the context of the evidence
         that she told the Appellant in detail how his father  was  involved
         in the peace process and about the Taleban coming  to  their  home.
         That the Appellant's father, if he was genuinely involved with  the
         Taleban as claimed, would have wanted his son to join is  also  not
         speculative given the profile which the  Appellant  said  that  his
         father had.  I do not find any error of  law  in  relation  to  the
         credibility  findings.   Those  were  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
         evidence.  Those credibility findings stand.

     22. I do not need to reach a conclusion on ground two.  The  protection
         claim in relation to Article 15(c) will need to  be  considered  by
         the Tribunal as at the date of the re-hearing before it and  it  is
         not necessary for me to reach  a  concluded  view.   I  would  have
         rejected the ground in any event so far as that relied on the Judge
         having adopted an erroneous approach.  It is clear from  the  final
         sentences of [137] and  what  is  said  at  [141]  that  the  Judge
         understood the test for Article 15(c) to be satisfied and that  the
         test was different from  that  under  the  Refugee  Convention.   I
         accept that  the  Judge  did  err  at  [135]  in  finding  that  AK
         (Afghanistan) is binding on him as opposed to finding that it was a
         decision  which  ought  to  be  followed  unless  there  was  later
         background material which undermined it.  That error is not however
         material given the Judge's consideration of the background material
         at [137] and the Court  of  Appeal's  grant  of  permission  in  HN
         (Afghanistan and others) v SSHD at [138].  However, I  accept  that
         the current situation in relation to Afghanistan will  need  to  be
         considered by the Judge at the date of re-hearing.  I therefore say
         nothing further about this.

     23. Mr Kotas suggested that if I found there to be an error of law only
         in relation to Article 8 that the appeal could be re-heard  in  the
         Upper Tribunal.   I  have  considered  that  submission  carefully.
         However, in circumstances where the Judge has declined  to  make  a
         number of factual findings about the relationship  and  the  child,
         and applying the guidance, I consider it appropriate to  remit  the
         appeal for re-hearing before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  enable
         factual findings to be made at  first  instance.   That  will  also
         enable the First-Tier Tribunal to take account of  the  outcome  of
         the Court of Appeal case of HN.  As I have already noted,  however,
         the credibility findings of the previous Judge contain no error  of
         law.  Accordingly, the findings at [116] to [131] of  the  Decision
         stand.

DECISION

    I am satisfied that  the  Decision  contains  an  error  of  law.   The
    Decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs is set aside save  for  the
    credibility findings at [116] to [131] of the Decision.  The appeal  is
    remitted to the First-Tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  by  a  different
    Judge.


    Signed [pic] Date: 10 February 2016
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
