
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02854/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I make this order because the  First-tier
    Tribunal made a similar order and, in unresolved asylum appeals such  as
    this, there is always a possibility that publicity could itself create a
    risk to an asylum seeker that could prevent his return.

 2. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against  a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe, who  dismissed  the  respondent's
    appeal on asylum grounds but allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds
    because of a concern about the mental health of the respondent.

 3.  The  respondent,  hereinafter  "the  claimant"   cross-appealed.    The
    application for permission was made  late  at  the  hearing  before  the
    Tribunal on an earlier occasion.  Permission was granted and time  given
    to the Secretary of State to consider her position.   Both  appeals  are
    before me now and the representatives of  the  parties  agree  with  the
    disposal set out below.

 4. Dealing first with the Secretary of State's appeal, it  is  agreed  that
    the First-tier Tribunal's reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds are not explained sufficiently. The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not give a  proper  explanation  for  the  decision  that  the
    claimant would not be assisted by his relatives in Sri Lanka.  There  is
    some evidence that the claimant could obtain support from his  relatives
    in Sri Lanka.  Whether that is established as a fact is unclear  and  if
    it is established as a  fact  whether  it  would  defeat  his  claim  is
    unclear.  The problem is that the point has not been  explained  and  it
    needs to be resolved.

 5. Secondly, it is agreed by the Secretary of State that  the  decision  of
    the Tribunal is deficient on asylum grounds because  there  are  factors
    pointing towards the appeal being allowed which had  not  been  properly
    considered or explained.  This does  not  mean  that  the  appeal  would
    ultimately be successful.  It means that there are points that ought  to
    have been considered but had not been considered properly or at all.

 6. The case is not suitable for disposal on submissions now, partly because
    there is general dissatisfaction and an element of  uncertainty  in  the
    findings about whether or not the  claimant  has  attempted  suicide  on
    earlier occasions. There is reference to this in  the  medical  evidence
    but it is not clear  what  the  doctor  had  in  mind  when  making  the
    observations that he did.  It may  be  a  reference  to  something  said
    inconsequentially in  interview;  it  may  be  that  what  was  said  in
    interview was very serious indeed or it may be that something  else  was
    recorded that does not appear in the paperwork, and  that  is  something
    which the claimant's solicitors have undertaken to investigate.  Without
    in any way directing how another Tribunal should make a decision  on  an
    application to admit fresh evidence it seems to me that this is the kind
    of issue which it is in everybody's interest to be resolved if that  can
    be done properly.

 7. For these reasons I have decided that the case needs to go back  and  it
    will go back to Hatton Cross (unless the First-tier  Tribunal  otherwise
    directs), not before First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe.

    Notice of Decision

 8. The appeals of both parties are allowed as indicated above.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |Dated 16 December 2015               |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |                                     |

