
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/02682/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10th March 2016                       |  On 6th July 2016                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                                     AK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. I Broklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, instructed by S Satha & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The First-tier Tribunal has made  an  anonymity  order  and  for  the
       avoidance  of  any  doubt,  that  order  continues.   AK  is  granted
       anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.   No   report   of   these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   him.    This
       direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to proceedings being
       brought for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Ievins   promulgated on 5th January 2016  in  which  he  allowed  the
       appeal of AK against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department made on 29th January 2015  to  refuse  to  grant  the
       appellant asylum.


    3. The appellant before me, is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department. However for ease of reference,  in  the  course  of  this
       decision I shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the First-
       tier Tribunal.  I  shall  in  this  decision,  refer  to  AK  as  the
       appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


    4. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national. He  is  a  Tamil  by  way  of
       ethnicity, and of the Roman Catholic faith.  A useful summary of  his
       immigration history is to be found at paragraph [5] of  the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal and I will borrow from that summary:


             "The appellant had lived in Qatar from 2005 to 2010.   He left
             Sri Lanka on 20 September 2011 and came to the United  Kingdom
             on a Tier 4 Student visa and entered on the following day. The
             appellant returned to Sri Lanka on 31 August 2013 but returned
             to this country some three weeks later on 19  September  2013,
             he having been granted a further Tier 4  visa  from  23  March
             2013 to 25 November 2014. However on  24  October  2013,  thus
             about a month after his return  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the
             appellant  claimed  asylum  for  fear  that  he   would   face
             mistreatment if returned to Sri Lanka  because  he  claims  to
             have been a member of the LTTE.


    5. A summary of the events that lead to the claim for asylum as set  out
       in the respondent's decision to refuse the claim for asylum, is to be
       found at paragraph [6] of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge.   I  do  not  repeat  that  summary  in  this  decision.    At
       paragraphs [8] to [18] of the  decision,  the  Judge  summarised  the
       respondent's reasons for refusing the claim and at paragraphs [21] to
       [24], the Judge  records  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
       parties.   At paragraphs [18] and [19] of  the  decision,  the  Judge
       sets out the medical evidence before him in the form of a report from
       Professor Lingam and a report from Dr Persaud.  At paragraph [20]  of
       the decision  the  Judge  refers  to  some  original  photographs  of
       scarring.  He states:


             "20. ....I saw some original photographs  of  scarring,  which
             did  not  help,  and  photographs  of  the  appellant   at   a
             demonstration.   Because of the way the photographs were lit I
             conclude that they could very well be of the appellant  but  I
             was  not  sure  that  they  were  of  him.  I  will  note  the
             appropriate standard of proof below."


    6. The material findings of the Judge are to be found at paragraphs [26]
       to [30] of the decision.  At paragraph [26] the Judge states that  he
       draws no conclusions adverse to the appellant from the  month  or  so
       delay in his claiming asylum after his arrival.


    7. At paragraph [27] of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge comes
       to the conclusion that he  did  not  consider  that  the  appellant's
       account of  his three and a half months with the  LTTE  in  2001,  as
       being  vague.   The  Judge  found  the  appellant's  account  of  his
       experiences as he came and went to and from Sri Lanka, to be entirely
       plausible. The Judge considered it plausible that the  appellant  was
       simply not kept on, but released by the LTTE on  the  basis  that  he
       could be called back if wanted later,  which  is  what  he  had  said
       happened.  The  Judge  did  not  consider  it  implausible  that  the
       appellant was released after  the  Sri  Lankan  Navy  found  him,  on
       payment by a Catholic Father from his school and that  the  appellant
       was released with a warning but without a reporting requirement.  The
       Judge noted that it appears to be the events that happened  in  2013,
       that really give rise to the appellant's claim for  asylum.  To  that
       end, having had regard to the evidence before him, the  Judge  states
       at paragraph [28]:


             "28. ....I consider  that  there  is  a  serious  possibility,
             reasonable likelihood and real risk that when he  returned  in
             2013 the Sri Lankan authorities visited him at home,  detained
             him and beat him in the way that he described. He was detained
             for a bit more than a  week  and  released  on  payment  of  a
             bribe.....The authorities were aware of the appellant's  name,
             they  arrested  him,  beat  him,  did  not  consider  him   of
             significant interest, so released him.   The payment of  money
             helped them to do so. I am satisfied that  the  appellant  was
             involved with the LTTE but at a low level more than  a  decade
             ago.  The authorities let him go and he was able to leave  Sri
             Lanka on his own passport.  He had an extant visa.  I  do  not
             consider that the fact that the appellant left  Sri  Lanka  in
             2013 to be a factor that indicates that what happened when  he
             was detained did not happen."


    8. At paragraph [29] of the decision, the Judge reminds himself  of  the
       need to assess the risk that the appellant would face  on  return  in
       light of the country guidance set out in GJ and Others.  At paragraph
       [30] the Judge notes:


          "30.     The risk factors are  set  out  in  paragraph  7  of  the
             headnote.  This individual was a low-level LITE supporter  who
             received basic training with them back in 2001  to  2  and  he
             worked for them briefly at their request in 2004.    He  would
             not now be perceived to be a threat to the  integrity  of  Sri
             Lanka as a single state.   He is not a journalist.  He is  not
             someone who has given evidence  to  the  Lessons  Learned  and
             Reconciliation Commission.     He is not  someone  whose  name
             appears on a computerised stop list accessible at the airport.
              He has passed through  the  airport  without  difficulty.  It
             follows that there is not an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
             warrant."


    9. I pause there to note that those findings are particularly  important
       because it is  plain  that  the  Judge  is  engaging  with  the  risk
       categories that  are  identified  in  the  headnote  to  the  country
       guidance decision in GJ and Others.    The  Judge  goes  on  in  that
       paragraph to state:


             "....What  happened  in  2013  was  that  the  appellant   was
             detained, for whatever reason, beaten and tortured,  but  then
             released.   I accept that the Sri Lankan authority's  approach
             is based on sophisticated intelligence.  He is not on the stop
             list but subparagraph 9  of  the  headnote  applies.    He  is
             someone who was monitored by the security services  after  his
             return. They came to see him, detained him and  beat  him  and
             released him.  The headnote explains that if  monitoring  does
             not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to
             destabilise  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state  or  revive  the
             internal armed conflict, the individual in question is not, in
             general, reasonably likely to  be  detained  by  the  security
             forces. "That would be  a  question  of  fact  in  each  case,
             dependent on any diaspora activities carried out  by  such  an
             individual". The  key  phrase  in  sub-paragraph  (9)  is  "in
             general".  Each  individual's  case  is  different.  From  the
             reasons given above I am satisfied  that  this  appellant  was
             detained and beaten and tortured......It happened once; I  can
             see no good reason why it could not happen again.  Accordingly
             I am satisfied that there is a serious possibility, reasonable
             likelihood and real risk that if this appellant  was  returned
             to Sri Lanka he would be subject to persecution on account  of
             his actual or imputed political opinion...."


   10. The respondent appeals on the ground that the Judge erred in allowing
       the appellant's appeal.  She claims that the Judge failed to consider
       the evidence holistically and that it was incumbent upon the Judge to
       consider whether the appellant's account in fact fits the category of
       person that is the  current  focus  of  the  Sri  Lankan  governments
       concern, as identified at [2] and [3] of the headnote to the decision
       in GJ and others.  The respondent submits that having concluded quite
       categorically that the appellant did not fit the profile  of  someone
       at risk as presented in GJ and others the account that  he  had  been
       detained and tortured in 2013 as a result of his previous involvement
       with the LTTE should fall away.


   11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on
       22nd January 2016.  The matter comes before me to consider whether or
       not the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ievins  involved  the
       making of a material error of law, and if the decision is set  aside,
       to re-make the decision.


   12.  At  the  hearing  before  me,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller   adopted   the
       respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  and  she  draws  my  attention  in
       particular to what is said at paragraph [28] of the Judge's decision.
        She submits that the appellant's account of events, and the  Judge's
       consideration  of  that  account,  is  inconsistent  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal's decision in GJ and others.  She  submits  that  the  Judge
       erred in assessing the credibility of that account  by  relying  upon
       the medical evidence that was before him. She submits that the  Judge
       should have had the  objective  evidence  in  mind  when  making  his
       assessment of the credibility  of  the  account  of  events  in  2013
       because  the  appellant's  subjective  account  of  events   is   not
       consistent with what is set out in the objective evidence.    In  any
       event, she submits that the fact that the Judge accepted the  account
       of events in 2013 is not to say that the appellant  remains  at  risk
       upon return now.


   13. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Coleman submits that the Judge came to
       findings that were properly upon to him on the evidence at paragraphs
       [26] to [30] of his decision.  The Judge was entitled to believe  the
       appellant's account of events for the reasons that are set out in the
       decision.  He submits that the Judge carefully assessed the risk upon
       return by reference to the country guidance  case  and  having  found
       that the appellant had been detained in 2013 as he  had  claimed,  it
       was open to the Judge to allow the appeal for the reasons given.


   14. The issue for me to decide is whether or not the Judge  was  entitled
       to conclude that the appellant was detained in 2013 and in  light  of
       the findings made by the Judge, whether the appellant falls with  the
       category of a person who may be at risk as set out at subparagraph  9
       of the headnote in GJ and others.


   15. In that respect I follow the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  R  &
       ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal held that
       a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the grounds  of
       perversity if it was irrational or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
       sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.  A finding
       that  is  "perverse"  embraces  findings  that  are   irrational   or
       unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact  that  are
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
       should not overturn a judgment at first instance,  unless  it  really
       could not understand the original judge's thought process when he was
       making material findings. I apply that guidance to  my  consideration
       of the decision in this appeal.


   16. Having carefully read the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       and his reasons, I reject the submission that the decision  discloses
       a material error of law as claimed by the respondent. The decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge spans over some eleven  pages,  and  32
       paragraphs.  It is clear that the Judge very carefully considered the
       evidence before him as to all of the events that  were  described  by
       the appellant, and came to findings that were properly  open  to  the
       Judge on the evidence.


   17. In my judgement the findings made by  the  Judge  between  paragraphs
       [26] and [30] in particular, were findings that were properly open to
       the Judge on the evidence before the Tribunal.  They cannot  be  said
       to be perverse, irrational or findings that were not supported by the
       evidence.  This is an appeal which in my judgement was allowed  after
       the  Judge  had  carefully  considered  the  particular   facts   and
       circumstances of the claim.  In my judgement, the Judge  allowed  the
       appeal having  had  very  careful  regard  to  the  country  guidance
       decision in GJ and Others and in particular, subparagraph (9) of  the
       headnote thereto.


   18. The country guidance in GJ and others is clear that if  a  person  is
       detained by the Sri Lankan security services  there  remains  a  real
       risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring  international  protection.
       Subparagraph (9) notes that a person whose name appears on a  "watch"
       list is not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport but  will
       be monitored by the security services after his  or  her  return.  If
       that monitoring does not indicate that  such  a  person  is  a  Tamil
       activist working to destabilise  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state  or
       revive the internal armed conflict, the  individual  in  question  is
       not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained  by  the  security
       forces. The Judge noted at paragraph [30] of his  decision  that  the
       key phrase in sub-paragraph (9) is "in general". In my judgement, the
       Judge was right to stress that each individual's case  is  different.
       In this appeal the Judge found  that  this  appellant  was  detained,
       beaten and tortured in 2013.  As I have said, that was a finding that
       was open to the Judge on the evidence.  It was against that  backdrop
       that the Judge allowed the appeal and in my judgement it was open  to
       him to do so.


   19. In my judgement the respondent is unable to establish that there  was
       a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       and it follows that the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   20. The appeal is dismissed.


   21. An anonymity direction was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is
       continued.

Signed                                  Date: 6th July 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD


The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a full fee award of  any  fee  which  has
been paid or may be payable.  I have dismissed the appeal before me and  the
fee award stands.

Signed                                  Date: 6th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
