

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02459/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|on 9 February 2016                       |              On 16 February 2016     |
|                                         |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     HK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
MacKay Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda, born on 4 September  1983.    The
    First-tier  Tribunal  made  an   anonymity   direction,   although   no
    submissions had been made on the matter.  No submissions were  made  in
    the Upper Tribunal either, so a direction is maintained.

 2. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd promulgated  on  28
    August 2015 states at paragraph 6:

      At the outset ... I was asked by the appellant's representative for an
      adjournment as the witness YSN could not attend.   He  stated  he  had
      spoken to someone else from the Unity Centre who could attend to speak
      to the appellant's attendance thereat.  It was  noted  that  the  Home
      Office accepted that  if  it  was  found  that  the  appellant  was  a
      homosexual, he would [be] at risk on return to Uganda.  I refused  the
      application for an adjournment on the basis  that  I  had  the  signed
      witness statement from the appellant's representative, YSN, and I also
      had a letter from the Unity LGBT group at E2 of the appeal bundle.   I
      was satisfied that this evidence together with the  oral  evidence  of
      the appellant would be sufficient to enable me to make a determination
      in this case.  The appeal proceeded.

 3. I think the judge must have meant that he had the  statement  from  YSN
    which had been obtained by the appellant's representative.

 4. The judge found that the appellant had fabricated his  claim  to  be  a
    homosexual, and dismissed his appeal.

 5. The grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  may  be  summarised  as
    follows:

        1. Failure to grant an  adjournment.   The  witness  statement  was
           supportive of the appellant's position that he  was  homosexual.
           It could not be said that the FtT would reach the same  decision
           had it heard and accepted the evidence of the witness.

        2. Failure to consider cultural context, where country  information
           and witnesses explained that the cultural  context  was  not  to
           divulge that one was homosexual.

        3. Misdirection in law, by failing to recognise that  the  Tribunal
           is precluded from finding that the appellant's  statements  lack
           credibility merely because he  did  not  rely  on  his  declared
           sexual orientation on  the  first  occasion  he  was  given  the
           opportunity.

        4.  Error  in  law  in   expecting   the   appellant   to   produce
           corroboration, namely at paragraph 30 criticising the  appellant
           for being unable to produce corroboration  of  any  relationship
           and at paragraph 33 for failing to produce certain letters.

        5. Failure to give adequate reasons  at  paragraph  32,  where  the
           judge found that the appellant's evidence was  vague  about  his
           relationship in Uganda, without giving reasons or examples.

        6. Error in finding that a letter from MK (a  Ugandan)  was  "self-
           serving."

 6. Permission was granted on the basis that arguably the  Tribunal  failed
    to consider whether  an  adjournment  was  necessary  in  interests  of
    justice.  The remaining grounds were thought to have less merit but  as
    they addressed the  composite  issue  of  credibility,  permission  was
    granted on all grounds.

 7. Mr Winter firstly submitted that the evidence of the witness  YSN  went
    not only to the appellant's attendance at the Unity LGBT group, but  to
    his sexuality.

 8. The relevant passage in the statement is as follows:

      In our country and culture, issues around sex  and  relationships  are
      taken as a very private thing and we do not discuss that.  If a friend
      was a woman, of the same sexuality, we could  discuss  that,  but  not
      with a man.  But despite not discussing the detail of relationships  I
      knew his sexuality because he was going to the group ...

 9. I inquired further as to what information had been put before the judge
    to justify the adjournment.  The Home Office note was that the  witness
    was said to  have  been  let  down  by  a  childminder,  and  that  the
    Presenting Officer had pointed out that the appellant's  attendance  at
    the group was not disputed by the respondent.  There had  been  mention
    of another witness willing  to  attend,  but  no  details  of  time  of
    availability.  Although it was suggested on the appellant's  side  that
    the application for adjournment had not  been  opposed,  that  was  not
    confirmed by the Home Office note.

10. Mr Winter submitted further as follows.   At  paragraph  29  the  judge
    found the appellant's claim that he had a child  with  his  partner  in
    order to cover up  his  sexuality  was  inconsistent  with  his  asylum
    interview, when he said that if he did not have a child with a woman it
    would be thought that either he or she was  barren.   The  judge  found
    this more consistent  with  a  heterosexual  relationship.   Mr  Winter
    submitted that this ignored the cultural context, but I  am  unable  to
    see why.  There was evidence of not divulging that one  is  homosexual,
    but that does not explain  the  discrepancy  emerging  from  an  asylum
    interview which pursued precisely that claim.

11. The judge was criticised for expecting corroboration at paragraph 30 of
    the determination.  However, I note that the judge's point there is not
    the non-production of evidence, rather that the appellant  was  playing
    with  a  semantic  distinction   between   relationships   and   sexual
    encounters.

12. At paragraph 32, the judge says  that  the  appellant's  evidence  both
    prior to and orally  at  the  hearing  was  vague  and  lacked  detail.
    Without setting out the evidence at length, this is a  point  which  on
    reference to the evidence either speaks for itself or it does not.   By
    definition, vagueness  is  not  subject  to  detailed  citations.   The
    appellant does not quote to show that his evidence was richly  detailed
    and self-consistent.

13. The use of the phrase "self-serving" at paragraph 33 is  unhelpful,  as
    is usually the case when this rather meaningless epithet  is  deployed.
    The paragraph as a whole, however, makes a sensible point  that  it  is
    implausible that  in  Uganda  the  appellant  would  exchange  explicit
    correspondence with a person whom he saw regularly, or would keep  such
    correspondence in his place of employment in a drawer  along  with  the
    business cheque book.  The judge  was  also  entitled  to  find  it  no
    coincidence that the correspondence  was  dated  the  month  after  the
    asylum interview.

14. On the main point on which  permission  was  granted,  the  failure  to
    adjourn, I am unable to detect any error and certainly not  a  material
    one.  It rather appears as if the pursuit of the application was  half-
    hearted.  It is not clear if the reference to another witness attending
    was in the alternative, or in addition.  It seems to have been made  in
    the passing and for little good reason.  No information was provided on
    when either YSN or another witness  might  be  able  to  attend.   Most
    importantly, the terms of the statement of YSN confirm what  the  judge
    said - she  was  to  speak  only  to  a  matter  not  in  dispute,  the
    appellant's attendance at the group.  Now that time  has  gone  by,  no
    evidence  has  been  offered  to  confirm  the  reasons  for  her  non-
    attendance.  No statement has been  offered  to  suggest  that  if  the
    matter had been probed, she might have had anything  to  say  which  is
    more favourable to the appellant's case.  As Mrs O'Brien  pointed  out,
    further in her statement  the  witness  says  that  she  has  not  been
    attending the group for some time.  The evidence from the appellant and
    from Unity Group was that he was an infrequent attender.

15. There is nothing to show that the judge went wrong as a matter  of  law
    or that if an adjournment had been granted the appellant's  case  would
    have benefited.

16. The further grounds are no more than points of disagreement, dressed up
    under various headings designed to suggest error of law.

17. The decision is not shown to have gone wrong as a matter of law  either
    in refusal of adjournment or in any other respect, and so shall stand.

18. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


            [pic]


            11 February 2106
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




