
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02970/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2013                             |On 22 October 2013           |
|Decision given orally at the hearing          |                             |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                   SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                            singarasa rajanikanth
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Miss H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   It has been drawn to our attention that in  the  interview  record  the
    appellant stated that since he had come to this country and when he was
    in India, having left Sri Lanka,  army  personnel  went  twice  to  his
    parents' house asking about him and were searching for  him  and  asked
    for his  whereabouts.   He  had  in  fact,  as  the  Immigration  Judge
    accepted, been forcibly, as many were, dragooned into the LTTE.  In due
    course he had been arrested, he was tortured but  he  was  released  on
    payment of a bribe.  The judge followed the  approach  in  the  country
    guidance case of GJ and notwithstanding that he found in favour of  the
    appellant so far as the issues of fact were concerned as  to  what  had
    happened to him in Sri Lanka (that being contrary to the view taken  by
    the Secretary of State who rejected his account effectively completely,
    regarding him as not having told a truthful story) he decided that  the
    appeal should be dismissed.

2.   Unfortunately and it is difficult to  follow  why  this  happened,  the
    allegation that the army had been round since he had left Sri Lanka was
    not dealt with by the judge.  Miss Jegarajah  submits  that  since  the
    judge found that overall he was a credible witness we should allow  the
    appeal on the basis that that is material evidence  and  it  should  be
    believed as well as the rest of his story,  that  there  was  still  an
    ongoing interest in him.

3.   The fact that there is a release on bribe and the fact that  there  was
    no difficulty in leaving the country openly can  of  course  show  that
    there is no real further interest in an  individual.   But  it  is  not
    necessarily determinative.   It  was  regarded  in  this  case  by  the
    Immigration Judge  as  determinative.    Had  he  dealt  with  and  his
    attention been drawn to what was said in interview albeit  it  was  not
    contained in the appellant's statement, we believe that he  would  have
    and should have heard evidence about it.  There was therefore an  error
    of law in that evidence relevant to the outcome of the appeal was  left
    out of account.  The appellant  should  have  been  asked  for  further
    details and it may be that  there  could  have  been  cross-examination
    about that matter.

4.   It is clearly capable of changing the  view  that  was  formed  by  the
    judge, which was that in all the circumstances  despite  believing  his
    account of what had happened to him there was no reason to believe that
    he was at real risk of being, we put it  this  way,  a  target  of  the
    government forces if he were returned.

5.   It seems to us that in those circumstances and particularly  that  this
    is a matter which is raised at the last moment, and  Miss  Horsley  has
    not really had a proper opportunity of considering the matter and maybe
    seeking such information as she might be able to seek from Home  Office
    sources, and since the  judge of course would still be able to be aware
    of  the  matter  and  since  he  has  made  positive  findings  in  the
    appellant's favour it cannot be a prejudice to him if  we  decide  that
    the appropriate course is to send the matter  back to  the  Immigration
    Judge to consider whether this additional material when properly looked
    at and properly analysed does change the decision that he made, and  if
    it does not, to give reasons why that is the case.






6.   Accordingly we allow the appeal to that extent and remit the matter  to
    FtT Judge Timothy Thorne in the way that we have indicated.





Signed                                  Date


THE HON MR JUSTICE COLLINS

