
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02816/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2015                  |On 11 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    H N N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brenells  promulgated  on  17  April  2012,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  2
    March 2012 to refuse to vary his leave and  to  refuse  his  claim  for
    asylum.



Summary of Issues

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Sorani Kurdish origin and is from
    Kirkuk in Northern Iraq.  His case is that he has  no  family  left  in
    Iraq other than a mother, whose whereabouts are unknown; is  unable  to
    obtain either with the assistance of  the  Iraqi  Consulate  in  London
    and/or any contacts (which he does not  have)  in  Iraq  the  necessary
    documents to return there or to the  area  under  the  control  of  the
    Kurdish Regional Government ("KRG").  He maintains also that he now has
    a well-founded fear of persecution in his home area of Kirkuk; that  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect him to return either to Baghdad  or  to
    the KRG which, in any event, he would be unable to reach.

 3. Although the respondent accepts that the applicant has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in his home area it is  not  accepted  that  he  is
    unable to acquire the necessary documents to permit his return to Iraq.
     Although it is also accepted that he could not return to Baghdad it is
    submitted that it is open to him to relocate to the  KRG  and  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

History of This Case

 4. Given that more than three years have elapsed  since  this  matter  was
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal and given the significant  changes  in
    the situation in Iraq since then, it is, helpful to  set  out  in  some
    detail the history of this appeal.

 5. The appellant was born on 1 March 1994.  He fled Iraq in December 2008,
    travelling overland  via  Turkey,  Greece  and  France  to  the  United
    Kingdom, arriving on 28 June 2009 the date at which he claimed  asylum.
    His application for asylum was refused on 7 August 2009 but  given  his
    age he was granted discretionary leave to remain until 31 August  2011.
    His appeal against the decision to refuse asylum  was  dismissed  in  a
    hearing by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thiew, promulgated  on  6  October
    2009.  On 25 August 2011 the applicant applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom,  maintaining  his  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Iraq and submitting that his removal there would  be  in
    breach of the Refugee Convention and also Articles 2, 3 and  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Brenells did not find the appellant to  be  a
    credible witness and, basing his decision primarily on the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Thieu dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 14 May 2012 by First-tier  Tribunal
    Brunnen and the matter then came before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Wood  on  25  September  2012.   Judge  Wood's  decision  in  which  he
    determined that there was an error of law is attached at Annex 1.   The
    judge noted [7] that  it  was  no  longer  being  maintained  that  the
    appellant was at risk of being a victim of a blood feud, and  that  the
    issue was  whether  the  judge  had  properly  considered  whether  the
    applicant was entitled to  Humanitarian  Protection  on  the  basis  of
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, that is the appellant was
    at serious risk of indiscriminate violence.  The judge  concluding  [9]
    that the judge had erred materially in his  consideration  for  Article
    15(c) and that:-

         "None  of  the  findings  concerning  the  issues  of  Humanitarian
         Protection and Articles 2 and 3 of ECHR  can  stand.   It  was  not
         suggested the  FTTJ's  treatment  of  Article  8  was  in  any  way
         erroneous, and therefore, for the reasons I have  already  outlined
         above, his findings in  relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention  and
         Article 8 should remain undisturbed."

 8. Directions were subsequently given as to how the matter was to  proceed
    but, however,  the  matter  was  subsequently  adjourned  thus  country
    guidance on this  situation  in  Iraq  as  regards  Article  15(c)  was
    awaited.

 9. By way of a transfer order, the matter came before me initially  on  12
    January 2015 when it was adjourned and again on 7 September 2015.

Variation of Judge Wood's Order

10. To a significant extent, Judge Wood's decision has  been  overtaken  by
    events. Since it was written, the situation  in  the  appellant's  home
    area of Kirkuk has changed dramatically due to the activities  of  ISIS
    the security situation across the whole of Iraq has also changed.

11. It was agreed between the parties that it would be  necessary  to  vary
    Judge Wood's directions as to how the appeal should proceed  given  the
    concession by the respondent that as someone  who  was  not  affiliated
    with ISIS the applicant would be at risk of  persecution  in  his  home
    area, that the issue of the Refugee Convention not being in issue would
    need to be revisited.

12. On reading the whole of Judge Wood's decision, it is clear that when he
    refers to the "Refugee Convention issues" he is in  fact  referring  to
    the facts on which it is said the appellant was, on his case  in  2012,
    at risk, that is the blood feud.  The  issue  of  persecution  by  ISIS
    forces has after the decision of Judge Wood it would accordingly be  in
    the interest of justice to permit this issue  to  be  considered  in  a
    remaking of the decision.  Similarly, it was accepted that in  addition
    to this it would be necessary to consider the issue of whether  it  was
    unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate within  Iraq;  it  was
    also conceded that, were I not to find that the appellant was a refugee
    or was entitled to Humanitarian Protection, that it would be necessary,
    given the effluxion of time since 2012, to revisit the issue of Article
    8.

13. As noted above, much of what is in dispute has  been  narrowed  between
    the parties and I did not hear evidence from  the  appellant.   I  did,
    however, hear submissions from both representatives and I had before me
    the following documents which were identified by the parties  as  being
    central to the issues in this dispute:-

      i) Expert report from Dr Rebwar Fatah, 28 August 2015.

     ii) Iraq: Internal Relocation (Technical Obstacles), 24 December 2014.

    iii) Iraq, Security Situation in Baghdad, Southern Governorates and  the
         Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI).

     iv) Iraq, Humanitarian  Situation  in  Baghdad,  the  South  (Including
         Babil) and the KRI, June 2015 (republished July 2015).

14. In discussion between the representatives it was agreed, following what
    is said in the Humanitarian Situation Report  at  2.4.6  the  applicant
    would have a well-founded fear of persecution  in  his  home  area,  it
    being a "contested" area.  It was accepted  also  that  he  would  need
    specific documentation in order to reach the KRG and to be accepted  in
    there.

15. It is accepted also  that  the  two  documents  necessary  -  an  Iraqi
    nationality certificate ("INC") and  the  Civil  Status  Identity  Card
    ("CSID") would be necessary for the appellant on return as otherwise he
    would be likely to face significant difficulties in accessing  services
    and livelihood and  would  face  destitution  which  would  breach  the
    Article 3 threshold (see internal relocation at 1.3.17).

Submissions

16. Mr Bandegani relied  on  the  report  of  Dr  Fatah  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 183 to 184 to the effect that on the  facts  of  this  case,
    given the appellant's age when he left Iraq and lack of access  to  any
    support there, that it would be difficult if not impossible for him  to
    replace either the CSID or INC.  He submitted also that it was accepted
    by  the  Home  Office  in  the  guidance  (1.3.27)  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect a person to reacquire documents from their place
    of origin through a proxy.  He submitted also  that  it  would  not  be
    possible for the appellant to obtain help  in  Baghdad  as  he  has  no
    original or copies of the relevant documents and  no  one  in  Iraq  to
    assist him, he does not know the book reference number required and  no
    money and would therefore be unable to obtain an INC or CSID.   It  was
    accepted also (see paragraph  2.5.12)  that  the  applicant  could  not
    travel to the Kurdish area except by air which, he could  not  do.   Mr
    Bandegani submitted that there was no  evidence  within  the  documents
    provided by the Secretary of State either that it would be possible  to
    obtain the documents before travelling to a Kurdish area.  Mr Bandegani
    submitted also that, relying on paragraph  2.5.12  internal  relocation
    document that admission was a discretion, that the  grant  of  stay  to
    those not from the Kurdistan region  being  temporary.   Reference  was
    also made (2.5.19 to 2.5.27) on the restrictions put in place on  those
    who were not from the KRI and particularly who did not have  a  sponsor
    in the KRG as well concerns about those from the contested areas.

17. Mr Clark submitted that the appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  the
    necessary documents and relying on the internal  relocation  report  at
    2.5.7 to 2.5.12 it is likely he will be able to get a  permit  although
    it was accepted, contrary to Dr Fatah's less generous interpretation of
    the evidence, that the appellant would not  be  able  to  return  to  a
    contested area he did, however, accept that the applicant could not  on
    the evidence as accepted be returned to Baghdad, the safest area  being
    for him the KRG.

18. Relying on the material at 1.2.27 to 1.28 as well as  1.2.41  Mr  Clark
    submitted that the applicant would in this case be able to  obtain  the
    necessary  documentation  with  consular  assistance  from  the  United
    Kingdom and would be able to obtain other documents through  UNHCR  and
    other assistance on  return.   He  submitted  that  it  was  apparently
    arbitrary that he would be entitled to enter the KRG and on what basis,
    temporary or otherwise,  accepting  on  the  basis  of  1.3.41  however
    accepting that being from a contested area it may be difficult for  the
    applicant to get  permanent  residence  given  the  risk  of  terrorism
    identified by the KRG.

19. In reply Mr Bandegani submitted that  the  respondent's  position  with
    regards to the availability of documents was not  sustainable  but  was
    supported by the evidence which was vague and not properly sourced.  He
    submitted that in reality the applicant would not be able  to  get  the
    relevant documents in Baghdad and it was clear  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence put forward by Dr Fatah, none of which  was  disputed  by  the
    respondent that it would be unduly harsh to expect  this  appellant  to
    return to the Kurdish area.

20. I reserved my decision. Subsequent to the  hearing  and  before  I  had
    finalised my decision, the Upper Tribunal handed down its  decision  in
    AA (Article 15 (c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 144. In the  light  of  that  I
    gave directions to both parties to make submissions, if so advised. The
    respondent has made no submissions.

Findings

21. It is not in issue that the appellant is at risk within his  home  area
    of Kirkuk.  It is also accepted by the  respondent  that  he  would  be
    returned to Baghdad and that this would not, on the particular facts of
    this case  be  reasonable  given  the  lack  of  any  family  or  other
    connections with Baghdad, his inability to  speak  Arabic  and,  as  Dr
    Fatah identified, the lack of any real Kurdish community with which  he
    would have links of  language  and/or  faith.   The  question  then  is
    whether it would be reasonable to expect him to relocate to the KRG  or
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

22. In this context I note from AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49  at [5]:

         "5.  In paragraph 21 of my  opinion  in  Januzi  I  summarised  the
             correct approach to the  problem  of  internal  relocation  in
             terms with which all my noble and learned friends agreed:

                  "The  decision-maker,  taking  account  of  all   relevant
                  circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country
                  of origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to  expect
                  the claimant to relocate or whether  it  would  be  unduly
                  harsh to expect him to do so ... There is, as Simon  Brown
                  LJ aptly observed in Svazas v Secretary of State  for  the
                  Home Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of
                  cases. The decision-maker must do his best to  decide,  on
                  such material as is available, where on the  spectrum  the
                  particular case falls. ...  All  must  depend  on  a  fair
                  assessment of the relevant facts."

             Although specifically directed to a  secondary  issue  in  the
             case, these observations are plainly of  general  application.
             It is not easy to see how the rule could  be  more  simply  or
             clearly expressed. It is,  or  should  be,  evident  that  the
             enquiry must be directed to the situation  of  the  particular
             applicant, whose age, gender, experience, health,  skills  and
             family ties may all be very relevant. There is no warrant  for
             excluding,  or  giving  priority  to,  consideration  of   the
             applicant's way of life in the place of persecution. There  is
             no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to, consideration
             of conditions generally prevailing in the home country.  I  do
             not underestimate the difficulty of making decisions  in  some
             cases. But the difficulty lies in applying the  test,  not  in
             expressing  it.  The  humanitarian  object  of   the   Refugee
             Convention is to secure a reasonable measure of protection for
             those with a well-founded fear of persecution  in  their  home
             country or some part of it; it is not  to  procure  a  general
             levelling-up of living standards around the  world,  desirable
             though of course that is."

23. The decisions in MK and HM and Others were both considered by the Court
    of Appeal in  HF  (Iraq)  &  Others  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1276  which  at
    paragraphs [95] to [101]  considers  the  respondent's  policy  of  not
    returning to Baghdad those who do not have the necessary  documentation
    given that they would not be accepted by the Iraqi government.   I  do,
    however, consider, despite Mr Bandegani's submissions, that whether  or
    not the applicant would be able to obtain the necessary documents is  a
    matter which I should decide before considering whether he would be  at
    risk on return. In HF at [101] Elias LJ held:-

         "In my judgment, this analysis is correct. I accept, as Mr  Fordham
         submits, that it would be  necessary  for  the  court  to  consider
         whether the appellants would be at risk on return if  their  return
         were feasible, but I do not accept that the  Tribunal  has  to  ask
         itself the hypothetical question of what would happen on return  if
         that is simply not possible for one reason or another.  Section  67
         of the 2002 Act envisages that there may be practical  difficulties
         impeding  or  delaying  making  removal  arrangements,  but   those
         difficulties do not alter the fact that the  failed  asylum  seeker
         would be safe in his own country and therefore is  in  no  need  of
         refugee or humanitarian protection. I agree with the  Secretary  of
         State that the sur place cases are  distinguishable  because  there
         the applicant could be returned and would be at risk if he were  to
         be returned. They are not impediment to return cases."

24. On that basis, I do not consider that it is necessary for me to  engage
    with the question of whether or not the  applicant  would  be  able  to
    obtain the necessary documentation as, for the reasons set out below, I
    consider that even were these technical obstacles overcome and he  were
    able to travel to the KRG, it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do
    so.

25. As Mr Clark accepted, the evidence produced by  the  respondent  as  to
    what the appellant would encounter on return to the KRG is  lacking  in
    some detail.

26. Putting aside the technical difficulties that the appellant may have in
    reaching the KRG, I must consider what is likely to happen  on  return.
    No issue has been taken with Dr Fatah's evidence on this point.

27. It is  accepted  by  the  respondent  in  her  most  recent  report  on
    Humanitarian Protection (which was not considered in  AA  as  it  post-
    dates the haring in that case) section at 2.4.3 while the  majority  of
    internally  displaced  persons  ("IDP")  are  accommodated  in  private
    settings a minority are in IDP camps although this number is greater in
    one of the KRG  provinces,  Dahuk  the  circumstances  appear  to  vary
    considerably and it is stated 2.1.1 "In particular decision makers need
    to consider whether the person is from a contested area  and  therefore
    will be an IDP, since this is likely to have impact on the support they
    will be able to access in the area of relocation."

28. It is evident from Section 8 of the report that  there  is  significant
    variation in living conditions within the  various  IDPs.   It  appears
    from paragraph 8.4.1 to 8.4.10 that there are significant shortfalls in
    the appellant asking for assistance.  In his report at [138]  to  [140]
    Dr Fatah states:-

         "138.    However, there exist barriers to  the  movement  of  Iraqi
              Kurds from the 'disputed territories' into the KRI.

         139. I interviewed an Asayesh officer  who  works  in  the  Asayesh
              service  in  Sulaimaniyah.   He  is   responsible   for   the
              'fundamentalist file'.  The Asayesh officer stated  that  the
              Kurds from the disputed territories can visit KRI as tourists
              but they could obtain formal residence or transfer their food
              rations cards either.  The Asayesh officer stated that it was
              a KRG policy to keep Kurds in  the  disputed  territories  in
              order to main what  the  KRG  preserves  to  be  the  Kurdish
              identity of those areas.

         140. The appellant is  from  Kirkuk,  a  city  which  sits  in  the
              disputed territories and as such, he is liable to  fall  foul
              of the KRG policy to maintain the  Kurdish  presence  in  the
              disputed territories.   ...

         147. Although as a Kurd [the appellant] would not have to  overcome
              a hurdle of providing a sponsor in order to enter  IKR,  and,
              for the same reasons, is  considered  unlikely  to  face  the
              arbitrary procedures existing in ... points, it is clear from
              the 'disputed territories' it would not be  possible  for  Mr
              Namiq  [the  appellant]  to  relocate   to   IKR   with   any
              permanency."

29. Given that it is accepted that he has no connections with the KRI other
    than being Kurdish and speaking the language, has no family support and
    connections, and has only one relative in Iraq, whose  whereabouts  are
    unknown, as well as the fact that he left the country seven  years  ago
    as a teenager, given the clear evidence of significant  food  shortages
    set out in the Country Information and  Guidance  on  the  humanitarian
    section as well as the likelihood that he will not obtain  a  permanent
    residence and therefore would place restrictions on being able to  work
    I consider that on the particular facts of this case it would be unduly
    harsh to expect the appellant  to  relocate  to  the  KRG  given  these
    factors when taken cumulatively.  Given the acceptance that  relocation
    to Baghdad would not be viable and given the evidence also of Dr  Fatah
    that relocation to anywhere else other than the KRG  or  Baghdad  would
    not be realistic, I am satisfied that there is nowhere in Iraq to which
    the applicant could reasonably be expected  to  relocate  and  that  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

30.  Accordingly,  for  these  reasons,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has
    established that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Iraq  and
    to return him  there  would  be  in  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations pursuant to the Refugee Convention.  I therefore allow  the
    appeal on that basis.  Further, and in the alternative,  for  the  same
    reasons I found that to remove him they would be in breach of Article 3
    of the Human Rights Convention.

31. As I have found that the applicant is entitled to refugee status he  is
    by definition not entitled to humanitarian protection.

32. In the circumstances also,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  make  any
    findings with respect to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

33. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law and it is set aside.

 2) I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on asylum and  human  rights
    grounds.


Signed   Date: 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

