
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02129/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 13 August 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          MOHAMMED AYDI AL KAHTANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant gives his date of birth as 5  September  1988.   He  sought
   asylum in the UK on 25 January  2013,  claiming  to  be  an  undocumented
   Bidoon from Kuwait.

2) The respondent rejected that claim for  reasons  explained  in  a  letter
   dated 22 February 2013.

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  for
   reasons explained in his determination dated 13 April 2013.

4) These are the appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

   1. The Judge states ... in paragraph 38 of the determination  that:  "The
      appellant's position is that he is Bidoon from Kuwait.   Although  his
      answers are not in every respect clear at one particular point it does
      seem that he claims to be an undocumented Bidoon.  In this connection,
      he may well in accordance with the decided case law be at real risk of
      persecution on return to Kuwait if he is  indeed  a  Kuwaiti  Bidoon."
      ... it is an error of law for the  Judge  to  expect  an  undocumented
      Bidoon  to  provide  additional  proof.   The  Judge  noted  that  the
      appellant claimed in his interviews and in his witness statement  (see
      paragraph 40 of  the  determination)  that  he  and  his  father  were
      "undocumented Bidoons".  The Immigration Judge states at paragraph  44
      of the determination that:  "The appellant may be unfortunate  in  his
      circumstances in terms of obtaining information but the  fact  remains
      that the onus is on him and I do not consider that  he  has  met  this
      onus."  ... the Judge has failed to provide adequate reasons for  such
      a finding and reference is made to Wordie Property Co Lt  v  Secretary
      of State for Scotland 1984 SLT 345 at  348:  "The  decision  must,  in
      short, leave the  informed  reader  and  the  Court  in  no  real  and
      substantial doubt as to what the reasons for it were and what were the
      material considerations that were taken into account in reaching it."


   2. Given that the Judge acknowledged at paragraph 44 of the determination
      that the onus is not to a terribly high standard, then ...  the  Judge
      has erred in terms of the "caselaw", to find that the appellant is not
      a Kuwait Bidoon.  Reference is made to ... HE (Bidoon -  statelessness
      - risk of persecution) Kuwait CG [2006] UKAIT 00051, which was  lodged
      with the appellant's Skeleton Legal Argument.  At paragraph 35 of  HE,
      the Tribunal found ... that - "It would  appear  therefore,  that  the
      appellant, like other undocumented Bidoons, is in a position where  he
      would not be able to produce proper ID and would therefore, always  be
      at risk of charges of the kind that we accept had been brought against
      him being repeated.  That is an aspect of  the  risk  to  undocumented
      Bidoon generally.  We therefore, conclude on the  general  issue  that
      undocumented Bidoons will face such a level  of  discrimination  in  a
      range of ways in their lives in Kuwait and continue to be the  victims
      of persecution."  ...  the  Judge  has  materially  erred  in  law  in
      dismissing this appeal by failing to find  that  the  appellant  is  a
      Kuwaiti Bidoon and by failing to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  the
      decision ...


5) Mr  McGinley  referred  at  the  outset  to  MM  (Documented/undocumented
   Bidoon: Risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356 (IAC),  amending  and  updating
   HE, although not in any respect which bears on this particular case.

6) Mr McGinley said that at paragraph 44  of  his  determination  the  judge
   based his decision on  the  onus  being  on  the  appellant  and  on  the
   deficiency of proof.  He submitted that it was  illogical  to  expect  an
   undocumented Bidoon to produce documentary evidence, and that  in  effect
   was what the judge had required.  Mr McGinley relied on the  observations
   in the grant of permission that it was arguable that the judge failed  to
   point out what evidence was missing and failed to take into  account  the
   appellant's explanation that he left Kuwait aged 3  and  his  father  had
   been unwilling to talk to him about the  situation  there.   Mr  McGinley
   submitted that this amounted to inadequacy of reasons.  He referred  also
   to the observation in the grant of permission  that  the  judge  made  no
   findings on whether the appellant was likely to be an Egyptian  national,
   as the respondent thought.  He accepted that it was perhaps not incumbent
   on the judge to resolve that issue.

7) Mr McGinley pointed to the appellant's account of leaving Kuwait  in  the
   1990's.  That was consistent with the background evidence, referred to in
   the Country Guidance,  that  100,000  Bidoon  left  at  that  time.   The
   appellant's claims to have  lived  thereafter  in  Palestine,  Egypt  and
   Greece were consistent with the history of the  Bidoon  and  with  recent
   events  in  Europe  (the  impoverishment  of  Greece).   The  appellant's
   explanation of his  background,  lack  of  education  and  movements  was
   consistent with his lack of documentation and his  claim  to  have  lived
   without means of identity or legal status throughout his life.  When  the
   judge said that the onus had not been discharged he had effectively  been
   looking for documents which the appellant was in no position to  provide,
   as was made clear by his witness statement and evidence in the First-tier
   Tribunal.  The judge's error was essentially  in  looking  for  something
   that could not logically exist.  The appellant had done all that he could
   be expected to do, and a decision should be substituted in his favour.

8) Mr Mullen submitted that it could  not  properly  be  inferred  from  the
   determination that the judge  thought  that  the  appellant  should  have
   produced documentary evidence to back up his claim.  At paragraphs  38-44
   and in particular at 40 the judge explained  why  he  did  not  find  the
   appellant's evidence probative.  The judge  founded  on  the  appellant's
   total lack of knowledge of the background of the Bidoon and even  of  his
   own family.  The judge noted that the appellant had lived with his father
   until 2004, when he was aged 16.  His  interview  and  witness  statement
   showed that he knew very little about the Bidoon or  their  situation  in
   Kuwait.  The judge was entitled to think that the appellant  should  have
   had greater knowledge derived from living with his father  who  was  also
   said to be an undocumented Bidoon.  The explanation that his  father  and
   he were uneducated was no excuse for a lack of knowledge, as people  gain
   experience  of  life  whether  educated  or  not.   The  judge  noted   a
   discrepancy  between  screening  and  asylum  interview  as  to  how  the
   appellant's sister and mother died, for which he was  unable  to  give  a
   satisfactory explanation.  The judge found that not to be a major  factor
   with regard to the core of the claim but he was entitled to found  as  he
   did on the appellant having said different  things  at  different  times.
   The judge noted failure to claim asylum in Italy and France as adverse to
   credibility.  The judge  acknowledged  background  information  that  the
   appellant's surname was found mainly  in  Kuwait,  but  was  entitled  to
   consider that not nearly enough.  The appellant's  claim  was  one  of  a
   nature  easily  fabricated,  and  when  it  lacked  any  real  detail  or
   conviction a judge was  entitled  to  reject  it.   The  account  of  the
   appellant's geographical movements and his surname  was  consistent  with
   many other persons moving around on an informal and unlawful  basis,  and
   no strong indication that he was a Bidoon.  The appellant said at Q/A  49
   and 50 of his interview that he knew nothing about his family, but having
   left Kuwait at the age of 3 and living with his father for  the  next  16
   years, there was a justifiable inference  that  some  family  information
   would have been communicated from father to  son.   The  judge's  reasons
   although relatively brief were adequate.  He had not applied too  high  a
   burden of proof nor could it properly be read into his determination that
   he expected documentary evidence which the appellant was in  no  position
   to provide.

9) Mr McGinley in response submitted that at  his  interview  the  appellant
   said the expression Bidoon means people who have nothing.  The expression
   Bidoon means "without", much the same thing.  The  interview  had  to  be
   read in context.  Before reverting to the matter in the passage  referred
   to by Mr Mullen, the appellant had already  given  the  interviewer  such
   information as he had about his  family,  although  that  was  admittedly
   little.  The low standard of proof applicable  in  asylum  cases  existed
   because of the inherent difficulty of establishing claims of that nature.
    This case was a good example of why an appellant should not be  expected
   to prove his case to any higher standard, and why he should be  found  to
   have done so by his uncorroborated oral evidence.

10) I reserved my determination.

11) The appellant's case has been pressed as strongly as it  could  be  both
   in the First-tier Tribunal and in the Upper  Tribunal;  but  essentially,
   this appeal is a further insistence rather than identification  of  legal
   error by the First-tier Tribunal.  The determination  does  not  disclose
   that the judge thought that  the  appellant  should  have  been  able  to
   produce some evidence of a documentary nature.  Such a claim as this  may
   be  difficult  to  support  by  evidence  from  sources  other  than  the
   appellant, but that does not mean that every such claim must be taken  at
   face value.

12) The judge was entitled to find the evidence to fall short of  probation.
    The reasons which he gave, as set  out  in  the  determination,  and  as
   pointed to by the Presenting Officer, are adequate in my view as a matter
   of law to explain to the appellant why he has not succeeded.

13) The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
   determination of the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing  his  appeal,  shall
   stand.

14) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                14 August 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
