
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA026062015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 April 2016                       |On 17 June 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 sajid nawaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Marshall
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sajid Nawaz, was born on 7 October 1986 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He appeals against the decision of the respondent
    to refuse him asylum  and  to  issue  directions  for  his  removal  to
    Pakistan.  That decision was taken  on  3  February  2015.   First-tier
    (Judge Hillis) in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 27  April  2015
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the judge has erred in law such that his decision falls  to
    be set aside.  The appellant's case  was  that  he  had  been  arrested
    having attended a demonstration on 4 July 2013.  He paid  a  bribe  and
    secured his release from detention.  On 10 July  2014,  he  attended  a
    meeting which had been broken up by the police.  The appellant  escaped
    and an FIR was issued against him.  Despite the  incident  on  10  July
    2014  and  its  aftermath  being  of  particular  significance  in  the
    appellant's claim, the judge makes no reference to  it.   It  is  clear
    from the decision [16] that the judge has confused the incident  on  10
    July 2014 with another incident on 4 July 2013.

 3. Secondly, the appellant had submitted a number of documents in  support
    of his claim on which the judge has made  no  finding.   The  documents
    included an arrest warrant.  I  agree  with  Mr  Marshall's  submission
    that, given that the documents prima facie appear  to  corroborate  the
    appellant's account,  it  was  important  for  the  judge  to  make  an
    assessment of the documents.  I note  also  that  the  judge  does  not
    appear to have made any findings regarding the evidence  the  appellant
    gave before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. In the circumstances, I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.  There will need to be  a  further  fact-
    finding exercise which is best conducted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (not Judge Hillis).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 27 April 2015 is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The  appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Hillis) for that  Tribunal  to  remake
the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
