
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02964/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2013                              |                             |
|Prepared on 31 July 2013                      |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                  MS Z A M

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The chronology of this appeal is set out in the decision which  I  gave
    following a hearing on 3 September 2012, and this determination  should
    be read in conjunction with that  decision.   As  I  set  out  in  that
    decision, this appellant, who originally  claimed  asylum  on  2  March
    2009, claims to be a Somalia national, and claims  also  that  she  was
    born on 2 February 1992.  The respondent does not accept that she is  a
    Somali national or that she is as young as she claims.

 2. Following the hearing on 3 September 2012, as recorded in my  Decision,
    I found that the appellant's age was older than she claimed  and  that,
    for reasons set out within that decision, adverse credibility  findings
    which had  previously  been  made  in  respect  of  this  appellant  by
    Immigration Judge Murray, must be retained, but that the Tribunal would
    now need to come to a fresh decision on whether it was safe,  in  light
    of the adverse credibility findings, but also  in  light  of  the  then
    relatively new  country  guidance  decision  in  AMM,  to  return  this
    appellant either to Kenya (where the respondent believed she was  from)
    or Somalia.

 3. At a subsequent directions hearing on 23 January 2013, I directed  that
    the appeal would proceed on the  basis  that  the  adverse  credibility
    findings previously made should stand  and  also  that  the  respondent
    should file a skeleton argument setting out (i) whether it was intended
    to return the appellant to Kenya and if so, the basis upon which it  is
    said she could be returned there, and (in  answer  to  the  appellant's
    submissions previously made) that she would be safe there; and (ii) the
    respondent's answer to the appellant's submissions that she  would  not
    be safe on return to Somalia.

 4. Following these directions, Mr Jarvis prepared and  submitted  detailed
    written submissions to the Tribunal, dated  19  March  2013.  Contained
    within  these  submissions  are  detailed  arguments  as  to  why  this
    appellant could now safely be returned to Somalia, including  arguments
    as to why the country guidance given in AMM  should  no  longer  apply.
    However, these submissions are made against the assertion, at paragraph
    2, that "the [respondent] argues that the Sprakab evidence supplied  in
    this appeal is compelling evidence (to the required standard)  to  show
    that the A is in fact from Kenya".  The respondent's submissions as  to
    whether or not it would theoretically be safe to return this  appellant
    to Somalia have been made only "because of the A's own claim (disputed)
    that she is from Somalia" (at para 81).

 5. Just before the hearing, further submissions were received on behalf of
    the appellant also.



The Hearing

 6. I heard submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties,  which  I  recorded
    contemporaneously. My notes are contained in the Record of Proceedings.
     Much of the argument concerned whether or  not  the  country  guidance
    given by this Tribunal in AMM could still be relied upon.  On behalf of
    the respondent, Mr Jarvis submitted that, for a number of  reasons,  it
    could not, while Mr Jorro, on behalf of the appellant,  submitted  that
    Mr Jarvis's arguments were not well-founded.    I have  had  regard  to
    everything which was said to me during the hearing as well  as  to  all
    the documents contained within the file, whether or not they  they  are
    referred to specifically below.

 7. Essentially, with regard to this appellant,  the  respondent's  primary
    submission is that she is from Kenya and can be safely returned  there.
    Alternatively, if she is from southern Somalia,  then  when  one  takes
    into account what this Tribunal  said  in  AMM,  relying  on  what  the
    Supreme Court had earlier found in  MA  (Somalia)  this  appellant  had
    failed to make out a claim that she would be returning without any clan
    or family links or that she would have no support  from  others.   This
    appellant was continuing to maintain that she was from Somalia and must
    be returned to Mogadishu,  whereas  the  evidence  was  that  this  was
    clearly not true.  The appellant continues to claim that she has  lived
    in one area  of  Mogadishu  continuously,  even  though  she  has  been
    disbelieved.

 8. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jorrro accepted that it had  been  found
    that the appellant is not Reer Hamar and that  he  was  bound  by  this
    finding. She would not be entitled to refugee status, but she would  be
    entitled to Article 3 protection.   He  relied  in  particular  on  the
    findings of the Tribunal  in  AMM  at  paragraph  594,  which  were  as
    follows:

         "Despite  the  withdrawal  in  early  August  2011   of   Al-Shabab
         conventional forces from at least most of Mogadishu, there  remains
         in general a real risk of Article 15(c) harm for  the  majority  of
         those returning to that city after a  significant  period  of  time
         abroad. Such a risk  does  not  arise  in  the  case  of  a  person
         connected with powerful actors or belonging to a category of middle
         class professional persons, who can live to a  reasonable  standard
         in circumstances where the Article 15(c) risk, which exists for the
         great majority of the population, does not apply. The  significance
         of this  category  should  not,  however,  be  overstated  and,  in
         particular, is not automatically to be  assumed  to  exist,  merely
         because a person has told lies."

 9.  Mr Jorro relied on what was said in the Court  of  Appeal  by  Stanley
    Burnton LJ in SG (Iraq) [2011] EWHC 2428 (Admin) at paragraph 47 of his
    judgment (with which the other members of the court agreed):

         "... Decision makers and  Tribunal  judges  are  required  to  take
         country guidance determinations into account, and  to  follow  them
         unless very  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence,  are
         produced justifying there not doing so."

10. Although it had been argued  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
    situation had improved in Somalia since the determination  in  AMM  had
    been promulgated, the respondent had not given cogent  reasons  for  so
    submitting. Evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant showed that the
    position was not as clear cut as Mr Jarvis was suggesting.  Much of the
    evidence was disputed. Because there was an ambiguity in the  evidence,
    this failed the test of "cogent evidence".

11. With regard to the Kenya issue, the respondent's case depended  on  the
    first Sprakab report, which was made following analysis of a  seventeen
    minute recording which  was  said  in  the  report  to  show  that  the
    appellant spoke a dialect of Somalia spoken  only  in  Kenya.   On  the
    other hand, Mr Sheikh, who spoke with her for an  afternoon  and  is  a
    qualified linguistic, says that she is from southern Somalia.  Both  De
    Taal and Mr Sheikh say the Sprakab report does  not  make  sense.   The
    issue here was not whether there was a reasonable likelihood  that  she
    was from Kenya, but whether there was a reasonable likelihood that  she
    was from southern Somalia.  If the Tribunal were to make a finding that
    there was a reasonable likelihood that she was from  southern  Somalia,
    then she would be entitled to humanitarian protection under Article  3.
    The respondent does not have the  freedom  to  say  that  she  is  from
    anywhere; they must rely on the Sprakab report.

12. It should be noted that the writer of the  Sprakab  report  has  a  law
    degree, but Mr Sheikh who interviewed the appellant and De Taal are  in
    disagreement with Sprakab.  So the respondent's case that the appellant
    can be returned to Kenya is based on very flimsy grounds.

13. Although Mr Jorro accepted that in certain circumstances  it  could  be
    possible for an applicant to be returned  to  more  than  one  country,
    insofar as she is either from one country or the other, this  appellant
    had discharged the burden on her by  showing  that  it  was  reasonably
    likely that she was from Somalia.  It was the appellant's case that the
    Sprakab report was seriously flawed and that she would be at real  risk
    on return to southern Somalia.

14. Even if the appellant was returned to Kenya, which was  very  unlikely,
    she would be at real risk of refoulement or alternatively, would be  at
    risk within one of the IDP camps in Kenya. This was  set  out  in  more
    detail in paragraph 20 of the new skeleton argument submitted for  this
    hearing.

15. In reply, on behalf of  the respondent,  Mr Jarvis  submitted  that  Mr
    Jorro had had to gloss over the evidence.  With regard to the situation
    in Somalia, this Tribunal had to scrutinise properly the evidence which
    had been put before it in order to look at what are nuanced  legal  and
    evidential  approaches  to  the  question  of  Article  15(c)   -   the
    Qualification Directive - and Article 3 and so on.  The Tribunal should
    bear in mind the  approach  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  MA  (Somalia),
    particularly in paragraph 33.  However, it was  accepted  that  if  the
    Tribunal was to find that this appellant was a lone woman and that  AMM
    should  be  followed,  then  she  would  be  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection were it the respondent's intention to return her to Somalia.
     However, a  person  who  had  been  totally  disbelieved  (as  per  MA
    (Somalia)) would not have satisfied the burden of  proof  even  to  the
    lower standard.

16. While it was accepted on behalf of the respondent that the evidence had
    to show that there had been a durable change in conditions  in  Somalia
    since  the  promulgation  of  AMM,  the  Tribunal  in  that  case   was
    particularly aware that because Al-Shabab had only just  withdrawn,  in
    August 2011, it may well have been the case  then  that  the  necessary
    test of durability had not been satisfied.  However, now there had been
    changes which had continued.  At the  time  of  the  decision  in  AMM,
    shelling had stopped, but because this  had  only  stopped  two  months
    before the hearing, the Tribunal could not find the change was durable.
     This Tribunal had to consider not whether there had been a fundamental
    change since AMM, but whether the change which was recorded  as  having
    already taken place had continued.  The situation now in Mogadishu  was
    much safer than it had been at the time of AMM.  The respondent did not
    suggest there was no violence at  all,  but  that  the  nature  of  the
    violence was greatly reduced. Al-Shabab had left and had not come back.
     They had had to withdraw from every major city in central and southern
    Somalia.  Although it was argued on behalf of the appellant that  Human
    Rights Watch was saying that it was still dangerous, there was a  broad
    range of evidence on the ground that the situation had improved.

17. With regard to the Sprakab reports, the respondent relied also  on  the
    second more recent report in which the writer goes into in considerable
    detail as to the differences between Kenyan Somali and  Somali.   There
    plainly is a difference.   The respondent also relies on  the  Tribunal
    decision in RB (Linguistic evidence - Sprakab) Somalia [2010] UKUT 329,
    which contains positive findings about the linguistic analysis  reports
    from Sprakab, in particular at paragraphs 165, 166, 168 and  171.    In
    that case, the criticisms which had been expressed of Sprakab  report's
    general approach and in particular that the interviews were "brief" had
    been rejected by the Tribunal, which had found, at paragraph 168,  that
    there was "no substantive reasons  for  distrusting  Sprakab's  reports
    either in this case or in general ...".  The Tribunal had  gone  on  to
    find that the Sprakab evidence was  "of  high  quality".   Finally,  at
    paragraph 171, the Tribunal had fond that Sprakab's  reports  were  not
    based solely on linguistic analysis, but were based on  other  relevant
    evidence.

18. In this case, the appellant had never suggested that she had spent half
    her life on the border with Kenya and had given no evidence relating to
    Kenya.  Also, the Tribunal must note her lack of knowledge of Mogadishu
    as noted by IJ Bircher, who disbelieved her account.

19. Although it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the  evidence
    of Mr Sheikh and De Taal was that there was no basis  for  saying  this
    appellant was a Kenyan Somali, clearly there was  such  evidence.   The
    underlying data and the process by which Sprakab produce their  reports
    meant that they should be given significant weight.  The letter  of  19
    February 2013 from Sprakab (the second report) shows very  clearly  the
    evidence on which their analysis has been based.  The  writers  of  the
    report are very familiar with Kenyan Somali dialects.

20. In De Taal's response of 22 March  2013  to  Sprakab's  second  report,
    numerous things are said which show that they do not approach  analysis
    in the same way Sprakab does. For example, at page 3, De Taal expressed
    surprise that Kenya was even in play.  They thought that  the  argument
    was about the Af Reer Hamar dialect.  De Taal's approach was to look at
    this through the tunnel of what they expected, whereas  Sprakab  looked
    at the issues from a purely linguistic approach.

21. The original De Tal response, in the appellant's bundle at pages  8  to
    18, is a report seemingly written by one person, whose CV  is  at  page
    18, but that person is not a native Somali, as Sprakab pointed out, and
    appeared to have acted alone.  Although at page 17 it  was  noted  that
    the  appellant's  case  is  a  difficult  one  which  required  further
    examination, there did not appear to have been any further examination,
    which was of concern.  It was not until the March 2013 De  Taal  letter
    or report that one finds out that De Taal now says that the  writer  of
    the report also used a "native speaker" to assist, but no  biographical
    details had been  given of this person.

22. However, so far as Sprakab is concerned, the Tribunal has noted  in  RB
    that  Sprakab  had  very  transparent  procedures,  which  finding  was
    supported by the Court of Appeal (in RB (Somalia) [2012] EWCA Civ 277).



23. Complaint was made on behalf of  the  appellant  to  the  Sprakab  2009
    report, because it was said that it had been carried out by an  analyst
    and therefore did not comply with international standards.  In fact, it
    had been carried out by two analysts, one of  whom  was  a  Reer  Hamar
    speaker (as is apparent from B6  of  the  respondent's  bundle)  and  a
    linguist.  Accordingly this report did follow the proper  procedure  as
    affirmed by the Court of Appeal in RB.  Clearly the report contained  a
    high level of analysis from native speakers  as  well  as  an  academic
    linguist.

24. Insofar as the appellant relied on the report of Mr Sheikh,  which  was
    not wholly consistent with that from De Taal, it was said that he was a
    linguistic expert, who,  accordingly  to  his  CV,  had  a  diploma  in
    linguistics.  Whatever that amounts to, a Tribunal cannot  ignore  that
    Mr Sheikh has claimed that the appellant spoke with a southern  Somalia
    dialect which included the Reer Hamar dialect, whatever that means.  He
    also concluded that she was from Mogadishu and  the  Reer  Hamar  clan,
    which had been shown not to be true.  Also, Mr Sheikh did not engage in
    any technical analysis of the appellant's speech which Sprakab did.

25. Although it was said on behalf of the appellant that Mr Sheikh spent an
    afternoon with the appellant rather than just relying  on  analysis  of
    seventeen minutes' conversation, as Sprakab was said to have done, this
    was not the case. At page 205 of the appellant's  bundle,  Mr  Sheikh's
    account is that he spent one  hour and twenty minutes speaking  to  the
    appellant. Although this was longer  than  seventeen  minutes,  it  was
    certainly not an afternoon.

26. Because there had been no flaw  in  Sprakab's  approach,  the  Tribunal
    should place very considerable weight on Sprakab's  conclusions.   That
    was a justifiable basis for the  respondent  adding  a  second  removal
    direction to the immigration decision.   If the appellant had a form of
    lawful residence in Kenya, she could be returned safely.

27. The respondent would submit that the evidence supported a finding  that
    she was from Kenya.  In addition to the Sprakab report, the  respondent
    would rely also on the fact that her  evidence  about  her  links  with
    Somalia was completely incredible.  It was the respondent's  case  that
    if the respondent was able to remove her to Kenya, her Article 3 rights
    would not be breached, but it was not for the respondent  to  establish
    at this stage that this could be done.

28. On this point, Mr Jorro accepted that the issue for  the  Tribunal  was
    not whether the appellant was a Kenyan national, but whether she  would
    be at risk on return to Kenya.  He agreed  that  it  was  not  for  the
    Tribunal to decide whether as a matter of fact she could   be  returned
    to Kenya.

29.  With regard to the risk on return to Kenya, it was not  accepted  that
    the appellant would be at risk of refoulement. It was accepted that  if
    the Tribunal found that she would be at risk if removed to Somalia then
    she would be at risk whether removed from  this country or from  Kenya.
    It was also accepted that if the appellant had no status or connections
    in Kenya, there was a real possibility that she would  be  returned  to
    Somalia from that country; it was also accepted that there would  be  a
    real risk  that if she was put into a displaced persons camp  in  Kenya
    her Article 3 rights would be engaged.  Accordingly,  it  was  accepted
    that if the Tribunal found that the appellant  had  no  connections  in
    Kenya, and would therefore  have  to  be  returned  there  without  any
    support, she would be at risk. However, in this regard, the  respondent
    relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in MA (Somalia), especially
    at paragraphs 32 and 33.



Discussion

Removal to Somalia

30.  I consider first whether this  appellant  can  safely  be  removed  to
    Somalia.  Mr Jorro, in his submissions before me, asserted at one point
    that at paragraph 34 of Judge Murray's determination, oseHosH,  because
    it wq zshe had found that the appellant had come from southern Somalia.
     In fact, Judge Murray did not so find.  Her finding  at  paragraph  34
    was that "since all three reports [that is the Sprakab report,  the  De
    Taal report and Mr Sheikh's report] confirm that the  appellant  speaks
    Somali to the level of a mother tongue speaker and she  speaks  with  a
    south  Somalia  dialect  I  accept  that  this  is  so".  As  Mr  Jorro
    acknowledged later in his argument, at paragraph 49  Judge  Murray  had
    stated that it was not for her "to speculate where she is  from".   She
    did,  however, make a clear finding that the  appellant  was  not  from
    Mogadishu, and was not Reer Hamar as she had claimed.

31. When considering whether  this  appellant  can  safety  be  removed  to
    Somalia, I must  take  account  of  Mr  Jarvis's  submission  that  the
    situation in that country is now so different from how it was when  the
    country guidance decision in AMM was  promulgated  that  this  decision
    need no longer be followed.  My starting point, when  considering  this
    submission, must however be the Court of Appeal decision in SG  (Iraq),
    which emphasised the importance of following country guidance.  I  also
    have in mind the  observations  of  the  Tribunal  in  AMM  itself,  at
    paragraph 345: in which the Tribunal stated as follows:

         "Despite our rejection of the appellants' submissions to the effect
         that the respondent bears a legal burden of showing  that  a  place
         previously unsafe has become safe, it is the case, as the  Tribunal
         said in EM and  Others,  that  any  assessment  that  the  material
         circumstances have changed, will need  to  demonstrate  that  'such
         changes are well established evidentially and durable'".

32. Mr Jarvis's submissions  were  interesting,  and  were  extremely  well
    presented, both in his oral argument and also  in  written  submissions
    which were prepared before the hearing.   Essentially  he  argues  that
    what the Tribunal had in mind in  AMM,  was  that  at  the  time  being
    considered in AMM, Al-Shabab had only just withdrawn from Mogadishu and
    it was too soon  then  to  say  whether  or  not  that  withdrawal  was
    permanent, or durable, but that as they had not come back  since,  this
    could  now be found.  Also, the famine which the  population  was  then
    suffering had now ended.  The respondent was not arguing that there was
    no violence any longer, but that the nature of the violence had changed
    significantly.  The conventional fighting which had taken place  up  to
    July and August 2011 had stopped.  The frontline had  gone.   Al-Shabab
    had left and had not come back.   Although  there  were  some  targeted
    attacks and sometimes civilians got caught up in the  cross-fire,  this
    was now much reduced, especially from February 2012.

33. Mr Jorro's position was that these arguments were not  clear  cut,  and
    are  certainly not so clear cut as  to  permit  this  Tribunal  now  to
    depart from the country guidance contained within AMM.

34. I have in mind that the Tribunal in  AMM  considered  a  huge  body  of
    evidence, which was considerably more than the evidence put  before  me
    for the purposes of this appeal, and in far  greater  detail.   It  may
    well be that the guidance in AMM will have to be revisited, by  another
    Tribunal, and that Mr Jarvis's arguments will form  the  basis  of  the
    Secretary of State's submissions  then,  but  well  made  though  these
    arguments are, having considered his submissions very carefully,  I  do
    not feel able, currently, to find that the guidance given  in  AMM,  in
    particular with regard to the position of a lone  female  returning  to
    Somalia without  any  support,  should  no  longer  apply.   I  am  not
    sufficiently satisfied that the situation has  changed  so  significant
    since AMM was promulgated as to allow me to find that  a  lone  female,
    being "returned" (or at any rate sent) to Somalia without  any  support
    would not be at risk.

35. I now consider Mr Jarvis's argument, relying on the guidance  given  by
    the Supreme Court in MA (Somalia) (and also  by  this  Tribunal  in  GM
    (Eritrea) and AMM) that I should nonetheless disregard the  appellant's
    claim that if removed to Somalia she would go there as  a  lone  female
    without support. Mr Jarvis's argument is that because her evidence  has
    been so totally discredited, she has not discharged the burden  on  her
    to establish that she has no support in Somalia. As  the  Tribunal  has
    found that her ethnicity is not Reer Hamar  as  claimed,  she  has  not
    established that she would be without support.

36.  The  difficulty  with  this  argument  is  that  it   disregards   the
    respondent's own position with regard to the evidence, which is that it
    is established by the Sprakab report that the appellant is in fact from
    Kenya.  Indeed before me Mr Jarvis asserted in terms that  it  was  the
    respondent's case that the appellant "has been residing in Kenya or  is
    Kenyan".

37. I have in mind the observations of the Tribunal in  AMM,  at  paragraph
    577, as follows:

         "It will be for judicial fact-finders to decide, on  the  basis  of
         the totality of the evidence before them, whether,  to  the  extent
         that this country  guidance  remains  authoritative  (in  terms  of
         Practice  Direction  12),  the  case  before  them  is  one,  where
         notwithstanding an appellant's  lies,  it  will  be  'fanciful'  to
         conclude that  the  appellant  falls  within  one  of  the  various
         exceptions we have  identified  in  the  country  guidance  in  the
         preceding part of this determination."

38. In this regard, I refer  in  particular  to  the  findings  in  AMM  at
    paragraphs 357 and 358:

         "357. Nevertheless, the evidence before us points to there being  a
             category of middle class or professional persons in  Mogadishu
             who can live to a reasonable standard, in circumstances  where
             the Article 15(c) risk, which exists for the great majority of
             the population, does not apply.  A returnee  from  the  United
             Kingdom to such a milieu would not, therefore, run an  Article
             15(c) risk, even if forcibly returned. Into this  category  we
             place those who by reason of their connection  with  'powerful
             actors', such as the TFG/AMISOM, will be  able  to  avoid  the
             generalised risk.  The appellants argued that no such category
             exists; but we reject that submission.  Indeed,  the  category
             that emerges from the evidence is  wider  than  the  'powerful
             actors'  exception,  and  covers  those  whose  socio-economic
             position provides them where the requisite protection, without
             running the  risk  of  assassination  faced  by  those  in  or
             associated with the TFE.

          358. The significance of the category we  have  identified  should
             not, however, be overstated.  For most people in Mogadishu the
             Article 15(c) risk persists, at the present time.  In the case
             of a claimant  for  international  protection,  a  fact-finder
             would need to be satisfied that there were cogent grounds  for
             finding that the claimant fell within such a category."

39. Given the respondent's position, which is that  this  appellant  is  in
    fact from Kenya,  even  though  this  appellant's  evidence  cannot  be
    accepted, I do not accept that I can be satisfied that she  would  fall
    within the category of persons referred to in  paragraph  357  of  AMM.
    Notwithstanding the appellant's lies in this case, I find that  such  a
    conclusion would indeed be "fanciful."

40. Accordingly, the appellant cannot safely be removed to  Mogadishu,  and
    nor is there anywhere else, within Somalia, to where, as a lone  female
    without  support,  she  could   safely  relocate.   Even  despite   the
    appellant's lies, there is simply  no  basis  upon  which  I  could  be
    satisfied to any standard of proof that  she  would  have  any  support
    within Somalia.

41. Accordingly, I find that insofar as  the  respondent  might  intend  to
    remove this appellant to Somalia, such removal would be  in  breach  of
    her Article 3 rights.



Removal to Kenya

42. I am satisfied that unless this appellant has support within Kenya, she
    cannot safely be removed to that country.  This is  because  she  would
    either be at risk of refoulement to Somalia (which I have already found
    would put her at risk) or she would be at risk of  being  placed  in  a
    displaced persons camp, which Mr Jarvis has accepted would put  her  at
    risk if she  was  without  support  or  contacts  in  Kenya.   The  key
    questions therefore are first, whether she is  indeed  from  Kenya  and
    secondly, whether, in that event,  she  would  be  without  support  if
    removed there.  This second question would have  to  be  considered  in
    light of the guidance given by the House of Lords in MA (Somalia).



Where is the Appellant from?

43. My starting point when considering where this appellant is from must be
    the findings of fact which have been made, and in particular  that  the
    appellant's claim to be from Mogadishu has been  disbelieved  by  every
    Tribunal which has considered her evidence. Mr Abdi's evidence has also
    been disbelieved (including by myself at the previous hearing).

44.  Sprakab's  finding  in  relation  to  this  appellant  is  clear   and
    unambiguous.  "She speaks a variety of Somali with certainty not  found
    in southern  Somalia.  She  speaks  a  variety  of  south  Somali  with
    certainty found in Kenya." In  other  words,  the  linguistic  analysis
    shows that she is from Kenya.

45.  The  De  Tal  response  to  the  initial  Sprakab  report  effectively
    challenges the basis upon which it was made. It refers to the  "quality
    of language analysis report" (the Sprakab report) as "poor" and  states
    in particular that "the report does not provide any  evidence  for  the
    conclusion that the applicant's variety of south Somali is not found in
    south Somalia, but in Kenya".  It  challenges  Sprakab's  finding  that
    there is "a variety of south Somali  found  with  certainty  in  Kenya"
    because "according to our experts, different varieties  of  Somali  are
    found in Kenya, but there is no such thing as a variety of south Somali
    that is not found in southern Somalia but is found only in Kenya".   In
    other words, the whole basis of the Sprakab analysis is challenged.

46. In De Taal's  conclusions,  at  paragraph  6,  it  is  said  that  "the
    applicant is a native speaker of  Somali  and  she  will  socialise  in
    Somali (or in a Somali-speaking milieu)".  While from  her  speech,  an
    origin from northern Somalia or even from  the  central  parts  of  the
    country "can be excluded with certainty" it  is  nonetheless  concluded
    that her speech could be from somewhere in southern  Somali.   What  is
    challenged is that her  origin  can  be  further  localised  to  Kenya.
    Effectively therefore the challenge to Sprakab's more specific  finding
    that this appellant is a Somali speaker from Kenya is  a  challenge  to
    Sprakab's expertise, rather than as a result of  any  specific  finding
    that she is not from such an area.  What De Taal is saying is  that  it
    is impossible to be that specific about anyone.

47. When considering this challenge to Sprakab's expertise in this area,  I
    must have in mind the observations of this Tribunal regarding Sprakab's
    evidence in RB  (linguistic evidence - Sprakab) Somalia [2010] UKUT 329
    (as largely upheld subsequently in the Court of Appeal). I set out  the
    relevant findings:

         "154. We are satisfied that Sprakab is  a  bone  fide  organisation
             that is linked to international linguistic organisations.  Its
             general manager, Pia Fernqvist, has an academic reputation  to
             enhance and protect and we are quite satisfied that  it  is  a
             devised and refined system analysing  language  that  requires
             interaction between several  employees.  It  is  thus,  to  an
             extent,  self-checking  and  its   mechanism   minimises   the
             opportunities for one person's  incompetence  or  indifference
             leading to a false result  ...

         156.     We reject the criticism that Sprakab is  not  independent.
             ...

         159.     Sprakab does not claim to be infallible.  ...  The kind of
             linguistic analysis offered  by  Sprakab  is  a  serious  step
             toward independent and verifiable  opinion  but  it  does  not
             claim to have the reliability  of,  for  example,  fingerprint
             evidence. It may be that linguistic analysis of the kind  used
             by Sprakab is a developing discipline and Sprakab will  become
             subject  to  more  peer  review.  It  would  certainly  be  in
             accordance with our understanding  of  Sprakab  that  it  will
             constantly  seek  to  refine  and  improve  its  methods.  The
             evidence before us shows that  Sprakab  provides  an   honest,
             serious and useful guide to establishing the location where  a
             person learned to speak.

         160.     The biggest weakness we see in Sprakab's system is that it
             depends at its core on  an  alleged  expert  in  the  language
             saying, for example, "I do not  think  people  who  come  from
             there talk  like  that".   However  that  opinion  has  to  be
             explained.  Reasons for holding it  are  given.   Patterns  of
             speech,  for  example,  are  recorded  in  ways  that  trained
             linguists can understand, are reproduced and checked.  Sprakab
             is sensitive to the changes in  language  use  and  notes  and
             keeps in contact with those of a like minded interest. Further
             no final conclusion is reached just on one  person's  opinion.
             ...

         165.     Professor N... criticises Sprakab's methods in relation to
             the cases he has examined, but for two  reasons  it  does  not
             appear to us that these criticisms  are  sufficient  to  cause
             doubt about Sprakab's process or its expertise as a whole.  In
             the first  place,  although  Professor  N...  found  that  the
             interviews were sometimes brief, sometimes over unsatisfactory
             telephone lines, and sometimes used question in a form  or  in
             a language of  which he did not approve, there  is  no  proper
             basis for saying that in those  cases,  or  because  of  those
             alleged defects, the opinion given  by  Sprakab  was  in  fact
             wrong. Some cases will be clearer than others and will require
             less investigation before an opinion is reached.  ...

         168. It seems to us that we have been given no substantive  reasons
             for distrusting Sprakab's reports either in this  case  or  in
             general. In our  judgment,  because  of  Sprakab's  underlying
             library of data and the  process  by  which  it  produces  its
             reports, Sprakab evidence is of high quality and  its  opinion
             are entitled to very considerable weight.

         169.  This is particularly  so  when  there  is  available  such  a
             detailed report as that ... in  the  present  case;  but  even
             where less detail is available Sprakab's recent opinion should
             be regarded  as  carrying  weight  because  it  comes  from  a
             reputable   and   apparently   reliable    body    with    the
             characteristics  and  methodology  we  have  described.    Any
             evidence opposing the Sprakab evidence will need to deal  with
             the reasons Sprakab has given for its view; and it seems to us
             highly unlikely  that  an  opposing  report  based  solely  on
             anecdotal reasoning or personal  opinion  would  be  a  proper
             basis for rejecting the Sprakab opinion."

48.  I note that at paragraph 6 of the first De Taal  report  there  is  an
    attempt to justify or excuse the appellant's  lack  of  specific  words
    from Mogadishu.  Instead of concluding that it was highly unlikely that
    she was from Mogadishu (which  this  would  seem  to  demonstrate)  the
    report instead says as follows:

         "That she does not speak with a typical  Mogadishu  accent  may  be
         stranger but it is  not  completely  impossible  if  the  applicant
         really spent most of her time at home and if we consider her  young
         age (it is well possible that many old Italian  loans  and  typical
         words of  the  Mogadishu  dialect  are  by  now  obsolete  or  less
         common)."

49. However the writers of this report are nonetheless obliged to find that
    the appellant's claim "to have been born and socialised  in  Mogadishu,
    and more specifically in Xamar Weyne,  looks  doubtful  and  cannot  be
    confirmed".  But they are not prepared to be more specific than to  say
    that "her speech points in general to the southern part of Somalia as a
    place of birth and/or socialisation".

50. Where the writers of the De Taal report  make  a  direct  challenge  to
    Sprakab's analysis is at paragraph 7, where at 7.2 under "Evaluation of
    the language analysis report(s"), it  is  stated  in  terms  that  "The
    present expert [that is De Taal's  expert]  does  NOT  agree  with  the
    expert's idea that the applicant speaks a 'dialect of Somali spoken  in
    Kenya'".  It is said that "this hypothesis makes linguistically  little
    sense" because "Somali as spoken in Kenya has  never,  as  far  as  the
    present expert knows, been investigated, and this means certainly a gap
    in our knowledge of the Somali-speaking world". It is  then  said  that
    "the present expert maintains that such a specific hypothesis  such  as
    an origin from Kenya must be proved against the easier  hypotheses  and
    better documented and supported".  In other words, this is a  challenge
    to the expertise of Sprakab.

51. Sprakab's response is contained in a report dated 21 February 2013.  It
    is noted that all Sprakab Somali analysts are  native  Somali  speakers
    "mastering the language and its dialects at the mother  tongue  level".
    They also have experience of growing up and living in Somalia and other
    Somali-speaking areas "(Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti for example)".  It
    is said that "this kind of linguist knowledge cannot be  learned  at  a
    university in Italy" or "by spending a few years in Somalia  (or  other
    Somali speaking communities)".

52.  Sprakab  has  tested  "many  would-be  analysts  who  are   non-native
    speakers", but although they have all been  fluent and many had studied
    linguistics  and  the  language,  "despite  these  persons'   extensive
    academic qualifications (up to the  level  of  doctorates  as  well  as
    professors), they did not pass Sprakab's rigorous tests".

53. It is noted that De Taal's expert did not speak Somali at  "the  mother
    tongue level" and had only spent a total of  three  years  in  Somalia.
    Also, their expert had not  spent  time  in  Kenya  or  amongst  Kenyan
    Somalis "which of course makes it difficult for him/her to be  able  to
    recognise Kenyan Somali features in the applicant's speech".

54.  Sprakab's conclusion that the appellant speaks  a  variety  of  Somali
    found in Kenya is repeated.  It  is  stated  that  although  the  south
    Somalia varieties spoken in south Somalia and the varieties  spoken  in
    Kenya are very similar, they have differences  which "can  be  observed
    and marked by native speakers with the proper  analytical  ability  and
    experience".  However, these differences cannot be observed "by persons
    who are not familiar with Kenyan Somalia varieties".

55. It is noted that in the De Taal report it is stated that Kenyan  Somali
    has never been  researched, but stated that this is only  true  in  the
    case of people, such as the De Taal expert, who are not native speakers
    or lived in Kenya amongst Kenyan Somali speakers (as Sprakab's  analyst
    has).  The "inability of the [De Taal]  expert  to  conduct  linguistic
    analysis" is noted, in particular at paragraph 8 of the De Taal  report
    in which it is said that "further  investigations  and  recordings  are
    needed in this difficult case".   It  is  then  said,  with  regard  to
    Sprakab's work environment, as follows:

         "In  the  Sprakab  Somalia  work  environment,  this  case  is  not
         perceived as difficult.  It is a basic  case  of  a  Kenyan  Somali
         variety, cases which are encountered and analysed at Sprakab  every
         week.  [My emphasis]"

56.  There  then  follows  a  number  of  illustrations  demonstrating  the
    differences between the appellant's pronunciations/how  she  forms  her
    words or sentences in Kenyan Somali, contrasted with  how  these  would
    appear in Somali varieties spoken in Mogadishu in south Somalia.

57. The conclusion of the Sprakab expert (who is named -  Torbj�rn  Norbom)
    is set out as follows:

         "The [De Taal] expert fails to observe and   mention  phonological,
         grammatical and lexical features in the  applicant's  speech  which
         are typical of Kenyan Somali,  as  shown  above.  Since  the  south
         Somali varieties spoken in South Somalia are very  similar  to  the
         south Somalia varieties spoken in Kenya, this is a  common  mistake
         by analysts who are not familiar with Kenyan  Somali.  However,  an
         analyst who lacks that knowledge should not analyse  Somali,  since
         they then mistake Kenyan south Somali  with  Somali  south  Somali.
         This adheres to the [De Taal] expert."

58. It is also noted that the De Taal expert  had  failed  to  mention  the
    "vast number of incorrect statements in the knowledge assessment of the
    applicant".

59. In response to the latest Sprakab report, De Taal provided  a  document
    headed "Response".  Part 1 of this document contains a "response by the
    counter-expert" in which he confirms that he is not  a  native  speaker
    and that his knowledge is  mostly  academic,  but  he  claims  that  he
    "consulted with a native speaker".  He maintains that there is  "simply
    no evidence - again, in the literature ... - of [a variety of  "Kenyan"
    Somali]."

60. It is clear that this response adopts  an  academic  approach  to  this
    issue.

61. Part 2 of the response is from Mr Verrips,  who  is  the  "founder  and
    director of De Taalstudios".  He refers to the working methods of  this
    organisation.

62. The core of his response is his claim regarding "Kenyan Somali" at  the
    top of page 4:

         "The central point in  the  disagreement  between  Sprakab  and  De
         Taalstudios' expert, the provisional Somali dialectologist, is  the
         issue of the existence of a Kenyan variety of  Somali.  The  Somali
         dialectologist  takes  the  view  that  in  the  absence  of  solid
         linguistic  research,  it  is  irresponsible  to   claim   that   a
         distinction can be made reliably between  speakers  of  Somali  who
         have lived in Kenya for a long time and those who are from southern
         Somalia."

63. Mr Verrips continues as follows, in the next paragraph:

         "Sprakab's response to this point boils  down  to  the  claim  that
         Sprakab DOES know how to distinguish between speakers of both sides
         of the Kenyan- Somali border. In doing so, Sprakab fails to address
         the essential point, which is that there is NO research  basis  for
         such a distinction.  In fact Sprakab  does  not  even  provide  ANY
         explanation as to how Sprakab knows that  the  distinction  can  be
         made reliably. From the face of it, Sprakab relies on  the  opinion
         of one or more native speakers who  claim  that  he  can  make  the
         distinction. There is no evidence whatsoever that these claims  are
         correct."

64. In other words, De Taal is claiming that the whole basis of the Sprakab
    analysis is faulty. It is not suggested that De Taal can show that this
    appellant is from anywhere  else,  but  rather  that  no  expert  could
    properly reach the findings which Sprakab made.

65. Before dealing with the issue as between Sprakab on the one hand and De
    Taal on the other, I must deal briefly with the evidence of Mr  Sheikh.
    In my judgment, his evidence must be discounted. Not only is his report
    inconsistent both  with  those  from  Sprakab  and  De  Taal,  but  his
    conclusions, both with regard to the appellant's clan and that  she  is
    from Mogadishu have been found to be incorrect.

66. As this Tribunal found in RB, at paragraph 168, "Sprakab evidence is of
    high quality  and  its  opinions  are  entitled  to  very  considerable
    weight". In my judgment, the real foundation of the opinion given by De
    Taal that one cannot reliably  distinguish  between  Somali  spoken  in
    Kenya and that spoken in parts of southern Somalia is that there is  no
    academic foundation for this thesis.  However, Sprakab does not  assert
    that there is. Rather, using the methods  which  this  Tribunal  in  RB
    considered to be reliable, it has given very firm evidence indeed  that
    this appellant speaks a variety of Somali  found  "with  certainty"  in
    Kenya and not found, again "with certainty" in southern Somali.  As  is
    noted in Sprakab's second report, cases  involving  the  Kenyan  Somali
    variety "are encountered and analysed at Sprakab every week".

67. Given the finding at paragraph 154 of RB that  "Sprakab is a bona  fide
    organisation that is linked to international linguistic  organisations"
    and (at paragraph 168) that its evidence is "of high  quality  and  its
    opinions ... entitled  to  very  considerable  weight",  and  also  (at
    paragraph 169) that "any evidence opposing the  Sprakab  evidence  will
    need to deal with the reasons Sprakab has given for its view" and  that
    "it seems to us highly unlikely that  a  ...  report  based  purely  on
    anecdotal reasoning or personal opinion will give a  proper  basis  for
    rejecting the Sprakab opinion", I do  not  consider  that  the  reasons
    advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant  for  doubting  the  unambiguous
    findings made by Sprakab cast  real  doubt  on  the  validity  of  that
    evidence.

68. In these circumstances, I am entirely satisfied on the totality of  the
    evidence before me, that this appellant is from Kenya.



Would This Appellant Be At Risk in Kenya?

69. I have already indicated above that even were I to  find,  as  I  have,
    that this appellant was from Kenya, she would still be at risk  if  she
    was to be returned there without any support. However in this regard  I
    must have in mind  the  observations  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  MA
    (Somalia).  At paragraphs 31 and 32, giving the judgment of the  court,
    Sir John Dyson SCJ, stated as follows:


         31.  What Laws LJ was saying at para 54 [of GM (Eritrea)] was that,
             where a claimant tells lies on a central  issue,  his  or  her
             case will  not  be  saved  by  general  evidence  unless  that
             evidence is extremely strong. It is only evidence of that kind
             which will be sufficient to counteract the  negative  pull  of
             the lie. But much depends on the bearing that the lie  has  on
             the case. The Court of Appeal correctly  stated  at  paragraph
             104 of its judgment in the present case:


                  'The lie  may  have  a  heavy  bearing  on  the  issue  in
                  question, or the tribunal  may  consider  that  it  is  of
                  little  moment.  Everything  depends  on  the  facts.  For
                  example, if in the Eritrea cases the  Secretary  of  State
                  had prima facie evidence  that  the  appellants  had  left
                  legally, the tribunal might think it  appropriate  to  put
                  considerable weight on the fact  that  the  claimant  told
                  lies when seeking to counter that evidence. The lie  might
                  understandably carry far  less  weight  where,  as  in  YL
                  itself, the judge is satisfied that the appellant has lied
                  where the lie is against her interests.'


         32.  Where the appellant has given a totally incredible account  of
             the relevant facts, the tribunal must decide  what  weight  to
             give to the lie, as well as to all the other evidence  in  the
             case, including the general evidence.  Suppose,  for  example,
             that at the interview stage the appellant  made  an  admission
             which, if true, would destroy his claim; and  at  the  hearing
             before the AIT he withdraws the  admission,  saying  that  his
             answer  at  interview  was  wrongly  recorded   or   that   he
             misunderstood what he was being asked. If  the  AIT  concludes
             that his evidence at the hearing on this point  is  dishonest,
             it is likely that his lies will assume great importance.  They
             will almost certainly lead  the  tribunal  to  find  that  his
             original answers were true and dismiss his  appeal.  In  other
             cases, the significance of an appellant's dishonest  testimony
             may be less clear-cut. The AIT in the present case was rightly
             alive to the danger of falling into the trap of dismissing  an
             appeal merely because the appellant had told lies. The dangers
             of that trap are well understood by judges  who  preside  over
             criminal trials before juries.  People lie for  many  reasons.
             ... "



70. Of particular relevance to the present  case  is  what  was  stated  at
    paragraph 47, as follows:


         "47.     In our view, there was no need to interpret paras 109  and
             121 in the way that the Court  of  Appeal  did.  There  is  an
             interpretation of these paragraphs which  is  consistent  with
             the self-direction at para 105 and is  unimpeachable.  In  our
             view, all that the AIT were  saying  at  para  109  was  that,
             because MA  had  not  told  the  truth  about  his  links  and
             circumstances in Mogadishu, the  possibility  that  he  was  a
             person with connections in Mogadishu could not be excluded. In
             other words, he had not discharged the burden of  proof  which
             the AIT had correctly said rested on him."

71. If one substitutes this appellant for MA and Kenya for  Mogadishu,  the
    parallel is evident.  This appellant has  not  attempted  to  tell  the
    truth about her connections and circumstances in Kenya, which is  where
    I have found she is from.  Accordingly, the possibility that she  is  a
    person with connections in Kenya  cannot  be  excluded.  So,  in  other
    words, she has not discharged the burden of proof which is upon her  in
    this case.  Unlike the situation with regard to Somalia, where there is
    other evidence which would suggest that she lacks support (particularly
    the Sprakab evidence which I have accepted) there is no  such  evidence
    with regard to Kenya.  The consequence of this  appellant  choosing  to
    tell lies about where she is  from  (as  I  and  every  other  Tribunal
    considering her case have found) is that,  like  the  applicant  in  MA
    (Somalia), she has failed to discharge the burden of proof which rested
    on her.  She has not shown that she is without support  or  connections
    in Kenya, and accordingly has not shown that she would be  at  risk  if
    she was returned there.

72.  For this reason, I find that if and to the extent that the  respondent
    is able to remove this appellant to Kenya, this removal would not be in
    breach of her Article 3 or any other rights she may have.   It  follows
    that insofar as there is a removal direction to Kenya, the  appellant's
    appeal must be dismissed.



Decision

I set aside the determination of Immigration Judge Murray, as containing   a
material error of law, and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed, on all grounds.



Signed:                                 Date: 22 August 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

