
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02017/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 November 2014                           |On 23 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between
                  MR Manathunga Dushanth Nishanga DE SILVA
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Kesa & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and his date  of  birth  is  30
    March 1976. He entered the UK on 2 December 2008 and claimed asylum  on
    20 February 2014. His application was refused by the Secretary of State
    in a decision of 28 March 2014.  The  appellant  appealed  against  the
    decision to remove him which accompanied  the  decision  to  refuse  to
    grant him asylum. He was detained and his appeal was processed  in  the
    fast track system.

2.   The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kimnell in a decision
    promulgated on 8 April 2014 following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on  7
    April 2014.   Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and then  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  appellant  made  an
    application for permission to apply for judicial review  and  this  was
    granted by Mrs Justice Laing.  Following  this,  there  was  a  consent
    order whereby the Upper Tribunal quashed  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal to refuse to grant the application for  permission  to  appeal
    and  agreed  to  grant  permission.   In  accordance  with  that  order
    permission was granted by Vice President T M G Ockleton on 9 July 2014.
     Thus the matter came before me.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The appellant was in the Sri Lankan Air Force between  1995  and  2007.
    After he left the Air Force he worked for  Mr  Nanayakrara.   The  work
    that they were involved in was apprehending LTTE suspects. In 1992  the
    appellant's father was murdered. This was as a result of  his  father's
    involvement in politics. The appellant believes  that  his  father  was
    murdered by Felix Perrera's  bodyguard,  Manil.  Felix  Perrera  was  a
    member of a political party.  As  a  result  of  this  the  appellant's
    brother paid a gang to kill Manil and another man  called  Gamani.  The
    gang killed Gamani and in 2002  the  appellant  was  arrested  for  his
    murder.  The appellant was detained for two days at a  police  station.
    He was then taken to a shed belonging to  Felix  Perrera  and  tortured
    over a period of four days.  Mr Nanayakrara's  intervened  and  secured
    his release. The appellant fled Sri Lanka in  2008.   His  evidence  is
    that he is at risk on return to Sri Lanka. He fears Manil who is now an
    MP. He also fears Mr Nanayakrara.

4.   The appellant was detained and unrepresented when  he  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Whilst in detention he was seen by a GP and  a
    medical report was produced pursuant to Rule 35 of the Detention Centre
    Rules 2001.   The  report  indicates  that  the  GP  who  assessed  the
    appellant had concerns that he may have been  the  victim  of  torture.
    The appellant told the GP that he had been  beaten  by  bodyguards  and
    that his ordeal lasted six days.  During this time he was tied up  with
    rope and beaten.  The doctor noted that there were no concerns relating
    to the appellant's mental health but that  the  "scars  are  consistent
    with the account of events given by the detainee." There is a body  map
    showing the scars.  At the hearing the appellant produced a letter from
    the (Helen Bamber Foundation) HBF

5.   The Judge recorded the following at [24] of the determination:

         "24.  ...A  letter  from  the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation  was  also
             submitted indicating that the appellant had been accepted  for
             initial assessment on 9 September 2014 and only then would the
             Foundation be in a position to say whether or not  they  would
             prepare a  medical  report.   Though  the  appellant  did  not
             specifically make one, I considered whether  the  letter  from
             the Foundation ought  to  be  treated  as  an  application  to
             adjourn proceedings, but I  decided  not  to  adjourn  because
             whether  or  not  a  report  would   be   available   remained
             speculative, depending on the outcome of the appointment on  9
             September.  There is a brief report and  a  body  map  in  the
             respondent's bundle identifying physical scars  the  appellant
             has.  Given the delay of six months before the Foundation were
             even in a position  to  say  whether  or  not  they  would  be
             prepared to provide a report, the adjournment would have to be
             for a period of something like eight or nine months which  was
             wholly unrealistic.  The appellant was  therefore  invited  to
             put his case.


6.   The Judge went on to dismiss the appellant's appeal  finding  that  his
    evidence was lacking  in  credibility  and  highlighting  a  number  of
    discrepancies. At [57] Judge Kimnell stated as follows:


         57.  I accept that the appellant has the scars shown  on  the  body
             map included in the respondent's bundle.  The  nature  of  the
             scars cannot be ascertained from the  report,  but  given  the
             fact that the appellant was an engineer who served in the  Sri
             Lankan  Air  Force  fighting  the  LTTE  in   villages   round
             Trincomalee, and participating in the arrest of LTTE  members,
             it will be surprising if he did  not  have  some  scars.   The
             report does not give an opinion as to how they were likely  to
             have been inflicted."

The Decision of Mrs Justice Laing

7.   The decision of the High Court at [4] - [7] reads as follows:

         "4.  The FTT refers to the Rule 35 report in paragraph  88  of  the
             determination where it relies on the narrative  given  to  the
             doctor  who  made  the  Rule  35   report   as   evidence   of
             inconsistency in the  claimant's  account,  in  paragraph  24,
             where it says that the report gives a map  of  the  claimant's
             scars, and in paragraph 57 where they say that the report does
             not give an opinion as to how the scars were  likely  to  have
             been inflicted.  The FTT does not  seem  to  have  appreciated
             that the Rule 35 report went somewhat further than this.   Had
             the FTT appreciated this, they might have  taken  a  different
             view about adjourning the hearing for a report from the  Helen
             Bamber Foundation ("the HBF"),  at  least  to  the  extent  of
             exploring whether the date of the appointment offered could be
             moved.


         5.   I have two independent linked  concerns  therefore  about  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  First, it is based on  a
             misunderstanding of the nature of  the  Rule  35  report,  and
             second, had  the  FTT  properly  understood  what  the  report
             showed, it might have adopted  a  different  approach  to  the
             adjournment which it rightly appreciated the production of the
             HBF report required it to consider granting.


         6.   I do not say that the  FTT  would  necessary  have  reached  a
             different conclusion on the appeal,  as  there  were  apparent
             inconsistencies in  the  claimant's  account,  but  a  correct
             understanding of the effect of  the  Rule  35  report  was  an
             essential precondition to a fair assessment of the  claimant's
             asylum  claim,  and  the  essential  context  for  the  proper
             assessment of those apparent inconsistencies.


         7.   I therefore conclude that it is at  least  arguable  that  the
             limb two of the  cart  test  is  met.   There  is  a  strongly
             arguable case that the FTT  erred  in  law,  and  there  is  a
             compelling reason for the grant  of  permission,  because  the
             claimant did not have a fair assessment of his asylum claim."

Conclusions

8.   I have taken a careful note  of  the  view  expressed  by  Mrs  Justice
    Laing. However, the issue for me is whether or not there is a  material
    error of law.

9.   Rules 28 and 30 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Fast  Track
    Procedure) Rules 2005 are relevant to the adjournment issue. The  Judge
    did not refer to these specifically. The Judge should  have  considered
    whether or not  the  appeal  could  be  justly  determined  without  an
    adjournment (Rule 28) and whether there were exceptional  circumstances
    which meant that the appeal could not be justly determined in the  fast
    track procedure (Rule 30), whilst at all times  giving  effect  to  the
    overriding objective contained  (Rule  4  of  the  Principal  Procedure
    Rules).  The Judge was obliged to consider the above and  that  he  did
    not do so is an error of law.    However, I do not find that the  error
    is material.

10.  There were significant credibility issues raised by the respondent  and
    the Judge  found  serious  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence and wholly rejected it. He did so for a number  of
    reasons (although it was accepted that the appellant  has  scars).  The
    Judge noted that there was no evidence about Felix Pererra or the death
    of his body guard or of a commanding officer called  Nanayakrara.   The
    Judge found that there was "no  evidence  substantiating  anything  the
    appellant says or supporting it in a broader  sense"  (see  [54]).  The
    Judge found that the serious discrepancies in the  appellant's  account
    were not just matters of varying dates or locations but  they  went  to
    the substance of his claim.

11.  The Judge noted at [58] that the  appellant  stated  in  his  screening
    interview that the government killed his brother and that  it  was  the
    government who had previously arrested the appellant; however, this was
    at odds with the account that he  gave  in  his  substantive  interview
    which was "wholly different" where he had stated that he was not afraid
    of the government, but that he feared Felix  Pereira  and  Nanayakrara.
    In his asylum interview  the  appellant  stated  that  his  father  was
    murdered in 1992 but in his screening interview he said that his father
    and he were arrested in 2002/03. The appellant's oral evidence was that
    only he arrested because his father was already deceased by then.   The
    Judge noted that the appellant's explanation for  the  inconsistencies,
    namely that the interpreter was to blame was "weak". The  appellant  in
    his screening interview was asked why he could not return to Sri  Lanka
    and he made no  mention  of  Felix  Pereira  or  a  commanding  officer
    Nanayakrara.

12.  The appellant stated in his screening  interview  that  the  government
    killed his brother but in the substantive interview he stated that  his
    brother was not dead. The Judge noted  that  the  appellant's  evidence
    within the screening interview was inconsistent. He stated that he  was
    involved in the contract killing arranged by his brother  and  then  he
    stated that he had no connection with it. The Judge took  into  account
    that the appellant did not claim asylum until he had been here for  six
    years and that he had remained in Sri Lanka for  six  years  after  his
    release from custody during which time he had married and had a  child.
    He had not on his account encountered any problems during that time The
    Judge concluded by finding that not only was the  appellant's  evidence
    inconsistent, but it was contradictory and furthermore that  there  was
    no explanation for the dramatic inconsistencies and  contradictions  in
    his account. In my view these findings are reasoned and  were  entirely
    open to the Judge.

13.  The Judge was aware of the Rule 35 report  and  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant has scarring, but he did not refer to the opinion of  the  GP
    that the scars were consistent with the appellant's  account.  However,
    there is in my view no reason to conclude he was not aware this or that
    he had not taken it into account. The Judge's findings at [57] are  not
    inconsistent with this.  The Rule 35  report  is  brief  and  uses  the
    language of the Istanbul Protocol in  concluding  that  the  scars  are
    "consistent" with the appellant's account. "Consistent" in the  context
    of the Istanbul Protocol does not preclude the possibility of  injuries
    having been caused by other means. In any event, the issue  for  me  is
    materiality. It is inconceivable that had the Judge accepted the report
    at its highest he would have reached  a  different  conclusion  in  the
    light of the evidence as a whole. The evidential weight of the  opinion
    of the GP is reduced by the appellant's  problematic  evidence.   There
    are extensive and unassailable adverse credibility findings made by the
    Judge.

14.  Mr Bandegani indicated to me that the appellant had now  been  assessed
    by the HBF and a report is expected to be produced shortly.  There  was
    no indication of what the report may say nor whether it is expected  to
    corroborate the appellant's evidence of torture. No unfairness has been
    caused to the appellant.

15.  For all of the above reasons the error of the Judge  is  not  material.
    The decision to dismiss the appellant's claim for asylum is lawful  and
    sustainable and the decision and is maintained.



Signed Joanna McWilliam         Date 20 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
