
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02347/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1st March 2016                     |On 8th March 2016               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     S E
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, Counsel Instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  dated  7  January  2016.  The
    appeal relates to a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington
    promulgated on 12 November 2015.  The Judge dismissed the appeal on all
    grounds including on protection grounds.

2.    The Appellant's grounds of the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  can  be
    summarised as follows:

    1) In relation to paragraph 18 of the Judge's  decision  there  was  an
       error because the Judge failed to take into account "the evidence of
       the Appellant in that he was shot  at  but  was  running  but  still
       continued to run as fast as he could as he  knew  he  could  not  be
       caught. He moved as fast as he could but in a camouflage  way  which
       meant that he was kind of walking depending on the situation";
    2) When he stated he "was running in a camouflage way,  this  does  not
       necessarily mean that he stopped and did not continuously run";
    3) In relation to paragraph 19 of the  Judge's  decision  there  was  a
       failure to consider that screening interviews are often  very  short
       and not detailed at all;
    4) It was the interpreter used  at  the  screening  interview  who  had
       stated that no further answers were required;
    5) In relation to paragraph 20 of the  decision  the  Judge  failed  to
       consider that upon reading  the  Respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal
       Letter the Appellant's family  then  sent  original  documents  with
       someone who was coming to the United Kingdom and he had then  passed
       them on to the Appellant;
    6) In relation to paragraph  21  of  the  decision  the  Appellant  had
       provided a detailed truthful account of what he knew;
    7) In relation to paragraph 22 of the decision the Judge has failed  to
       take into account  paragraph  3.1  of  the  screening  interview  in
       respect of the medical condition and disabilities;
    8) In relation to paragraph 23 of the decision the Judge has failed  to
       take into account that the original document  in  the  form  of  the
       summons was produced;
    9) In relation to paragraph  26  of  the  decision  Dr  McNab  was  not
       informed by the solicitors that  the  Appellant  was  shot  but  the
       Appellant told the doctor of this; and
   10) In relation to paragraph 28 of the decision  the  radiographer  when
       examining the Appellant suspected that  the  Appellant  had  gunshot
       residue  and  Dr  Cooper  also  confirmed  that  the  injuries  were
       consistent with a gunshot wound. The reports should not be dismissed
       and weight should be placed upon them.




3.    At the hearing before me Ms Patyna provided a  skeleton  argument  and
    Ms Fijiwala also provided case law.

4.    I explained that I  did  not  consider  the  grounds  of  appeal  (not
    drafted by Ms Patyna) to be particularly clear or helpful.

5.    Having heard and seen  the  written  submissions  of  Ms  Patyna,  the
    Appellant's case was more focused and amounted to contentions that:
      (1) There was an error of law because there was an incorrect  approach
    to the medical evidence;
      (2) The Judge thereby failed to consider the claim in  line  with  the
    medical evidence (the "Mibanga" point).

6.    Ms Fijiwala said that the scarring issue needed to  be  considered  in
    line with paragraphs 222 and 224 of the Upper Tribunal's decision in KV
    (Scarring-medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC). There  was
    no evidence about Dr Cooper's experience. Weight was for the  Judge  to
    decide. This was clear from paragraph 21 of SS (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 155.  The factors were
    taken into account. The Judge did not even know the  expertise  of  the
    expert. Doctors must consider  all  possible  causes  of  scarring.  No
    alternative causes for the scarring were considered. I should also look
    at paragraph 29 of S v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1153.

7.    The matters raised in the rest of the grounds were no more  than  mere
    disagreement.

8.    In relation to the Mibanga point the judge had analysed  the  evidence
    and he then went to assess the medical evidence. He  said  he  was  not
    persuaded. It was not separated.  The  radiologist's  report  was  also
    considered  by  the  Judge.  All  of  the  grounds  amounted  to   mere
    disagreement.

9.    I had reserved my decision.

10.   Having reflected on matters in my judgment the Judge materially  erred
    in law.

11.   Firstly, as indicated during the hearing, in my judgment  it  was  not
    open to the Judge to give no weight  to  the  medical  evidence  of  Dr
    Cooper. The reasons given for doing so do not stand up to scrutiny.  In
    respect of the Istanbul Protocol the Judge was  of  the  view  that  Dr
    Cooper's report needed to comply with it.  Much  the  same  submissions
    were made today. In my judgment it is clear from various paragraphs  of
    the Upper Tribunal's Country Guidance decision in KV that the  Istanbul
    Protocol relates to the investigation of torture.  For  example  it  is
    said  at  paragraph  16  that  it,  "..deals  with  both  physical  and
    psychological sequelae  of  torture  (i.e.  conditions  resulting  from
    torture)".

12.   In this case the Appellant's case was that he had  been  shot  at.  Dr
    Cooper's task was to comment on that. He did not need to refer  to  the
    Istanbul Protocol to do so. He was not  investigating  a  complaint  of
    torture from the Appellant (whether physical or psychological).

13.   Further, Dr Cooper had set out his expertise, including being  a  Home
    Office Pathologist. I note that colour photographs were not provided to
    the Judge but it is not clear if they were requested by the Judge. Even
    if the Judge had seen the colour photographs I do not see how it  could
    have changed the Judge's view about the medical  evidence.   Overall  I
    conclude that the Judge's decision to give 'no' weight to  Dr  Cooper's
    medical report renders the decision of  the  Judge  fatally  flawed.  I
    accept that weight was a matter for the  Judge,  but  his  reasons  for
    giving no weight are fundamentally flawed and undermine his decision.

14.   I note that  there  are  grounds  of  appeal  which  are  simply  wild
    assertions on their own, such as the grounds that there  was  some  odd
    sort of camouflaged walking/running. This is peculiar to say the  least
    as is the claim of interpreter mistakes, but because Dr Cooper has said
    that the gunshot wounds appear consistent with the claim  then  it  was
    against  that  background  that  the  medical  evidence  needed  to  be
    considered.

15.   The issues in respect of whether  the  Judge  considered  the  medical
    evidence  as  a  tool  in  assessing  credibility   or   not   requires
    consideration of the Court of Appeal's well-known decision in Mibanga v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  In  SA
    (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ
    1302 Sir Mark Potter, P, explained the matter further when he said,

            "32 Having said that, it does not detract in any  way  from  the
    force  of  the  decision  in  Mibanga  to  the   effect   that,   where
    there is medical evidence corroborative of an appellant's account  of
    torture or mistreatment, it should be considered as part of  the  whole
    package of evidence going to the question of credibility and not simply
    treated as an "add-on" or separate exercise for  subsequent  assessment
    only after a decision on credibility has been reached on the  basis  of
    the content of  the  appellant's  evidence  or  his  performance  as  a
    witness."

16.   Similar observations  were  made  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  S  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1153.

17.   In my judgment when looking at the decision as a  whole,  despite  the
    sub-headings used by the Judge, it is quite  clear  that  the  decision
    dealt first with the Appellant's credibility over several paragraphs at
    17 to 24 and it was only thereafter the  Judge  came  to  consider  the
    medical evidence. The medical evidence was separately rejected and  not
    as part of the assessment of the claim  as  a  whole  from  the  outset
    alongside the Appellant's credibility.

18    If the medical evidence is correct  then  there  is  a  gunshot  wound
    which could plausibly have occurred as explained by the Appellant. As I
    have indicated I was not attracted to the way in which the  grounds  of
    appeal were drafted, but these two particular aspects  of  the  Judge's
    decision relating to, what is after all a  protection  claim  requiring
    the most anxious scrutiny, has caused me to hesitate and to look beyond
    the numerous wild grounds. I have therefore concentrated  on  the  real
    grounds.  As indicated, having reflected on matters I come to the clear
    view that the Judge's decision does disclose material errors of law.

19.   The decision is fatally flawed and accordingly it is set  aside.  None
    of the findings shall remain for the rehearing that shall take place at
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law.

The appeal shall be reheard at the First-tier Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 1st March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

