
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02563/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 December 2015 and 20 October 2016    |On 08 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CWM
                           (ANONYMITY Order MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer (10
December 2015)
     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
     (20 October 2016)
For the Respondent:    Mr A O'Shea, instructed by Graceland Solicitors
     (10 December 2015 and 20 October 2016


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   At the hearing on 10  December  2015  the  Upper  Tribunal  (The  Right
    Honourable Lord Boyd and Mr H J E Latter sitting as a deputy  judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal) found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law
    for the following reasons.  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge S  J  Clarke)  who
    allowed the respondent's appeal against the decision made on 28 January
    2015 refusing to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection.  In this
    decision we will refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the respondent to this appeal as the appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Uganda  born  on  26  July  1983.   His
    immigration history is as follows.  He entered the UK  on  28  November
    2008 with a valid visa as a religious worker.   On  29  April  2009  he
    applied for an extension on the basis of his  religious  work  but  his
    application was rejected on 25 May 2009.  On 1 April  2010  he  applied
    outside the Rules for leave to remain based on his family  and  private
    life but this  application  was  refused  on  10  June  2010.   He  was
    encountered by police in the course of routine duties and  arrested  as
    an overstayer and was then detained on 10 May 2013 pending removal.  He
    claimed asylum on 15 May 2013.

3.   His claim was based on a fear that if returned to Uganda he would  face
    serious harm due to his sexual orientation as  a  homosexual.   In  his
    submissions to the  respondent  and  his  evidence  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he said that he first realised he was gay when he was  15  and
    entered into a relationship with a friend.  In 2001 he was  accused  of
    kissing his uncle's son and was arrested and beaten by the  police  and
    was also detained.  His grandmother paid a bribe to secure his release.
     He moved to Kireka to avoid his problems and found an agent who helped
    him  leave  Uganda  in  2008.   His  application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent who did not find the appellant's account to be credible.  It
    was her view that there were no substantial grounds for believing  that
    there was a real risk of serious harm on return to Uganda.  It was  not
    accepted that the appellant was homosexual.

4.   He appealed against that decision and at the hearing before  the  judge
    he and two other witnesses gave  oral  evidence.   However,  the  judge
    found the appellant was neither credible nor reliable  [8].   She  took
    into account contradictions in the appellant's own  evidence  including
    the fact that when asked in interview in May 2013  about  his  personal
    circumstances he said that he had a female partner in the  UK  and  had
    been with her for nearly three months.   His  subsequent  evidence  was
    that he panicked and this was why he said that he had a girlfriend  but
    the judge  rejected  that  explanation.   She  found  that  there  were
    inconsistencies in the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his  claimed
    partner.  She took into account the fact that  the  appellant  had  not
    sought  to  regularise  his  status  following  the  refusal   of   his
    application in June 2010 until after he was arrested nearly three years
    later on 15 May 2013.  He had said that he had a  girlfriend  but  five
    days later he claimed that he was homosexual.  She also noted  that  at
    no point during the period from 2009  until  he  was  arrested  had  he
    claimed asylum because of his sexual orientation.

5.   Having found that the appellant  was  an  unreliable  witness  and  had
    failed to show even  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  that  he  was
    homosexual, she went on to consider whether there was a risk on  return
    because of his sur place activities in the UK.  This is a reference  to
    joining the Say It Loud Club (SILC) and  the  fact  that  a  number  of
    pictures of the appellant taking part in their meetings are on the SILC
    website.  The judge said that motive was not relevant when  considering
    this aspect of the claim.  There  were  photographs  of  the  appellant
    posted by SILC, which were accessible globally, and he had participated
    openly in their meetings.  She noted that there was a clear  photograph
    of the appellant attending a meeting and many more photographs had been
    posted.  The judge referred to the Home Office Country Information  and
    Guidance on sexual orientation and gender identity  in  Uganda,  August
    2014.  She accepted that LGBT  persons  in  Uganda  were  a  particular
    social group and this must include those perceived to be members.   She
    accepted that such people are likely to face harassment, discrimination
    and mistreatment from a range of actors in Uganda which would  in  most
    cases amount to persecution  and  that  effective  protection  was  not
    available to LGBT persons and there was no internal relocation  option.
    The judge summarised her findings as follows:

         "20  The appellant has contrived a LGBT appearance to found a claim
             for protection because he will be perceived to be  homosexual,
             and there is sufficient evidence to show that  by  associating
             himself with the SILC, and the blatant posting of  photographs
             on their website  which  is  accessible  in  Uganda,  this  is
             sufficient to show that he faces a real  risk  of  persecution
             upon his return, even though he is a pastor of  a  Pentecostal
             church.  I must allow his appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human
             rights grounds."

The Grounds and Submissions

6.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge erred in law by  failing  to
    provide adequate reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant  would  be
    perceived as homosexual in Uganda solely by virtue  of  his  photograph
    appearing on the SILC website.  This  was  a  community  support  group
    based in London and there was no credible evidence that it  was  active
    in Uganda or even on the political radar in that country.  There was no
    evidence the appellant was identified by name on  the  website  and  no
    consideration as to why it would be reasonably likely that he would  be
    at risk due to the remote possibility that someone who knew  him  would
    recognise his face and images on the website.  In the absence  of  such
    evidence it was not open to the judge to find the appellant was at risk
    on return.  Furthermore, the judge failed to consider  the  possibility
    that the appellant  could  request  the  incriminating  photographs  be
    removed before any return was carried  out.   In  view  of  the  strong
    negative credibility findings such actions would not entail any  breach
    of the HJ (Iran) principles.

7.   Mr Kandola adopted the grounds  in  his  submissions.   The  judge  had
    found that the appellant's claim was contrived but had failed  to  make
    any clear findings on whether SILC was  active  in  Uganda  or  whether
    there was any  likelihood  it  would  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities there.  There was  no  evidence  that  the  authorities  in
    Uganda would make any  such  enquiries  when  the  appellant  returned.
    There was no reason why the appellant could not ask for the photographs
    to be removed from the website.  He submitted that the reasoning of the
    judge was inadequate in that it failed to make it clear why the  appeal
    had been allowed.

8.   Mr O'Shea submitted that the  judge  did  give  adequate  reasons.   He
    referred in his skeleton arguments to the authorities on the nature and
    extent of the duty to provide reasons.  He referred  in  particular  to
    the judgment of Megaw J in R v Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964] 2QB
    467 where he said:

         "Parliament provides that reasons shall be given, and  in  my  view
         that must be read as meaning that proper, adequate reasons must  be
         given.  The reasons that are set out must be reasons which will not
         only be intelligible, but which deal with  the  substantial  points
         that have been raised."

9.   He also referred to the  opinion  of  Lord  Bridge  in  Save  Britain's
    Heritage v Secretary of State for the Environment  [1991]  2All  ER  10
    where he said:

         "If reasons were  improper  they  will  reveal  some  flaw  in  the
         decision making process which will open them  up  to  challenge  on
         some ground other than the failure to give reasons."

10.  Mr O'Shea submitted that when paras [18] - [20] were read  as  a  whole
    it was clear that the  judge  had  given  adequate  reasons.   She  had
    considered the appellant's sur place activities, the website, the  fact
    that photographs were posted, the material was globally accessible  and
    would show the appellant openly participating in SILC and  the  country
    information and guidance plainly recognised  that  those  perceived  as
    homosexuals were likely to face treatment amounting to persecution.  He
    further submitted that the reasons had to be looked at in  the  context
    of the evidence before the judge and  when  the  judge's  reasons  were
    looked at in the  context  of  that  evidence,  it  was  clear,  so  he
    submitted that there was no inadequacy of reasoning.

Assessment of Whether the Judge Erred in Law

11.  The issue before us is whether the judge erred in  law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.  It is not possible  to  gloss  over  the
    implications of the judge's findings of primary fact.  She  found  that
    the appellant was not a credible or reliable witness [8]  and  that  he
    had contrived a LGBT appearance to found a claim for  protection  [20].
    The judge had also noted that the appellant's claim of  involvement  in
    SILC had to be set against the background of the appellant  asking  her
    to accept that he was prepared to act as a  pastor  for  a  Pentecostal
    church and in that role actually challenge homosexuality.

12.  In Danian v Secretary of State  [1999]  EWCA  Civ  3000  the  Court  of
    Appeal considered the issues which arose in an asylum application based
    on sur place activities "tailored solely with the intention of creating
    a false claim".  The Immigration Appeal Tribunal had found that in such
    circumstances a person who acted in bad faith fell outside the  Refugee
    Convention regardless of whether his activities might have brought  him
    to the attention of the authorities in this home  country.   The  Court
    examined the jurisprudence and academic learning on the  issue  of  bad
    faith and came to the conclusion that a refugee sur place who acted  in
    bad faith fell outside the Geneva Convention.  In his  judgment  Brooke
    LJ referred to the judgment of Millett LJ in Mbanza [1966] Imm  AR  136
    where the court held that putting  forward  a  baseless  or  fraudulent
    claim did not in itself exclude an applicant from the protection of the
    Convention but it identified a number  of  pragmatic  reasons  why  his
    claim would be unlikely to be successful in such circumstances. Millett
    LJ observed at p 142:

         "The solution ... does not lie in propounding some broad  principle
         of abuse of the system or  attempting  to  pervert  the  course  of
         justice in order to  justify  a  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
         international obligations, but in  bearing  in  mind  the  cardinal
         principle that it is for the applicant to satisfy the Secretary  of
         State that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
         Convention reason.  Whether he can do so or not will  largely  turn
         on his  credibility,  and  an  applicant  who  has  put  forward  a
         fraudulent and baseless claim for asylum is unlikely to  have  much
         credibility left."

13.   Brooke  LJ  also  referred  to  material  submitted  from  the  deputy
    representative in the UK of the UNHCR on this issue who said:

         "We realise  that  this  [resorting  to  opportunistic  post-flight
         activities] may encourage  the  misuse  of  the  asylum  system  by
         persons who, without having real protection needs, want to create a
         refugee claim for  themselves  through  irresponsible/  opportunist
         actions.  This consideration is, no doubt, an important one as  the
         misuse of the asylum system may eventually be  detrimental  to  the
         interests of bona fide asylum seekers and  genuine  refugees.   For
         this reason, UNCHR would not object to a more stringent  evaluation
         of the well-foundedness of a person's fear of persecution in  cases
         involving opportunistic claims."


    Brooke LJ said that he was of the opinion that  this  letter  correctly
    set out the guidance which should be followed by appellate  authorities
    and courts faced with this kind of issue.

14.  In his conclusions Buxton LJ included the following:

         "For the reasons stated ... above, I cannot agree with  the  courts
         in Somaghi and HB, which considered that a bad faith exception  was
         necessary to prevent what amounted to  refugee  status  on  demand,
         thereby giving mala fide applicants an  advantage  over  bona  fide
         applicants.   This  complaint  entirely  overlooks  the   stringent
         evaluation of the claim that the host  country  is  likely  to  and
         entitled to engage in.  It also, in HB at page 57, wrongly  assumes
         that mere assertion of an intention to engage in unwelcome (to  the
         native country) activities in the  host  country  will  suffice  to
         grant a successful claim.  True it is  that  that  possibility  was
         raised by Balcombe LJ in Mendis ...; but it is notable that in that
         case the  applicant's  assertions  were  held  not  to  suffice  to
         establish a well-founded fear of persecution, I would also  venture
         to think that if the native country regime is such that it  can  be
         established  that,  even  without  any  actual  activity   on   the
         applicant's part,  there  is  a  sufficient  chance  of  his  being
         persecuted should he engage in certain political activities in  his
         native country, then serious questions arise as to  whether  it  is
         compatible with this country's international obligations to  return
         him there."


     Buxton LJ concluded his judgment by saying that he strongly  underlined
    what had been said by Brooke LJ at the end of his  judgment  that  this
    approach did not give a green light to bogus asylum seekers or threaten
    to undermine the proper work of the immigration  authorities  and  that
    such fears although initially understandable prove to be misplaced when
    seen against the background of the general requirements of asylum law.

15.  Put simply, these requirements place a burden on an applicant  to  show
    that he has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason.
     Where a claim is based on activities inconsistent  with  attitudes  or
    behaviour adopted in an applicant's  home  country  and  in  particular
    where they can be characterised as cynical or contrived, it  should  be
    stringently evaluated to ensure the  integrity  of  the  Convention  by
    showing that there is a proper and informed consideration of whether in
    an applicant's particular circumstances he has established  that  there
    is a real risk of persecution for a Convention reason on return.

16.  The opinion of Lord Bridge to which  we  were  referred  said  that  if
    reasons were improper they would reveal  some  flaw  in  the  decision-
    making process which will open them up  to  challenge  on  some  ground
    other than the failure to give reasons.  In Atputharajah [2001] Imm  AR
    566, Elias J said that reasons would be inadequate if they gave rise to
    a real cause for concern that a relevant matter had not  been  properly
    taken into account in the assessment of the appeal and that if  it  had
    been taken into account there  was  a  real  prospect  of  a  different
    decision being reached.  We are satisfied that the judge's reasons  are
    inadequate in this appeal.  They do not  indicate  that  the  stringent
    analysis called for in the circumstances of  her  findings  of  primary
    fact has been carried out.  There has been no  adequate  assessment  of
    the likelihood of the pictures coming to the attention of  the  Ugandan
    authorities or what their view would be in the light of the  fact  that
    the appellant failed to establish  that  he  was  homosexual.   We  are
    satisfied that the error of law is such that the decision should be set
    aside.  This is an appropriate case for the decision to be  re-made  in
    the Upper Tribunal.  We direct that the appeal be relisted for  further
    submissions on the issue of whether the appellant would be at real risk
    of persecution in the light of his sur place activities with SILC.

17.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  set  aside  and  it  was
    directed the appeal would be relisted for  further  submissions  before
    the Upper Tribunal on a date to be notified to the parties.  The appeal
    was relisted for hearing before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Archer
    following a transfer order being made but the  appeal  has  had  to  be
    relisted due to the tragic death of Judge Archer before  he  reached  a
    decision on the appeal.

Further Submissions

18.  At the hearing before me on 20 October 2016 Mr  O'Shea  relied  on  the
    documents contained in the original bundle (A) indexed and paginated  1
    - 72 and the supplemental bundle (B) indexed and paginated 1 - 35.   He
    handed in the review of the UK  Home  Office  Country  Information  and
    Guidance - Uganda: Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity  August  2014
    dated March 2015 ("CIG").  He also relied on the judgment of the  Court
    of Appeal in YB (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2008] EWCA Civ 360.  He accepted that the appellant had not been found
    to be a credible or reliable witness by the First-tier Tribunal but  it
    was his submission that in the light of the evidence the fact  remained
    that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  the  appellant,
    regardless of his motive, would be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Uganda.

19.  He submitted that the  evidence  was  clear  that  there  was  a  legal
    prohibition on homosexuality in Uganda which was enforced.  He referred
    to the terms of the Anti-Homosexuality Act 2014 ("AHA") at A, Annex  B.
    He  accepted  that  this  legislation   had   been   declared   to   be
    unconstitutional by  the  courts  in  Uganda  but  for  procedural  not
    substantive reasons.  The offence of homosexuality in s.2  of  the  Act
    was  punishable  on  conviction  by  imprisonment  for  life  and   s.7
    specifically provided that anyone who  aided,  abetted,  counselled  or
    procured another to engage in acts of  homosexuality  would  commit  an
    offence and be  liable  for  seven  years.   Further,  at  s.13  headed
    'Promotion of Homosexuality' a person who carried  out  acts  promoting
    homosexuality was liable to imprisonment of a minimum of five years and
    a maximum of seven years'  imprisonment.   The  appellant's  activities
    would fall within these provisions if the Act came into force.  In  any
    event the current law in Uganda  included  conspiracy  and  aiding  and
    abetting homosexuality.

20.  The strength of feeling in Uganda about homosexuality  was  clear  from
    the CIG at 2.4.3 where President Museveni was  quoted  as  saying  that
    homosexuals were actually mercenaries, they  were  heterosexual  people
    but because of the money they say they are  homosexuals  and  they  are
    prostitutes because of the money.  It was clear from the CIG at  1.3.10
    that LGBT people in Uganda have been subject  to  societal  harassment,
    discrimination and intimidation with threats to their well-being,  loss
    of accommodation and jobs and denial of access to health services.  The
    attitude of the public was confirmed at 2.8.5.   Issues  pertaining  to
    sex were very private within Uganda's culture and society  and  one  of
    the problems with the AHA was that it brought matters of sexuality into
    the public  domain  and  had  polarised  opinions  into  opponents  and
    supporters.

21.  He also referred to 2.5.3 regarding reports that arrests  of  suspected
    homosexuals tended to increase whenever there was  media  spotlight  on
    LGBT issues.  He submitted in the context of corruption in the  Ugandan
    police that it was not difficult to see that the appellant would face a
    real risk if the emails and photographs  set  out  in  A  came  to  the
    attention of people he knew.   He  further  submitted  that  there  was
    evidence that the authorities in Uganda had arranged  for  surveillance
    of opponents, referring to B14 about an official at the Home Office who
    held an office in the UK and Ireland Chapter of the National Resistance
    Movement, the President's  Party,  and  the  allegations  that  he  had
    misused his position to frustrate or  reject  applications  by  Ugandan
    asylum seekers.  Mr O'Shea submitted that,  whether  these  allegations
    were true or not, they demonstrated the potential risks of surveillance
    or information going back to Uganda.  The appellant had received emails
    and they could be tracked and they were therefore discoverable  and  he
    appeared in the photographs on the SILC website.

22.  Mr O'Shea referred to the CIG and in particular to the  fact  that  the
    Ugandan authorities maintained not only exit control lists but also  an
    entry control list of persons forbidden to enter  the  country  or  who
    were to be arrested on entry.  This indicated a degree of  surveillance
    at the border.  Further, the CIG at 2.3.1 referred to the fact that  in
    Uganda the law granted certain government  bodies  the  prerogative  to
    monitor the activities of private  individuals  by  putting  telephone,
    email and postal correspondence under surveillance and that there  must
    be a fear that this could be used to monitor  the  activities  of  LBGT
    individuals and activists.

23.  Mr O'Shea accepted that whilst the appellant's evidence  had  not  been
    accepted by the judge in the First-tier  Tribunal,  nonetheless,  other
    witnesses had given evidence that he was homosexual.  The  significance
    of this, so he argued, was that the appellant was an individual who had
    apparently successfully convinced others of his homosexuality  and  was
    able to be active in SILC activities.  If those activities were  looked
    at within the context of Ugandan attitudes, it surely followed,  so  he
    submitted, that the appellant would be perceived as a homosexual.   The
    fact that his brother had been granted asylum  status  because  of  his
    homosexuality was a further factor which could lead  to  the  appellant
    being targeted on return.  It was Mr O'Shea's  submissions  that  these
    factors when taken together created a real possibility when  looked  at
    in the light of the attitudes in Uganda that the appellant would be  at
    real risk of serious harm on return.

24.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted  that  the  fact  remained  that  the
    appellant's sexuality had been  rejected  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which had described him as someone  who  contrived  the  appearance  of
    being homosexual.  For his claim to succeed the appellant would need to
    demonstrate that the authorities could identify  him  or  he  would  be
    identified by fellow citizens  in  Uganda  and  that  they  would  take
    adverse action accordingly.  The  evidence  on  the  internet  did  not
    identify him by name and his image was not clear  in  the  photographs.
    Whatever the evidence about infiltration  into  Ugandan  activities  in
    this country was, there was no evidence to suggest that  the  SILC  had
    any profile in Uganda.  There was also no evidence to support a finding
    that any servers or routers in the  UK  could  be  intercepted  by  the
    Ugandan authorities.  Little reliance could be placed on the perception
    of UK-based  individuals.   The  fact  that  some  had  said  that  the
    appellant was homosexual simply  showed  that  he  could  manipulate  a
    decision.

25.  In so far as the fact that his  brother's  claim  had  been  successful
    might put the appellant at risk in his home area, there was  no  reason
    why he could not live elsewhere in Uganda and in  any  case  there  was
    nothing to show that the appellant's family members had  been  pursued.
    The submission relating to entry checks was based on a  relatively  old
    source in 2000 and there was only a tenuous link between entry and exit
    controls.  In the light of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings,  the
    appellant would not have to lie about his homosexuality.  He could  ask
    for the photographs on the website to be taken down.  There was a  lack
    of evidence to show that the Ugandan authorities were focused  on  what
    happened in the UK.  The fact  that  they  had  a  repressive  attitude
    towards homosexuality was not sufficient in itself to establish a  risk
    on return for this appellant.  Further, there was nothing  to  indicate
    that he would promote or be seen to promote  homosexual  activities  on
    return.  It was  her  submission  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish that he would be at  real  risk  on  return  because  of  his
    activities in the UK.

26.  In reply Mr O'Shea submitted that the appellant's sur place  activities
    were genuine whether or not his homosexuality was  real  or  contrived.
    The First-tier Tribunal decision was  found  to  be  erroneous  in  law
    because the reasoning was not sufficient.  The fact remained  that  the
    appellant had engaged in activities which would be unlawful  in  Uganda
    and if these activities of the appellant came to the attention  of  the
    Ugandan authorities, there was a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that
    he would be at risk.

Assessment of the Issues

27.  Extracts from Danian have already been set out in [12] - [14]  of  this
    decision.  I have also been referred to YB (Eritrea) in which the Court
    of Appeal commented further on the issues arising from  Danian  in  the
    light of Article 4(3) of the Qualification Direction (QD) and para 339P
    of HC 395.

28.  To set the  court's  comments  in  context,  Article  4(3)  of  the  QD
    provides:


         "The assessment of an application for international  protection  is
         to be carried out onan individual basis and  includes  taking  into
         account:


         (d)  Whether the applicant's activities since leaving  the  country
             of origin were engaged in for the  sole  or  main  purpose  of
             creating   the   necessary   conditions   for   applying   for
             international  protection,  so  as  to  assess  whether  these
             activities will expose the applicant to persecution or serious
             harm if returned to that country; ..."

29.  Paragraph 339D of HC 395 provides that :

         "A person may have a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted  or  a
         real risk of suffering based on events which have taken place since
         the person left the country of origin  or  country  of  return  and
         or/activities have been engaged in by a person since  he  left  the
         country of origin or country of return, in particular where  it  is
         established that the activities relied  constitute  the  expression
         and continuation  of  convictions  or  orientations   held  in  the
         country of origin or return."

30.  In YB (Eritrea), Sedley LJ said at para 13 as follows:

         "A relevant difference is thus  recognised  between  activities  in
         this country which, while not necessarily, are  legitimately  by  a
         political dissident against his  or  her  own  government  and  may
         expose him or her  to  a  risk  of  ill-treatment  on  return,  and
         activities which are pursued with  the  motive  of  not  expressing
         dissent but of creating  or  aggravating  such  a  risk.   But  the
         difference, while relevant  is  not  critical,  because  all  three
         formulations recognise that opportunistic activity sur place is not
         an automatic bar to asylum.  The difficulty is in knowing when  the
         bar can actually come down.  To postulate, as in Danian,  that  the
         consequence of a finding that the claimant's activity in the UK has
         been entirely opportunistic is that 'his credibility is  likely  to
         be low' is with respect to  beg  the  question:  credibility  about
         what?  He  has  ex  hypothesis  already  been  believed  about  his
         activity and (probably) disbelieved about his motive.  Whether this
         consequent fear of persecution or ill-treatment is well-founded  is
         then an objective question.  And if it  is  well-founded,  then  to
         disbelieve him when he says it is a  fear  he  now  entertains  may
         verge on the perverse."

28.  On the issue of surveillance of activities sur place,  Sedley  LJ  said
at para 18:


         "As has been seen (para 7 above) the  Tribunal,  whilst  accepting
         that the appellant's political activities  in  this  country  were
         genuine, were not prepared to accept in the  absence  of  positive
         evidence that the Eritrean authorities  had  'the  means  and  the
         inclination' to monitor such activities as a demonstration outside
         their embassy, or that they will be able to identify the appellant
         from photographs of the demonstration, in my judgment and  without
         disrespect to what is a specialist  Tribunal  this  is  a  finding
         which risks losing contact with  reality.   Where,  as  here,  the
         Tribunal has objective evidence which 'paints a bleak  picture  of
         the suppression of political opponents' by a named government,  it
         requires little or no evidence  or  speculation  to  arrive  at  a
         strong possibility and perhaps more that its foreign legation  not
         only film or photograph their nationals who demonstrate in  public
         against  the  regime   but   have   informers   among   ex-patriot
         organisations  who  can  name  the  people  who  are   filmed   or
         photographed.  Similarly, it does not require affirmative evidence
         to establish a probability that the intelligence services of  such
         states monitor and obtain information about oppositionist  groups.
         The real question in most cases  will  be  what  follows  for  the
         individual claimant.  If, for example any information reaching the
         embassy is  likely  to  be  that  the  claimant  identified  in  a
         photograph  is  a  hanger  on  with  no  real  commitment  to  the
         oppositionist cause, that will go directly to the issue flagged up
         by art 4(3)(d) of the Directive."


29.  It is clear from the background evidence and  the  CIG  that  same  sex
    sexual acts have been illegal in Uganda  under  long-standing  colonial
    era laws  and  that  the  position  was  confirmed  in  the  AHA  2014,
    broadening the range of proscribed activities to include amongst  other
    things the 'promotion of homosexuality'  and  providing  immunity  from
    prosecution for victims of homosexuality (1.3.4).  It is reported  that
    although the previous law was not generally enforced there were reports
    that LGBT persons were arrested by the police for lesser  offences  and
    following the passage of the AHA into law, there were reports  of  LGBT
    persons being arrested usually followed by release  without  charge  by
    the authorities.  There were  also  reports  of  violence,  'intrusive'
    medical investigations and beatings of LGBT  persons  arrested  by  the
    police but these reports appeared to be isolated.

30.  The report also confirms that in terms of societal treatment Uganda  is
    a religiously and  culturally  conservative  country  where  homophobic
    attitudes are widely held and that the enactment of  the  AHA  received
    popular support.  There have been reports of mob justice but sources do
    not indicate that this  occurs  frequently  but  it  is  conceded  that
    societal violence is likely to be unreported.  There are references  to
    societal  harassment,  discrimination   and   intimidation   and   that
    particular events such as the enactment and annulment of the  AHA  have
    often led to an increase in societal harassment  and  violence  against
    LGBT persons including by the media which has  outed  people  as  being
    gay.  The policy summary accepts that LGBT persons in Uganda are likely
    to face harassment, discrimination and mistreatment  from  a  range  of
    actors which could  in  most  cases  amount  to  persecution  and  that
    effective protection is not available nor is there internal relocation.



31.  At 1.4.7 it is said rightly that each case must be  considered  on  its
    individual merits and that someone who is (or is perceived as being)  a
    LGBT person is likely to have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Uganda.  The strength of feeling in Uganda is  indicated  by  the  fact
    that some papers have sought to out gays and by the Saturday Monitor at
    A5 referring to MPs passing the gays  bill  as  "a  Christmas  gift  to
    Ugandans".  It is also the case that President Museveni has  spoken  in
    extreme terms about homosexuality although  at  B9  where  there  is  a
    report that he was having second thoughts about the legislation arguing
    that the East African nation needed to consider the impact on trade and
    economic growth.

32.  In substance Mr O'Shea submits that despite the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding that he was not homosexual, the appellant  would  still  be  at
    risk on return assomeone perceived to be homosexual.  He  submits  that
    he would be so perceived because of his activities with  SILC  exposing
    himself on the web as a homosexual whatever the true position might  be
    and the fact that he has supported  SILC  activities.   His  activities
    were such that he was able to convince one witness,  a  gay  and  human
    rights activist and a founder of  SILC  about  his  sexuality  who  had
    described the appellant as an openly gay Ugandan man who  went  to  gay
    venues and he had witnessed how comfortable and  relaxed  he  was  with
    other gay people and confidently  took  pictures  flirting  with  other
    openly gay people:  it was  his  belief  that  the  appellant  was  gay
    because of the time he had worked with him both in Uganda and also here
    in the UK.

33.  Mr O'Shea also relies on the fact that the appellant has a brother  who
    is openly homosexual living in London with the possibility of him being
    mistaken for his brother or persecuted  because  of  his  brother.   He
    further submits that in the light of  the  evidence  there  is  a  real
    likelihood of the appellant coming  to  the  attention  of  either  the
    authorities or people who would report  him  to  the  authorities.   He
    relies, in particular, upon the fact that  the  appellant's  activities
    are on the web  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  Ugandan
    authorities monitor political opponents, and in the light of  the  very
    strong feeling about  homosexuality,  in  Uganda  they  would  take  an
    interest in someone who either seemed to be homosexual or was promoting
    homosexuality.  He further relies  on  the  evidence  of  a  degree  of
    surveillance at the border and the evidence about the  surveillance  of
    phones and emails as providing a sufficient indication  of  a  possible
    risk.

34.  The submission on behalf of the respondent by Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  is
    that the evidence is so tenuous that the appellant fails to  show  that
    there is any real possibility that the authorities would be aware of or
    have any interest in him, not least as his account has been rejected by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  He could ask for the photographs to be  taken
    down and there  was  no  evidence  of  any  substance  to  support  the
    submission that he would be of any adverse interest to the  authorities
    on return.

35.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  appellant  had  contrived
    an LGBT appearance to found a claim for protection but he  went  on  to
    find that there was sufficient evidence to  show  that  by  associating
    himself with the SILC and the blatant posting of photographs  on  their
    website accessible in Uganda that there was sufficient to show that  he
    faced a real risk of persecution on return even though he was a  pastor
    of the Pentecostal church.

36.  In re-making the decision I have found the issue of whether there is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant would  be  perceived
    to be homosexual very finely balanced. It was argued that a risk  arose
    from the fact that his brother had been granted asylum because  of  his
    sexual orientation but I discount this factor. I do  not  believe  that
    the Ugandan authorities will  draw  inferences  against  the  appellant
    because of his brother's sexuality, if known to them.

37.  However, in the light of  the  strength  of  feeling  in  Uganda  about
    homosexuality or activities promoting homosexuality, the passing of the
    AHA even though set aside on a technicality and the activities of  some
    parts of the press in outing perceived gays, I think that there  is  at
    least a serious possibility that, if the  appellant's  activities  with
    SILC were to come to the notice of  the  Ugandan  authorities,  whether
    directly or through non-state agents, there would be a real risk of him
    suffering serious harm which would amount to persecution.

  38.    The next issue is whether the appellant's activities with SILC  are
    likely to come to their attention.  In YB (Eritrea), Sedley  LJ  warned
    against not  taking  sufficiently  seriously  the  possibility  that  a
    government which suppresses political opponents would also taking steps
    to monitor such activities abroad. The same approach is appropriate for
    sexual orientation particularly in the light of  the  repressive  views
    expressed by the Ugandan authorities and its attempts to pass what  can
    only be described as draconian legislation against homosexuality.

39.  There is evidence that the Ugandan authorities monitor  dissidents  and
    in the light of the terms of the AHA  which  is  clearly  very  popular
    domestically  and  the  strong  feelings  the  issue  of  homosexuality
    engenders, I cannot discount the real possibility that the  authorities
    would take notice of the  activities  of  Ugandans  abroad  to  promote
    sexual equality for the LGBT community.  The SILC website is publically
    accessible and, although the appellant is not named in the photographs,
    it cannot be said that they are not sufficiently clear to enable him to
    be identified:  see for example B25 and 26.   The  suggestion  that  he
    could ask for the photographs to be removed may lessen future risk  but
    leaves open the question of whether the site has already been monitored

40.  If the appellant is  identified,  it  is  possible  that  he  would  be
    regarded by the authorities as a "hanger on" or as an  opportunist  but
    the fact that he is or has been a Pentecostal  pastor  may,  if  known,
    increase the risk that the authorities would take a more  serious  view
    of his activities in the light of the length of  his  involvement  with
    SILC and his apparent commitment to its activities as  referred  to  in
    the evidence.

41.  In summary, whilst I have doubts about whether  the  appellant  in  his
    individual circumstances would be at real risk on return, in accordance
    with the lower standard of proof, these doubts must be resolved in  his
    favour.  I am therefore satisfied that there  is  at  least  a  serious
    possibility or reasonable degree of likelihood that he would be at risk
    on return to  Uganda  as  a  perceived  homosexual  and  as  an  active
    supporter and promoter of homosexuality.

Decision

42.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.  I  re-make
    the decision by allowing  the  appeal  by  the  appellant  against  the
    refusal of asylum.  The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal
    remains in force.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 3 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter










