
[pic]
IAC-fH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02207/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 October 2014                         |On 17 November 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Master Jetmir Brija
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs A Mughal, Montague Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Albania and his  date  of  birth  is  15
    March 1996.  I shall refer to him as the appellant as he was before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant arrived in the  UK  on  16  November  2011  and  made  an
    application for asylum on 18 November 2011.  His application for asylum
    was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 24  April  2012.
    His application was based on a blood feud which  had  resulted  in  the
    death of his mother and  disappearance  of  brother  and  father.   His
    application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  as  a  result  of
    discrepancies in dates and other credibility issues which  were  raised
    in the decision letter of 24 April 2012.      The appellant was granted
    discretionary leave as an unaccompanied minor. He appealed against  the
    decision to refuse to grant him asylum.  His appeal  was  dismissed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 26 October 2012 and he was refused leave  to
    appeal against this decision.

3.   The appellant made an application to vary  his  leave  under  paragraph
    327 HC 395 and this application was refused on  19  March  2014.    The
    appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State  and
    his appeal was allowed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Gillespie
    following a hearing on 8 May 2014 in a determination of 14 May 2014.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  12
    September 2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley.  Thus the matter  came
    before me.

5.   The hearing before me was confined to the consideration of  whether  or
    not the Judge had  made  an  error  of  law  (in  accordance  with  the
    directions issued to the parties).  The First-tier  Tribunal  made  the
    following findings:

    "16. I must take as the starting point of my analysis, according to the
         principles in Devaseelan v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2002] UKIAT 00702, the determination dated 26th October
         2012 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean. This determination must  be
         accorded respect as an existing finding of facts on the same issues
         as are before me, and one, moreover, in respect of which permission
         to appeal was refused.  It is my misfortune, for  reasons  which  I
         address below, to have arrived at a view of the credibility of  the
         appellant which differs from the findings in that determination.  I
         am nevertheless keenly sensible of the circumstance that  I  cannot
         simply substitute my own discretion for that of the original  Judge
         and that I have no appellate function in respect of that  decision.
         I could only properly depart from the findings no the basis of  new
         evidence not considered or for some other exceptional or compelling
         reason.  There is some,  albeit  scant,  new  evidence  before  me.
         There is a letter, said  to  be  from  the  offices  of  the  local
         commune, Malzi, affirming the existence of the feud and  the  death
         of the mother.  It was not in existence at the time of the original
         appeal  but  has  been  produced  recently  for  the  purposes   of
         supporting this appeal.  The document is not verifiable but  is  of
         the nature of document which one  might  expect  a  person  in  the
         appellant's position to be able to produce.  It has not independent
         evidential value but is to be taken with other evidence.  There is,
         however, in addition to this document, some appreciable  cause  for
         disquiet concerning that previous decision which I  am  obliged  to
         address.


    17.   The  original  determination  contains  various  findings  as  to
         perceived discrepancies and  implausibilities  in  the  appellant's
         account.  These are held to 'undermine the veracity of his  account
         of the facts'.  The approach of  the  Judge  to  these  points  was
         criticised in the attempted appeal as showing a failure  to  attach
         due weight to the circumstance of the appellant's age, not only  at
         the time of appeal and interview, but  also  at  the  time  of  the
         events alleged.  The approach of the Judge was nevertheless held to
         have been without error of law.  Thus far there can be no cause  to
         depart from the finding.  The Judge also considered  a  certificate
         produced from the chairman of the Albanian  Committee  of  National
         Reconciliation.  He  considered  guidance  and  in  particular  the
         report of an expert, submitted for the appellant, relevant to  such
         certificates.  He declined to attach  weight  to  the  certificate,
         holding that certificates of this  body  and  its  chair  carry  no
         weight  because  of  recorded  instances  of  suspected  corruption
         relating to the issue of some such  documents.   This  too,  is  an
         unexceptional  finding  and  was  upheld  in  the  application  for
         permission to appeal.


    18.  What was not considered  in  the  application  for  permission  to
         appeal, however, was a further  express  finding  by  the  original
         Judge.  It was held as follows in declining  to  attach  favourable
         weight to the document:


             'Moreover, I find the fact that the appellant has submitted  a
             document to which no weight can  be  attached,  and  which  is
             almost certain to have been obtained  in  return  for  payment
             rather than being a true account of the existence of  a  blood
             feud, undermines the credibility of his  claim  that  a  blood
             feud exists and that he is the target.'


         Similarly,


             'The appellant also submitted a document  in  support  of  his
             claim from an organisation and individual who lack credibility
             and accept payment in return for false attestations.   I  find
             that this further undermines the credibility of his claim.'


             This constitutes a finding that the  appellant  has  corruptly
             procured a false document or has knowingly  produced  a  false
             and  corruptly  procured  document.   From  this  finding   of
             deception,  flows  a  further  finding  that  the  appellant's
             reliance on these documents  detracts  from  his  credibility.
             There is no  reason  given  to  support  a  finding  that  the
             document relied on by the appellant  was  corruptly  procured,
             was false or that the appellant knew of any such  falsity.   I
             invited the comments of Mr Hurley on this point.  He suggested
             that the words might be a throw-away remark by the  Judge  but
             felt unable to make any useful further submission.


    19.  In all the circumstances, I am  most  concerned  that  this  is  a
         potential defect in the reasoning and finding on  credibility,  not
         previously considered.  The adverse credibility  finding,  which  I
         ought otherwise to take as the starting point of my own assessment,
         might well be thought to be based upon, or influenced by, a factual
         finding of corrupt procurement of a document which is not supported
         in evidence.  It is not open to me to make  any  finding  impugning
         the decision.  Nevertheless, in justice to  the  appellant  I  feel
         constrained to  hold  that  the  circumstances  I  have  identified
         constitutes an exceptional reason which necessitates  that  I  must
         make my own assessment  of  credibility,  based  on  the  evidence,
         including the new evidence before me, independently of the findings
         in the original determination."


The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

6.   The grounds of appeal assert that  Judge  Gillespie  did  not  properly
    apply the guidance in Devaseelan relating to the  earlier  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dean, with specific reference made  to
    paragraph 16 of Judge  Gillespie's  determination.       I  heard  oral
    submissions from both parties.  Mrs Mughal  submitted  that  there  was
    before Judge  Gillespie  new  evidence  that  could  have  changed  the
    findings of Judge Dean.

7.   In my view the Judge made a material error of law.  Whilst it was  open
    to him to reconsider credibility on the basis of the evidence that  was
    before him it is not clear in my view why the Judge departed  from  the
    findings of Judge Dean.  He refers to the existence of  a  letter  that
    was not before Judge Dean but there is no analysis of this evidence and
    it is unclear why it was not before Judge Dean and how it had come into
    the possession of the appellant.

8.   In any event, having read Judge Gillespie's  decision,  it  seems  that
    the reason why he departed from the credibility findings of Judge  Dean
    was not simply as a result of this evidence, but because  of  perceived
    errors  in  Judge  Dean's  determination.   I  refer  specifically   to
    paragraphs 18 and 19 of Judge Gillespie's determination.  The Judge did
    not properly apply the guidance in Devaseelan.  As a result of this  he
    materially erred in law and I set  aside  the  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal pursuant to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

9.   I heard submissions relating to  the  venue  of  a  rehearing  and  Mrs
    Mughal submitted that the matter should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal whilst Mr Wilding submitted that in his view the  fact-finding
    was limited and the matter should remain in the Upper Tribunal  but  he
    was ambivalent.

10.  In my view there would  be  an  extensive  fact-finding  exercise  that
    would need to be conducted by the Tribunal and  having  considered  the
    practice statement of 25 September 2012 I remitted the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard on 8 April 2015.  It is  expected  that
    both parties will obtain a copy  of  Judge  Dean's  determination,  the
    appeal number AA/04746/2012 to ensure that it is before the First  tier
    Tribunal.



Signed Joanna McWilliam    Date 10 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

