
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02426/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 17th January 2018                  |On 21st February 2018                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     a q
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse instructed by Rashid and Rashid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant seeks permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Black dated 4th January  2017
    to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a Pakistan national born on [ ] 1983 and asserts  that
    whilst  in  Pakistan  he  worked  as  a  well-known  poet,  journalist,
    television and radio presenter in Rahim Yar Khan  (RYK)  district  (his
    home area).  He maintains he is the author of published  poetry  and  a
    number of books. He initially wrote love poems but became  inspired  to
    write revolutionary poetry.  He asserts that  he  worked  for  a  radio
    station called Jeevay Pakistan FGM 99 (and for a TV channel  which  was
    shut down by politicians in 2008).  He had  problems  with  politicians
    and had to leave the  area  in  2009.   He,  however,  had  started  to
    experience problems in 2007 having held a high profile public  function
    against  the  then  President  Pervez  Musharraf  at  the  Bar  Council
    Association in RYK on 31st May 2007.  He states he  was  threatened  by
    the government agencies as  a  result  and  he  received  more  threats
    towards the end of 2007 and  was  attacked  by  a  political  group  in
    December 2007.  Those attacks he asserts were reported  to  the  police
    but to no avail and fatwas were issued against him on 10th  March  2008
    and 1st June 2009.

 3. He then states that on 7th May 2009 he was involved in  a  "road  show"
    and subsequently received threats by  supporters  of  the  Taliban  and
    relocated to Lahore.  In May 2009 he was kidnapped by the  Taliban  and
    interrogated but released having agreed to stop writing.  He then  fled
    to another city Bakhar and then to the village called Notak.

 4. The appellant applied for student visas to enter the United Kingdom  on
    three occasions, on 10th October 2006, on 3rd November  2006  and  17th
    July 2008.  His applications were  refused  but  the  last  allowed  on
    appeal and his visa was valid for 27 months.  He arrived in the  UK  on
    20th January 2010.  He was  arrested  and  detained  under  immigration
    powers on 24th February 2012 and claimed asylum after  his  arrest  and
    detention.  His application was  refused  on  4th  April  2014  and  he
    appealed that decision.  The First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal  on
    asylum grounds but the decision was set aside by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martins on the basis that  there  had  been  no  consideration  of  the
    Secretary of State's case.  A further consideration of the  appeal  was
    made de novo by First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor on  16th  March  2016
    and that decision was set aside for irrationality which arguably led to
    an unsafe decision.  The appellant's appeal  was  considered  again  de
    novo by First-tier Tribunal Judge Black on 22nd February 2017  and  she
    dismissed his appeal in a decision dated 10th March 2017.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. There were four grounds for permission to appeal:

         Ground (i) a failure by the judge  to  make  findings  of  fact  on
         material that the appellant was  a  high  profile  published  poet,
         journalist and news anchor in Pakistan

         Ground  (ii) the judge made a material misdirection in the law  and
         in her approach to corroborating evidence.

         Ground (iii)  the judge  had  effected  procedural  unfairness  and
         erroneous findings because they were based on evidence that was not
         before the Tribunal

         Ground (iv) the judge made irrational  findings  on  the  basis  of
         mistakes of fact or lack of further reasoning

    I will deal with each ground in turn.

 6. Ground (i) it was asserted there was a failure to make findings of fact
    on material matters  and  a  failure  to  take  into  account  material
    evidence which asserted that the core of the appellant's claim was that
    he was a high profile published poet, journalist  and  news  anchor  in
    Pakistan who had been subject to persecution and clear findings of fact
    needed to be made on those points.  The Tribunal Judge failed to do  so
    as indicated at paragraph 51 of her decision.

         "I have not sought to analyse  the  appellant's  poetry  and  other
         writings to make a finding as to whether or not it might be such as
         to cause fatwas to be issued, the Taliban to  kidnap  and  threaten
         the appellant or politicians to threaten  and  attack  him  on  the
         basis of his revolutionary poetry and speeches.  In  any  event,  I
         have only been provided with summaries of some of  the  poetry  and
         his speeches at public gatherings.  I am  unable  to  make  such  a
         judgment as to whether the appellant's activities are  such  as  to
         cause the degree of adverse  attention  he  claims.   There  is  no
         expert evidence, for example from a country expert, as  to  whether
         that is the case.  I nonetheless consider the evidence on aspect of
         the claim in the round."

 7. It was asserted that there was ample evidence  before  Judge  Black  to
    make a finding on these crucial points and it was incorrect to say that
    she had only been provided with summaries of some of the poetry most of
    which  had  been  translated  in  complete  form  and  contained  overt
    political and anti-extremist messages.

 8. The situation faced by journalists and  those  who  challenged  extreme
    groups' ideas was well-known in Pakistan  and  country  background  was
    before the judge which noted the NGOs and their staff suffered numerous
    attacks by extremist groups who accused them  of  promoting  a  western
    agenda and that Pakistan was known as the  most  dangerous  country  of
    journalists in the year under review as identified at   Paragraph 11 of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  Country background  evidence
    must be taken into account when determining whether an asylum claim was
    credible.

 9. It was arguable that the judge's failure  to  make  clear  findings  on
    crucial facts and to determine risk on return without a country  expert
    report when there was an  abundance  of  country  background  evidence,
    amounted to material errors of law.

10. At the hearing before Ms Hulse submitted that there was ample  evidence
    before  the  judge  and  that  the  poems  were  clearly  critical   of
    politicians and religious radicalism.  She submitted that Pakistan  was
    a dangerous place for journalists and the  judge  had  failed  to  make
    clear findings on the basis of no expert evidence which was not open to
    her.

11. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that reading the decision as a whole  the
    judge took the steps carefully and at paragraph 56 set out her findings
    looking at all the matters in the round.  There  was  a  clear  finding
    that the appellant was a journalist and poet and  the  ground  was  not
    arguable.

12. In addressing ground (i),  I find that the judge addressed the evidence
    in relation to the appellant's activities as a journalist,  writer  and
    poet and that can be seen from paragraphs 34 onwards.  It is  incorrect
    to assert that the Judge failed to make a clear finding as  to  whether
    the appellant was a journalist.  At paragraph 56 she states  "I  accept
    he worked as a journalist in Pakistan and that he is a  published  poet
    of some renown in his local area of RYK".  She details  his  activities
    at paragraphs 34 to 37 analysing  the  extent  of  his  activity  as  a
    journalist.  The judge was well aware from her recitation at  paragraph
    11 of the Country of Origin Information in relation to journalists.  At
    paragraph 11, as acknowledged by the grounds,  she stated as follows:

         "In  addition,  the  parties'   representatives   agreed   it   was
         appropriate for me to  check  the  Country  of  Origin  Information
         currently available on the respondent's website.  I  have  done  so
         and noted the  following  at  paragraph  7.3.3  and  7.3.4  of  the
         respondent's Country Information and Guidance  (CIG)  on  Pakistan:
         Security and humanitarian situation, dated November 2015:

             '7.3.3.   The HRCP reported that, regardless of the nature  of
                    their work, non-governmental  organisations  (NGOs)  and
                    their  staff  suffered  numerous  attacks  by  extremist
                    groups who accused them of promoting a Western agenda.

             7.3.4.    The same report stated: 'Pakistan was named  as  the
                    most dangerous country for journalists in the year under
                    review, according to  the  International  Federation  of
                    Journalists (IFJ), a global organization of  journalists
                    based in Belgium.  The threat  was  most  pronounced  in
                    volatile regions such as  FATA  and  troubled  districts
                    such  as  Khuzdarin  Balochistan.   The   targeting   of
                    journalists in these regions was a direct consequence of
                    their association with journalism, whether through press
                    clubs or as employees  of  print  and  electronic  media
                    outlets.  According to HRCP's monitoring of 48  volatile
                    districts in  Pakistan,  journalists  and  human  rights
                    defenders suffered 19 attacks in 2014."

13. It is clear that the judge was well aware  of  the  country  background
    material and it was inconceivable that she did not take it in  account.
    At paragraph 51 the judge sets out the following

         'I have not sought to analyse  the  appellant's  poetry  and  other
         writings to make a finding as to whether or not it might be such as
         to cause fatwas to be issued, the Taliban to  kidnap  and  threaten
         the appellant or politicians to threaten  and  attack  him  on  the
         basis of his revolutionary poetry and speeches.   In  any  even,  I
         have only be provided with summaries of some of the poetry and  his
         speeches at public gatherings.  I am unable to make such a judgment
         as to whether the appellant's activities are such as to  cause  the
         degree  of  adverse  attention  he  claims.   There  is  no  expert
         evidence, for example from a country expert, as to whether that  is
         the case.  I nonetheless consider the evidence on [this] aspect  of
         the claim in the round'.

14. I find this approach was open to the judge.  She  did  not  ignore  the
    background evidence or  the  appellant's  evidence,  but  she  did  not
    profess  to  have  special  expertise  regarding  the  content  of  the
    publications and its impact in Pakistan. Indeed the Country  of  Origin
    Information  relates  to  the  dangers  of  journalism  in  being  most
    pronounced in "volatile regions" such as FATA  and  troubled  districts
    such as Khuzdarin Balochistan, which are not  identified  as  the  area
    from which the appellant hailed.  Indeed  he  could  relocate  but  was
    found by the judge to have given contrary evidence about where  he  had
    last lived in Pakistan.  In the circumstances it was open to the  judge
    to conclude that without expert evidence  she  was  unable  to  make  a
    judgment as to whether the appellant's activities were such as to cause
    the degree of adverse attention he claimed.   Clearly  the  nature  and
    content of poems will be relevant but it is for the appellant to  prove
    his case albeit on the lower standard of proof.  It is the  appellant's
    assertion that he was at risk on return from extremist groups and  from
    politicians but it was open to the judge  to  require  expert  evidence
    regarding the effect of the  publications  themselves.   That  was  not
    present. Indeed had she advanced or asserted specific knowledge she may
    well have been criticised for that approach. I repeat  it  is  for  the
    appellant to prove his case.  The use of the expert  report  is  widely
    acknowledged and I note from RR (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010]
    UKUT 000274 (IAC) that

         "In  a  case  where  there  are   obvious   but   not   necessarily
         determinative difficulties in  an  appellant's  oral  evidence  the
         Tribunal is likely to be helped considerably by independent  expert
         evidence that supports the appellant's story"

15. His claim was assessed in the round, in the context of  the  background
    material, with an assessment of  the  documentation  and  having  found
    specific and significant difficulties  with  the  appellant's  account.
    The judge concluded, for example, the appellant did not, until his oral
    evidence, identify any particular politician he perceived as  a  threat
    [45], that in his screening  interview  the  appellant  gave  his  last
    address as being Rahim Yar Khan and yet that contradicted his  evidence
    that he had previously left his home area for Lahore and then  went  to
    Bakhar [46].  Further the appellant stated that he  claimed  to  be  in
    contact with journalists in Pakistan but there were  no  statements  or
    letters to support the appellant's claim  that  he  was  under  threat.
    That clearly was in relation to a specific well-known terrorist but  as
    the judge points out at paragraphs [47] and [48] there was no  evidence
    from his contact in Pakistan to witness any current threat.  The  judge
    gave numerous examples throughout the decision of contradictions within
    the appellant's account and  these  can  be  gleaned  from  a  detailed
    reading of the decision.  The findings in relation to  the  appellant's
    profile are found throughout the judge's determination as a  whole  and
    this ground is not made out. It is for the appellant to  establish  the
    risk of the threat to himself, on the basis of evidence, and the  judge
    was entitled to conclude on  the  evidence  before  her,  that  without
    expert evidence she was not satisfied his claim had been made out  even
    to the lower standard of proof.

16. Ground (ii) it was asserted that the judge made a material misdirection
    in the law and in her  approach  to  corroborating  evidence.   It  was
    submitted that the  appellant  relied  on  a  wealth  of  corroborating
    evidence to show that he was a high profile published  poet  journalist
    and  news  anchor  in  Pakistan  and  that  he  was  subject  to   past
    persecution.  These included books, articles, video footage  and  press
    cards.  Evidence of the latter included a First Information Report  and
    two fatwas.  The evidence he relied on was  rejected  or  given  little
    weight  solely  because  the  country  background   material   asserted
    fraudulent documents were readily available  (paragraph  42).   It  was
    submitted that the judge concluded that the  fatwas  were  not  genuine
    documents  without  giving  any  reasons  other  than  concerns   about
    inconsistencies and  the  implausible  nature  of  his  account.   This
    approach  ran  counter  to  the  principles  established   in   Tanveer
    Ahmed(Documents unreliable and  forged)/Pakistan  [2002]  UKIAT  00439.
    Documents should not be viewed in isolation and the documents should be
    considered after looking at the evidence in  the  round.   Further  the
    judge rejected the evidence because they had been "produced to  support
    the appellant's  appeal"  (paragraph  43)  but  that  was  misconceived
    because all evidence about its very nature supports an appeal and  such
    a finding was akin to a misdirection in law.

17. The corroborating evidence relied on by the appellant  was  crucial  in
    supporting the crux of his claim.

18. Ms Hulse submitted at the hearing that it was important for  the  judge
    to look at the documentation before deciding and to consider all of the
    documents when assessing the claim.

19. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that at paragraph 33 to 35 the judge  did
    refer to the documentation in detail and did not simply  reject  it  on
    the basis that they came from Pakistan but gave reasons.  She submitted
    that the judge, having looked at the documents,  considered  that  they
    did not sit alongside each other well.  To submit that  there  were  no
    reasons  given  was  incorrect.    The   judge   had   considered   the
    documentation and not in isolation.

20. My view is that it was open to the judge to give little weight  to  the
    mere quantity of the documentary evidence produced and  she  was  quite
    right to concentrate on the quality of the evidence and to consider the
    reliability of the documentary evidence which  is  what  she  did  from
    paragraph 39 onwards.  The analysis is  consistent  with  the  guidance
    given in Tanveer Ahmed(Documents unreliable and forged)/Pakistan [2002]
    UKIAT 00439 and I repeat the  summary  conclusions  at  paragraph  [38]
    which confirm that

         'In asylum and human rights cases it is for an individual  claimant
         to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can be relied on.

         The decision maker should consider whether a  document  is  one  on
         which reliance should properly be placed after looking at  all  the
         evidence in the round'.

21. The judge's findings are intertwined, she addressed the  issue  of  the
    publications and further the intricacies of his account, and I will not
    repeat the significant points made by the judge to which I have already
    alluded.  At paragraph 40 the judge made a detailed assessment  of  the
    First Information Report and why she rejected it on the basis  that  it
    was not consistent with the appellant's own evidence.   The  judge  was
    entitled to do that.  She gave reasons.  She did not  accept  that  his
    evidence  that  he  was  not  permitted  by  the  police  to  cite  the
    perpetrators of the FIR.

22. It was open to  the  judge  also,  and  in  addition  to  her  previous
    findings, to note that the CIG identified the prevalence of  fraudulent
    documents in Pakistan but the important point is  that  the  judge  had
    given other reasons for rejecting the FIR.

23. From paragraph 43 the judge also considered the fatwas and was  clearly
    sceptical and entitled to be sceptical given that the fatwa was said to
    be issued on 24th April 2014, which was ten days after the Secretary of
    State's refusal, and bearing her mind her  approach  to  the  remaining
    evidence. She was entitled to give less weight to documents which  were
    produced after the claim.  In  addition,  the  judge  states  that  the
    "letter  from  the  Pakistani  lawyer  instructed  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors  in  London  refers  to  having  'approached  the  concerned
    authorities and enquired the case'".  The judge opines the  letter  did
    not state who was approached or when.  The letter referred to  the  FIR
    being verified by the concerned police  station  and  attested  by  the
    "concerned court" but the judge stated "it is  not  clear  which  court
    that is".  The judge at paragraph 43 also notes further inconsistencies
    between the "note to whom it may concern" from the  Special  Branch  of
    the Punjab Police dated 26th September 2016, and  which  refer  to  the
    FIR, and the FIR itself.  One referred to telephonic  threats  and  the
    other referred to simply 'attacks' rather than telephone threats.

24. The judge made further criticisms as follows:

         "43.     ... There is no indication from  the  correspondence  with
             the  Pakistani   lawyer   or   the   appellant's   instructing
             solicitors' statement as  to  how  the  Pakistani  lawyer  was
             selected to verify the documentary evidence.   The  author  of
             the statement  notes  that  she  took  instructions  from  the
             appellant and then contacted 'an advocate in Pakistan'.  There
             is no indication as  to  how  that  lawyer  was  selected  for
             instruction or whether, for example his name was  provided  by
             the appellant himself.  The author of the statement  says  the
             appellant was unable to carry out the investigation himself as
             'he does not have contact in Pakistan'.  However this  is  not
             correct: the appellant told me he  had  obtained  the  medical
             documentation and latest fatwa from  a  journalist  friend  in
             Pakistan.

         44.      In his first witness statement dated  16  March  2012  the
             appellant refers to coming to the UK 'to save his  [sic]  life
             from the Taliban and Islamic radicals, who wanted to take  his
             [sic] life'.  There is no mention of Mr Malik  Ishaq  in  that
             statement.  Nor is there mention of the two fatwas  issued  in
             2008 and 2009.  This is despite the fact he knew  about  those
             fatwas at that time.  In his substantive interview on 18 April
             2012 he referred to the threat from Malik Ishaq.  He  expanded
             upon this in a further statement dated 23 April 2012 in  which
             he stated he fears harm from Mullahs of Lashkar-e-Jhangvi  and
             specifically Mr Malik Ishaq who has been  told  the  appellant
             writes  poetry  against  them.   He  also  referred  in   that
             statement to the existence of the two fatwas.

         45.      The appellant did not identify  until  his  oral  evidence
             before me any particular politicians whom he  perceived  as  a
             threat.  No names are given in his five witness statements  or
             his interview record.  This is despite the fact he  must  have
             been aware of the identity of those politicians at the time he
             made his asylum claim."

25. It  is  clear  that  the  judge  made  a  detailed  assessment  of  the
    documentation and the central tenets of the appellant's claim and found
    the account to be wanting at the very least.  The  judge  between  [38]
    and [43] considered the documentary evidence and indeed throughout  the
    determination carefully explains why she accorded weight that  she  did
    to the documents.  The judge clearly carries out an assessment  of  the
    strands of evidence in the round and explains why the conclusions  were
    reached at [56] onwards.  The judge  gives  adequate  reasons  for  her
    rejection of the evidence and I  am  not  persuaded  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in her decision on this basis.  The corroborating
    documentation may well be crucial  but  the  fact  is  that  the  judge
    accorded little  weight  to  key  elements  of  the  material  after  a
    thorough, considered and detailed analysis.

26. At ground (iii) it was asserted there  was  procedural  unfairness  and
    erroneous findings because they were based on  evidence  that  was  not
    before the Tribunal.

27. It was asserted that the judge relied  on  a  number  of  details  when
    dismissing the appellant's appeal including:

      a) his failure to mention by name a member  of  the  Lashkar-e-Jhangvi
         whom he feared on return Malik Ishaq;

      b) he named politicians during his hearing but not named them before;

      c) during his screening interview he gave his last address in Pakistan
         as an address in RYK despite his evidence that he  left  that  area
         before coming to the UK;

      d) he failed to provide evidence via statements, letters confirming he
         is at risk from Malik Ishaq;

      e) he mentioned in his interview almost five years  ago  he  had  some
         financial help from Pakistan but did not provide witness  evidence,
         any documentary evidence; and

      f) he mentioned in his second but not his first statement  his  family
         had been contacted about his whereabouts.

28. It was submitted  that  the  findings  were  made  without  giving  the
    appellant an opportunity to respond to an offer an explanation  on  the
    points taken against him and it was  arguable  that  such  conduct  was
    procedurally unfair.   It  was  stated  that  it  was  trite  law  that
    procedural fairness required giving a party an opportunity  to  respond
    to a material point before taking against them are challenging evidence
    Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 00274.

29. Ms Hulse submitted that the judge did not ask the  appellant  questions
    which should have been put to him in court.  She conceded not  all  may
    be relevant but nonetheless they should have been addressed.

30. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that it was for the appellant to bear the
    burden of proof.

31. In conclusion, it is important  to  note  that  the  appellant  himself
    presented swathes of evidence to be analysed by the judge and she  gave
    reasons on the central aspects of his claim.   Clearly,  the  appellant
    was legally represented and was  aware  of  what  was  in  his  witness
    statements from the outset, such that from his first witness  statement
    on 16th March 2012 he made no mention of a specific person being  Malik
    Ishaq of whom he was afraid and further there was no mention of the two
    fatwas issued in 2008, 2009 despite the fact that the judge points  out
    that the appellant knew of those fatwas at the time.  The appellant was
    clearly aware of the contrast between the two statements and that would
    not have been a surprise to him.

32. It was open to the judge to conclude at paragraph 46 that there was  an
    inconsistency that the appellant had claimed in his screening interview
    that his last address was Rahim Yar  Khan  but  that  was  despite  his
    further evidence that he had to leave his home in the  last  year.  The
    judge rightly points out that he was supposed to have fled that part of
    Pakistan. It was the appellant who put forward further evidence through
    his legal representatives who would have been aware  of  his  screening
    interview and the contrast would have  been  evident  and  in  need  of
    explanation.

33. Similarly referring to 27(d) above, the judge was entitled to make  the
    point at paragraph 48 that the appellant claimed to be in contact  with
    journalists in Pakistan but there were  no  statements  or  letters  to
    support his claim. That lacuna in  the  evidence  was  obvious  to  the
    appellant and to his representatives. The deductions by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs [47] and [48] do not demonstrate a procedural unfairness  in
    the assessment of the appellant's claim.  Bearing in mind the amount of
    evidence there was no doubt a wealth of questions that could have  been
    asked by the Home Office Presenting Officer or the judge but  the  need
    to ask questions on each and every detail is not to  my  mind  required
    when the contrast or defect was already before the appellant in his own
    evidence and he was represented.

34. I am therefore not persuaded that there was any  procedural  unfairness
    in the decision such that  the  party  had  no  opportunity  to  put  a
    material  point  taken  against  him.   The   appellant   was   legally
    represented and the contrast between the evidence was quite clear.  The
    judge wove in the appellant's oral evidence into her determination  and
    in a way that it fitted adequate reasons.  Anxious scrutiny is required
    and this is a detailed determination with careful analysis, and  albeit
    it is an asylum claim, it is not incumbent on the judge to  go  through
    every single detail and refer to every piece  of  evidence,  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341.  It is not incumbent  on  the
    judge to give reasons for reasons.

35. Turning to  ground  (iv)  it  was  argue  the  judge's  conclusions  at
    paragraph 36 were arguably  irrational  with  the  absence  of  further
    reasoning.  Those conclusions were cited as follows:

      a) it was implausible that  his  attendance  and  presentation  as  to
         gathering attracted a crowd of 10,000 attendees [36];

      b) it was implausible (a) would have thought his problems in  Pakistan
         might dissipate to the extent that he could return at  some  point;
         [49]; and

      c) whether it was implausible that his friend would have kept  a  copy
         of the medical legal report and a fatwa issued in  2014  (paragraph
         55)

36. Further the judge's finding that the appellant made no mention  of  his
    family receiving threats prior to his departure, failed  to  take  into
    account that he mentioned in  his  first  statement  that  people  came
    looking for him prior to departure from Pakistan and  his  brother  was
    beaten.

37. It would appear that the  judge's  findings  have  been  taken  out  of
    context and I take each criticism in turn.  At paragraph 36  the  judge
    clearly stated having viewed the video that  she  did  not  accept  the
    number of people in attendance.  There was no evidence on the video.

         "The video showed the appellant speaking on a  podium  with  a  few
         others around him.  There was no indication of the  number  in  the
         audience.  The appellant told me some people were  sitting  outside
         the immediate area around the podium but even then it would had  to
         have been a significant  area  to  accommodate  such  a  number  of
         people.  I do not accept his evidence on this and find it to be  an
         exaggeration."

38. The judge was operating and  proceeding  on  the  basis  of  the  video
    evidence that she was shown; there was no independent evidence  and  in
    the light of her determination as a whole this finding was adequate.

39. Turning to (b)  and  the  criticism  that  the  appellant  thought  his
    problems would dissipate the judge clearly at paragraph 49 stated  that
    she did not accept his explanation that he expected things to calm down
    in Pakistan sufficiently for him to be able to return  because  as  she
    stated

         "By October 2009 the appellant was the subject of two fatwas issued
         in March  2008  and  June  2009.   It  is  inconceivable  that  the
         appellant would have  expected  the  threat  from  the  mullahs  to
         dissipate in the two years he would spend in the UK  such  that  he
         could return to Pakistan.  This is particularly the  case  when  he
         states that the threats started at the end of 2007; given they  had
         already lasted two  years  of  culminating  in  two  fatwas  it  is
         implausible the appellant would have expected to be able to  return
         to Pakistan in two years after his arrival here".

40. That reasoning is clear and unambiguous and shows no  irrationality  on
    the part of the judge.

41. In relation to the Medico  Legal  Report  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude particularly bearing in mind other witness statements were not
    available that it was not credible that the appellant would be able  to
    resurrect a Medico Legal Report after so many years.  It  is  a  matter
    for the judge as to the weight she gives to the evidence.

42. At paragraph 52 and 53 the judge is making the point  of  the  contrast
    between the appellant's own statements.  I can  see  that  there  is  a
    reference in paragraph 20 of the first witness statement to the brother
    being beaten but that said the judge specifically states that there was
    no mention of this in his substantive asylum interview and in the light
    of the comprehensive findings regarding credibility elsewhere, I am not
    persuaded that this is a material error of law.   The  findings  should
    not be viewed in isolation and in the face  of  the  series  of  cogent
    adverse credibility findings made against the appellant in relation  to
    the documentation as to his risk on return to Pakistan even  though  it
    was accepted that he was a journalist and poet in the  absence  of  the
    expert report it was open to the judge to find that he was not at  risk
    on return.

43. The criticisms of the judge's decision are in  essence  a  disagreement
    with the findings. As such I found there is no material error  and  the
    decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 12th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



