
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
AA/02822/2015

                                     AA/02904/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23rd February 2016                     |On 29th April 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between


                                     bc
                                     YK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                   Appellants


                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:     Ms A Immamovic of Counsel instructed by
                    Hallidayreeves, Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent, I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. On 5th November 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Lowe in which she allowed  the  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse asylum, humanitarian and human
    rights protection to the appellants, who are citizens of  South  Korea.
    The first appellant is the mother of the  second  appellant  who  is  a
    minor.

 3. The grounds of application state that the appeal was allowed  on  human
    rights grounds, apparently with reference to Article  3,  although  the
    judge, having given consideration to the best interests of  the  second
    appellant, reaches no  conclusion  in  that  respect  and  conducts  no
    proportionality balancing exercise.  It is also argued that  the  judge
    misdirected herself in respect of the sufficiency of protection and the
    option of internal relocation.  In particular, no reason was given  for
    the conclusion that the appellant  would  be  unable  to  access  state
    protection when a  2014  USSD  Report  showed  the  existence  of  such
    protection.   Further,  if  consideration   was   given   to   internal
    relocation, the judge found, inconsistently,  that  the  appellant  had
    worked as an assistant English teacher  in  South  Korea  but,  on  the
    other, there was no evidence of working  women  being  able  to  tailor
    their hours of work to school hours.

 4. Judge Andrew granted permission on the basis that the judge  had  given
    no reasons for the conclusion that the appellant  would  be  unable  to
    avail herself of state protection or would be unable to re-locate.

Error on a Point of Law

 5. At the hearing Mr Parkinson confirmed that the respondent relied on the
    grounds.   He  indicated  that,  at  page  29  of   the   Home   Office
    supplementary bundle  submitted  before  the  First-tier  hearing,  was
    detailed reference to the protection available in South Korea in  cases
    of domestic violence.  There was also  evidence  of  a  growth  in  the
    number of divorces and consequent single parent families.  Over  11,000
    cases of domestic violence had been reported to the authorities in  one
    month alone.  Additionally, the appellant had acknowledged that she had
    taught young children and so future employment in  that  capacity  with
    appropriate hours of work would be available to her.  He also contended
    that, although the decision of the judge was detailed, it was not clear
    what the judge had decided in relation to each element of the claim.

 6. Ms Immamovic relied upon her skeleton argument.  This argues  that  the
    judge properly  directed  herself  in  a  detailed  and  well  balanced
    assessment yet fairly eliminating the appellant from  membership  of  a
    particular social group or opinion  such  as  sufferers  from  domestic
    violence.  She was entitled to conclude that it would not be reasonable
    to expect the appellant to relocate with her child given the  level  of
    domestic violence she had suffered  which  had  been  accepted  by  the
    respondent.   She  further  contends  that  the  judge  did  take  into
    consideration a part of  the  USSD  Report  of  2014,  particularly  at
    paragraphs 32 and 33, entitling her to  conclude  (paragraph  34)  that
    there was little objective  evidence  to  show  that  the  government's
    measures were working or that domestic violence shelter facilities were
    actually available to the appellant.  As to  relocation,  the  skeleton
    argues that the judge was entitled to conclude that it was contrary  to
    the second appellant's best interests to relocate bearing in  mind  the
    violence which that appellant had already suffered at the hands of  her
    father and in witnessing abuse towards her mother, the first appellant.



 7.  In  oral  submissions,  Ms  Immamovic  made  reference   to   reasoned
    conclusions in the decision, which I noted, to show that the judge  had
    given full consideration to objective evidence about  the  availability
    of state protection and relocation.

 8. Mr Parkinson reminded me that the second appellant was  not  a  British
    citizen and so a high threshold test had to be met in relation  to  her
    human rights claim.  Further, the judge has speculated, particularly in
    paragraph 36, about what might happen when objective  material  clearly
    showed the existence of state protection.

 9. In conclusion, Ms Immamovic contended that what the judge had concluded
    in paragraph 35 was not speculation because of the  factors  which  had
    been considered in paragraph 33 covering,  amongst  other  things,  the
    domestic violence situation as related to women.

Conclusions

10. Bearing in mind the detailed and comprehensive nature  of  the  judge's
    decision I decided to reserve my own decision  on  whether  or  not  an
    error or errors of law were present.  My reasons  now  follow  for  the
    conclusion that the decision contains such errors  and  should  be  set
    aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh having
    regard to the Practice Statement of the Senior President  of  Tribunals
    of 25th September 2012 at paragraph 7.2.

11. The decision of the experienced  First-tier  Judge  does,  I  conclude,
    contain a considerable amount of speculation as to what would happen if
    the appellant were to return and came into contact  with  her  husband.
    In paragraph 35 the judge surmises that the first appellant would  have
    no alternative but to  return  to  live  with  her  husband  and  would
    therefore be at risk of renewed domestic violence even though,  in  the
    same paragraph, the judge points  out  that  the  appellant  is  highly
    educated, speaks fluent English and has employment experience in  South
    Korea and so might, I infer, be capable of living  independently.   The
    judge's conclusion that, despite such experience, the  appellant  would
    be unable to take up employment is  unsupported  by  reference  to  any
    specific objective material.

12. The objective material which is examined in paragraph 33  is  described
    by the judge as "relatively scanty" although the existence of the  USSD
    Report of 2014 is  referred  to  in  the  previous  paragraph.   It  is
    difficult to see how that report  can  be  described  as  giving  scant
    information about the relevant  issues  in  this  appeal.   The  report
    states that there is an independent and impartial  judiciary  in  civil
    matters including human rights violation.   The  law  defines  domestic
    violence  as  a  serious  crime  with  strong  enforcement   provisions
    including restraining orders and significant punishment  for  breaches.
    In one month, alone, the Ministry of Justice was handling  over  27,656
    sexual and  domestic  violence  cases  with  over  11,000  relating  to
    specific domestic violence leading to the subsequent detention  of  228
    offenders.  There are 33 integrated support centres and  a  further  25
    protection  facilities  against  sexual  violence  and  27   government
    operated facilities for migrant women  victims  of  domestic  violence.
    There is, therefore, copious reference to the facilities available  for
    victims  of  domestic  violence  which  has  been  identified  by   the
    government as one  of  the  "four  social  evils"  it  has  to  tackle.
    Therefore, I am unable to see  how  the  judge's  conclusion  that,  in
    effect, the appellant could not avail herself of government  protection
    can be anything other than unsupported  speculation.   Indeed,  as  the
    judge concedes  in  paragraph  36,  her  conclusions  there  are  "only
    speculation" albeit  in  relation  to  the  first  appellant's  parents
    looking after her child.

13. In my conclusion, it was not open to the judge to find, as she  did  in
    paragraph 36, that because of the "collectivist" nature of South Korean
    society, the  appellants  would  be  forced  to  return  to  the  first
    appellant's husband sooner or later.  Further, in the  same  paragraph,
    the judge was clearly wrong  to  indicate  that,  even  if  there  were
    facilities for victims of domestic violence,  there  was  no  objective
    evidence of one.

14. Further, in relation to relocation, it is not clear, from the decision,
    that the judge has given specific consideration to this option  bearing
    in mind the appellant's educational background and  former  employment.
    Whilst the judge refers to country evidence relating to  discrimination
    against females  in  finding  employment  and  difficulties  with  care
    arrangements, these conclusions are, also, no  more  than  speculation.
    That is because no specific objective material has been  identified  to
    show that a single mother would be unable to find employment.  Further,
    the judge does not examine any evidence which would suggest that living
    in a different area would be unreasonable to expect of the appellants.

15. I also note that the judge has based her decision on the application of
    Article 3 which protects against the risk of  serious  harm.   In  this
    context it is not clear why the judge did not consider  the  option  of
    humanitarian protection on the basis that the asylum appeal  could  not
    succeed.

16. For the reasons I have given, the decision shows errors  on  points  of
    law such that it should set aside.  As any future hearing will  require
    the evaluation of evidence to the date of hearing it is appropriate for
    the matter to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing. This accords with the  Practice  Statement  to  which  I  have
    already referred.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows errors on points of  law.
    I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Anonymity

18. As this appeal involves the interests of a child I make  the  following
    direction:

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellants.  This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

DIRECTIONS

19. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

20. The hearing will take place at the Stoke Hearing Centre on a date to be
    specified by the Resident Judge.

21. The fresh hearing must not be before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Lowe.

22. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

23. No interpreter will be provided for the hearing unless  representatives
    so indicate.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

