
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02862/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 5th March 2015                   |On: 3rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Nasira Rasheed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan, Counsel instructed by the Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date  of  birth  11th  November
    1940.  She appeals with permission[1] the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge  Lever)  to  dismiss  her  asylum  and  human   rights
    appeal[2].

 2. The basis of the Appellant's case is that she is an Ahmadi who has  and
    will suffer persecution  in  Pakistan  for  reasons  of  her  religious
    belief. The past persecution alleged  included  having  death  threats,
    having members of her family assaulted and their property attacked  and
    stolen.  She claims that whilst living in Pakistan she was  open  about
    her faith and would speak about it to other women in her neighbourhood.

 3. The Respondent rejected the claim and gave her reasons for so doing  in
    a letter dated the 14th April  2014.  It  was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had ever "preached" (ie advanced the Ahmadi faith to  friends
    and neighbours) because the Appellant  had  been  unable  to  correctly
    answer detailed questions about Ahmadi history and theology  that  were
    put to her at interview. The Respondent  did  not  find  her  level  of
    knowledge commensurate with that of someone  who  had  been  preaching.
    Further it was noted that the Appellant's passport identified her as  a
    Muslim  rather  than  "Ahmadiyya"  or  "Qadiani"  which  the  Pakistani
    passport authorities would have recorded if she were Ahmadi.  As to the
    Appellant's account of her past  persecution  by  Khatme  Nabuwaat  and
    others, the Respondent found it to be vague and contradictory.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever had  an
    opportunity to hear oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  her  son.
    Applying the lower standard of proof it was accepted that the Appellant
    is Ahmadi but it was not accepted that she had openly "preached" or had
    suffered any past persecution as a result of her faith.   A  number  of
    negative credibility  findings  were  made  about  the  Appellant.  The
    Tribunal found that her "account  and  examples  of  discrimination  or
    persecution were virtually non-existent" and that for most of her  life
    "she has been able to live without much difficulty  or  problem  within
    Pakistan". The appeal was dismissed.

    Error of Law

 5. The written grounds of appeal are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in the following material respects:

 i) Failing to take relevant evidence into account.

         Paragraph 26 of  the  determination  indicates  that  the  Tribunal
         thought the account of difficulties  in  Pakistan  began  in  2012.
         Paragraph 33 appears to indicate that the Tribunal  was  conducting
         its risk assessment on the basis that nothing had happened  to  her
         prior to that date. The determination notes that the Appellant  had
         "provided little or nothing by way of example or detail  concerning
         her alleged preaching over many years" and  that  any  examples  of
         persecution or discrimination were "virtually non  existent".   The
         Appellant submits that these comments suggest that the Tribunal has
         failed to address a large part of  the  evidence,  which  concerned
         instances of  the  Appellant  advancing  her  faith,  of  suffering
         discrimination, societal hostility and persecution as far  back  as
         1996.







ii) Failure to apply MN v SSHD (Pakistan) CG [2012] UKUT 00389

         Because the Tribunal did not consider the evidence  about  how  the
         Appellant had engaged in preaching in the past,  its  finding  that
         she was unlikely to do so in the future was flawed.

iii) Error of fact amounting to an error of law.

         At paragraph 27 the determination appears to conflate two different
         incidents described in the account and conclude that the  Appellant
         had changed her evidence about an incident that occurred in October
         2012 to say that it happened in May 2012.    This was an  error  of
         fact and it led the Tribunal to make unfair findings

iv) Failure to give adequate reasons

         It is submitted that in reaching negative credibility findings  the
         Tribunal has given irrational or otherwise inadequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the account.

 6. The Respondent accepted that the determination  contains  an  error  of
    fact but it was submitted  that  this  did  not  infect  the  reasoning
    overall. It was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal has  given  good
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account concerning  the  incident
    that led her to flee from Pakistan, and that  there  was  no  error  in
    characterising the Appellant's evidence as "vague" because it was.

 7. On the 13th November 2014 I heard further oral submissions  on  whether
    the making of the decision involved an error  of  law.   In  a  written
    decision dated 19th November 2015 I found as follows:

         "I deal first with the alleged error of fact.

         At paragraph 26-27 the determination discusses an amendment to  the
         Appellant's account, made in her witness  statement.  At  interview
         the Appellant had mentioned two incidents. One was when her son-in-
         law had been beaten up and his property stolen. The other was  when
         she was personally threatened, spat at and  verbally  abused  by  a
         "mullah".  The interview transcript shows that both these incidents
         are said to have  occurred  in  October  2012.   The  determination
         records that the Appellant sought to amend  this  evidence  in  her
         witness statement, stating that the "threatening incident" in  fact
         occurred in May 2012. The Appellant contends,  and  the  Respondent
         accepts, that the Tribunal was here  mistaken.  The  Appellant  has
         consistently stated that she  incident  where  she  was  personally
         threatened occurred in October 2012. Her witness statement  changed
         the date of the assault on her son-in-law, not the date of her  own
         assault.

         This error of fact is only an error of law if it can be shown  that
         it led to a material unfairness. I  find  that  it  is  clear  from
         paragraph 27 that the mistake as to the date  formed  part  of  the
         Tribunal's risk  assessment.  Although  the  Tribunal  attached  no
         weight to the fact that the Appellant had changed her evidence,  it
         was thought material because this  incident  was  said  to  be  the
         catalyst in her deciding to leave Pakistan.  If the incident was in
         May rather than October it would have meant that she had  "remained
         in Pakistan for several months thereafter without further  incident
         or difficulty".  I find that  this  error  of  fact  did  therefore
         infect the overall risk assessment.

         The central complaint, contained in grounds i) and ii), is that the
         determination fails to address a good deal of evidence given by the
         Appellant. Mr O'Ryan has set out in detail the evidence upon  which
         he relies to rebut the  findings  in  the  determination  that  the
         account contained "little or nothing by way of example"  about  the
         Appellant's faith and was similarly scant in terms of  persecution.
         He points, for instance, to the Appellant's claim that her door was
         marked "atheist" and that graffiti was sprayed indicating  that  it
         was lawful to kill the occupants[3]; that Khatme Nabuwaat organised
         a 'social boycott' against  the  family  and  orchestrated  a  hate
         campaign  which  included  death  threats  being  put  through  the
         door[4];  that she and her husband were regularly confronted in the
         street by Sunni extremists during  the  1990s;   that  stones  were
         thrown at  the  house  and  rubbish  left  at  the  door[5].    The
         Appellant  had  also  consistently  stated  that   she   had   been
         "preaching" in Pakistan for a long time and that she had been doing
         this, and suffering the consequences, when her husband was alive[6]
         (her husband died in 1996). After her husband died she continued to
         preach to local non-Ahmadi women under the direction of  the  lajna
         jamaat[7]. This had led to Khatme Nabuwaat telling  her  to  desist
         otherwise they were going to set fire to  her  home  and  kill  the
         whole family[8]. In her interview the Appellant was asked about why
         she persisted in preaching in these circumstances:

             "Q45: Was he the only person in your family who was preaching?

             A: no, I was doing that as well. Him and me."

             Q46. When did you start preaching?

             A: For a long time I've been telling my  neighbours  about  my
             religion.

             Q47. Roughly how long?

             A: Since I grew up, I used  to  tell  other  people  about  my
             religion.

             Q48. What did you preach to people?

             A: We are proper and right Muslims.

             Q49: How did you decide who to preach to?

             A: To the people who are my neighbours living in  my  locality
             and I thought they would listen to me.

             ...

             Q131. Did you preach to anyone other than your neighbours?

             A: No, only the neighbours.  But  also  if  I  had  met  other
             persons I would tell them as well.

             Q132: Please explain what you mean by other persons?

             A: Neighbours and if I went to visit someone.

             Q 133: Is it important to you to preach?

             A: Yes, when we take BAIT, a promise, we promise we will  pass
             our religious message to other people."

         In her witness statement she explains the kind of conversations she
         was having:

             "When I say that I used to preach  our  neighbours  about  the
             Ahmadi faith I mean that I used to address the  main  problems
             that Muslim  extremists  have  with  our  faith,  explain  the
             differences between our faith and why we are Muslims as  well.
             I tried to change people's perception of our  faith  based  on
             Muslim extremist interpretation. I used to speak about this to
             women who were our neighbours who I met in our house or I  was
             invited to go to their house. I would  only  speak  to  people
             that I knew who were friendly towards me. They were  not  many
             as most of the Muslims would boycott us  and  refuse  to  have
             anything to do with us. I  used  to  tell  them  that  we  are
             Muslims as well and we pray as well five times a day, we  read
             the Koran, we go on pilgrimage to the Saudi and  on  Haji  the
             basic principles of Islam are the same. I tried to explain  to
             them about our belief that the Imam Mehdi has come already and
             why we believe he came. Most  common  accusation  against  our
             Mahdi is that we are infidels because  we  believe  that  Imam
             Mehdi came whereas the other Muslims believe that he  has  yet
             to come. They see this as an insult to  the  Prophet  Muhammad
             who is in their opinion the last prophet[9].

         It would seem from  paragraphs  8-20  of  the  determination  ('The
         Proceedings - Evidence') that the focus of enquiry at  the  hearing
         was the most recent events that had allegedly led the Appellant  to
         leave Pakistan. That is understandable. However it would seem  from
         paragraphs 24 on ('Decision and Reasons') that this has  distracted
         the Tribunal from assessing the evidence about what might be called
         the 'general' harassment and persecution the  Appellant  claims  to
         have endured for much of her life.  Because  the  determination  is
         almost exclusively concerned with the 'catalyst event', to which  I
         return below, there is no consideration given to the  material  set
         out in Mr O'Ryan's grounds.  At paragraph 24 it is noted  that  the
         Appellant claims to have preached  over  a  significant  amount  of
         time, but the risk assessment begins at paragraph  26  which  opens
         "she has claimed threatening  and  abusive  behaviour  from  others
         directed  against  herself  and  her  family  from  at  least  2012
         onwards". This would appear to confirm that the  Tribunal  has  not
         had regard to the parts of the account going  back  to  the  1990s.
         This then led to the findings that she had provided no examples and
         that the account of problems was "virtually non-existent".  Grounds
         i) and ii) above are made out.

         The  final  ground  deals  with  the  central  findings   in   this
         determination.  These are concerned with the Appellant's claim that
         in approximately January 2013 she  had  arranged  for  some  Ahmadi
         books to be sent to a relative in Quetta. Someone who was assisting
         her with the packing had accidentally included a copy of the Qur'an
         in the parcel. It had  been  opened  by  someone  at  the  shipping
         company who had become suspicious about it. Local Mullahs were made
         aware of this and deemed it an insult to Islam. They threatened the
         Appellant and visited her home looking for her.  The  grounds  make
         various criticisms  of  the  reasons  Judge  Lever  gives  for  his
         findings on this issue. Overall I do not find these  criticisms  to
         be well founded. At paragraph 31 the determination sets  out  eight
         reasons why the account is not believed.  It may be  that  some  of
         them would not, in isolation,  stand  up  to  scrutiny,  but  taken
         cumulatively they provide a sound basis for the  Tribunal  to  have
         rejected this part of the claim.  These findings are preserved".

 8. Following this written decision on 'error of law' I directed  that  the
    decision in the appeal would be remade by me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    dealing only with  the  "historical"  claims  of  persecution  and  the
    Appellant's evidence as to her propensity to preach.  At  the  November
    2014 hearing I had been informed by both parties that  the  Appellant's
    daughter, son-in-law and three granddaughters[10] had  been  recognised
    as refugees. Since she lived with them in Pakistan and a large part  of
    her claim overlaps with theirs, the parties agreed  that  these  grants
    would likely have some bearing on  the  Respondent's  attitude  towards
    this Appellant. It was therefore agreed  that  the  re-making  of  this
    matter would be adjourned until the 30th January 2015 when it is listed
    'For Mention Only'. This gave the Respondent an opportunity  to  review
    the decision in this matter.

 9. On the 26th January 2015 the Respondent applied to have the hearing  of
    the 30th January  adjourned.  This  was  because  due  to  "significant
    resource issues" the Respondent had been unable to look  again  at  the
    Appellant's case.  The hearing was adjourned and relisted  for  mention
    on the 5th March 2015. At that hearing Mr McVeety initially applied  to
    have the matter adjourned again. The Respondent had still not  reviewed
    the matter. The HOPO at the 'error of law' hearing, Mr Smart, had  sent
    the file to the correct team, but they had unfortunately sent it on  to
    the wrong unit in Newcastle. It had from there been sent  back  to  the
    correct place but not in time to have the  Appellant's  asylum  refusal
    reviewed.

10. Mrs Rashid is approaching 75 years of age. She is not in  the  best  of
    health, and is understandably anxious to have her appeal determined, or
    her case otherwise resolved.  In  light  of  these  matters  Mr  O'Ryan
    invited me to proceed to re-make the decision in light of the  accepted
    facts and country guidance. Mr McVeety had no objection to that course.

11. I apologise  to  both  parties  for  the  delay  in  promulgating  this
    decision.

    The Re-Made Decision

12. The First-tier Tribunal found as fact that  the  Appellant  is  Ahmadi.
    Her daughter, son-in-law  and  granddaughters  have  all  been  granted
    refugee status consequent to  their  claims  for  asylum,  based  on  a
    factual matrix closely related to that advanced by the Appellant in her
    own claim.

13. The extant country  guidance  is  MN  and  Others  (Ahmadis  -  country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389  (IAC).  The  headnote
    reads as follows:

         "1.      This country guidance replaces previous guidance in  MJ  &
             ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033, and  IA  &
             Others (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT  00088.  The
             guidance we give is based in part on the developments  in  the
             law including the decisions of the Supreme Court in HJ  (Iran)
             [2010] UKSC 31, RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38  and  the  CJEU
             decision in Germany v. Y (C-71/11) & Z (C-99/11). The guidance
             relates principally to Qadiani Ahmadis; but as the legislation
             which is the background to the issues raised in these  appeals
             affects Lahori Ahmadis also, they  too  are  included  in  the
             country guidance stated below.

         2. (i)  The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis is  legislation
             that restricts the way  in  which  they  are  able  openly  to
             practise their  faith.  The  legislation  not  only  prohibits
             preaching  and  other  forms  of  proselytising  but  also  in
             practice  restricts  other  elements  of   manifesting   one's
             religious  beliefs,  such  as  holding  open  discourse  about
             religion  with  non-Ahmadis,   although   not   amounting   to
             proselytising. The prohibitions include  openly  referring  to
             one's place of worship as a  mosque  and  to  one's  religious
             leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are not  permitted  to
             refer to the call to prayer as azan  nor  to  call  themselves
             Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions include  a
             fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found,  there  is  a
             risk of the death penalty which to date has not  been  carried
             out although there is a risk of lengthy incarceration  if  the
             penalty  is  imposed.  There  is  clear  evidence  that   this
             legislation is used by non-state actors to threaten and harass
             Ahmadis. This includes the filing of First Information Reports
             (FIRs) (the first step in any criminal proceedings) which  can
             result in detentions whilst prosecutions  are  being  pursued.
             Ahmadis are also subject to attacks by non-state  actors  from
             sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

             (ii)  It is, and  has  long  been,  possible  in  general  for
             Ahmadis to practise their faith on a restricted  basis  either
             in  private  or  in  community  with  other  Ahmadis,  without
             infringing domestic Pakistan law.

         3. (i)  If  an  Ahmadi  is  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
             particular importance to his religious  identity  to  practise
             and manifest his faith openly in Pakistan in defiance  of  the
             restrictions in the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC)  under  sections
             298B and 298C, by engaging in behaviour described in paragraph
             2(i) above, he or she is likely to be in need  of  protection,
             in the light of the  serious  nature  of  the  sanctions  that
             potentially apply as well as the  risk  of  prosecution  under
             section 295C for blasphemy.

             (ii)  It is no  answer  to  expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
             description  just  given  to  avoid  engaging   in   behaviour
             described in paragraph 2(i) above ("paragraph 2(i) behaviour")
             to avoid a risk of prosecution.

         4. The need for protection applies equally to men and women.  There
             is no basis for considering that Ahmadi women as a  whole  are
             at a particular or additional risk;  the  decision  that  they
             should not attend mosques in Pakistan was made by  the  Ahmadi
             Community following attacks on the mosques in Lahore in  2010.
             There is no evidence that women in particular were the  target
             of those attacks.

         5. In light of the above, the  first  question  the  decision-maker
             must ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is  an  Ahmadi.
             As with all judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach
             conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such  weight
             to aspects of that evidence as appropriate in accordance  with
             Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  This is  likely  to
             include an enquiry whether the claimant was registered with an
             Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged  there
             on  a  regular  basis.  Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be
             relevant.    Evidence   likely   to   be   relevant   includes
             confirmation from the UK  Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the
             activities relied on in Pakistan  and  confirmation  from  the
             local community in the UK where the claimant is worshipping.

         6. The next step  (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
             intentions or wishes as to his or her faith,  if  returned  to
             Pakistan.  This is relevant because of the need  to  establish
             whether it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  religious
             identity of the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)
             behaviour. The burden is on the claimant to  demonstrate  that
             any intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects of  the
             faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code
             (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular  importance  to  the
             claimant to preserve  his  or  her  religious  identity.   The
             decision maker needs to evaluate all the  evidence.  Behaviour
             since arrival in the UK may also be relevant. If the  claimant
             discharges  this  burden  he  is  likely  to  be  in  need  of
             protection.

         7. The option of internal relocation, previously considered  to  be
             available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably  open  to  a
             claimant who genuinely wishes  to  engage  in  paragraph  2(i)
             behaviour, in the light of the nationwide effect  in  Pakistan
             of the anti-Ahmadi legislation.

         8. Ahmadis who are not able to show that they practised their faith
             at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other  than
             the restricted basis described in paragraph 2(ii) above are in
             general unlikely  to  be  able  to  show  that  their  genuine
             intentions or wishes are to practise and manifest their  faith
             openly on return, as described in paragraph 2(i) above.

         9. A sur place claim by an Ahmadi based on post-arrival  conversion
             or  revival  in  belief  and  practice  will  require  careful
             evidential analysis. This will probably include  consideration
             of evidence of the head of the claimant's local United Kingdom
             Ahmadi Community and from  the  UK  headquarters,  the  latter
             particularly in cases where there has been a  conversion.  Any
             adverse findings in the claimant's account as a whole  may  be
             relevant to the assessment of likely behaviour on return.

         10.      Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to be  not  reasonably
             likely to engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour
             is, in general, not  at  real  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan,
             judicial fact-finders may in certain cases  need  to  consider
             whether that person would nevertheless be reasonably likely to
             be targeted  by  non-state  actors  on  return  for  religious
             persecution by  reason  of  his/her  prominent  social  and/or
             business profile."

14. The Appellant has already shown herself to be Ahmadi. I therefore begin
    my assessment at the second stage set out above. This  means  that  the
    alternative questions I must address are therefore whether:

          a) The Appellant is an Ahmadi who would genuinely wish to  engage
             in "paragraph  2(i)  behaviour"  which  includes  but  is  not
             limited to "holding open discourse about  religion  with  non-
             Ahmadis", "openly referring to  her  place  of  worship  as  a
             mosque" or to her religious leader as an  "imam",  or  to  her
             religion as "Islam".

             OR whether

          b) She cannot meet  that  test  but  is  nevertheless  reasonably
             likely to be  targeted  by  non-state  actors  on  return  for
             religious persecution by reason of  his/her  prominent  social
             and/or business profile.

15. In addressing these questions I remind myself that the burden of  proof
    rests on the Appellant and that the standard of proof is the relatively
    low "reasonable likelihood".

16. The record of the Appellant's screening interview is dated  5th  August
    2013, her asylum interview 29th August 2013;  her  statement  is  dated
    23rd May 2014. I note that in all of these she quite  naturally  refers
    to herself as a "Muslim" and her place of worship as a  "Mosque"  [11].
    She has consistently stated that her son-in-law Ahmed Nauman  Khan  was
    the General Secretary of the  Ahmadi  organisation  in  their  area  of
    Karachi[12]. In the absence of any evidence to the  contrary  I  accept
    that this was a material fact advanced by him in his own asylum  claim,
    and accepted, by the Respondent.  It is certainly a claim supported  by
    way of letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK dated 2nd  March
    2013. As set out above (at page 5) the  Appellant  has  explained  that
    whilst in Pakistan she considered it an important part of her faith  to
    talk to friends and neighbours who were not Ahmadis  about  her  faith,
    and to try and dispel any prejudices that they might have about it.  In
    light of the evidence overall I see no reason to reject  that  part  of
    her account. She has not sought to exaggerate or embellish that part of
    her evidence and on the lower standard of proof I  accept  that  it  is
    true.  I note the evidence of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK  that
    she continues to be active in the community here.  That  is  consistent
    with her having undertaken that role in Pakistan.

17. The Appellant's husband died in 1996. She is now part of the  household
    of her daughter and son-in-law, both of whom have  been  recognised  as
    being at risk for reasons of their religious belief  in  Pakistan.    I
    accept her evidence that she would talk to  neighbours  etc  about  her
    faith and that she did so because she took a "bayt"[13], a promise that
    she would pass her faith on to others[14].  Her involvement was not  as
    a community leader or overt preacher but I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that her behaviour when in Pakistan did in the  past,
    and would in the future, amount to  the  behaviours  described  by  the
    Upper tribunal in paragraph 2(i) of the  headnote  to  MN  and  Others.
    She therefore qualifies for refugee status.

    Decisions

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

19. I re-make the decisions in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because she is
    a refugee.

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

20. I make no direction for anonymity. There was no application for such an
    order and on the facts I see no reason to make one.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               10th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 4th August 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Molloy
[2] The appeal is brought against a decision to remove the Appellant
pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 dated 22nd April
2014
[3] Screening interview at 4.1 [A8]; Statement of Additional Grounds 'SAG'
para 5 [C3]
[4] SAG at para 3 [C2], Witness statement (23.5.14) para 9
[5] SAG at para 7 [C3]
[6] See Interview under caution (17.8.13) at [B2]; SAG at para 3 [C2]
[7] SAG para 7 [C3]
[8] SAG para 9 [C4], Witness statement (23.5.14) para 11


[9] Witness statement 23.5.14, para 11
[10] Their grant of refugee status was evidenced by way of a letter from
the Respondent dated 31st July 2014.
[11] See for instance 1.9 screening interview, Q29 of asylum interview,
paragraph 4 witness statement
[12]  See for instance Q40 asylum interview record, paragraph 11 witness
statement
[13] See paragraph 199 of MN and Others
[14] Q133 asylum interview

