
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02076/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18th December 2014                     |On 12th January 2015             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                                     M K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by AP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka, was refused  asylum,  and
    his appeal against this decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jacobs-Jones, in a determination promulgated  on  14  July  2014.
    The appellant had arrived and claimed asylum in 2008, at the age of 15,
    but there had then been a considerable delay in processing  his  claim.
    He was not interviewed until September 2011,  and  his  claim  was  not
    refused until December 2013.

2.   Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cheales, on 19 August 2014.  On a renewed application permission
    to appeal was then granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor,  on  18
    November 2014.  Her reasons were as follows:

         "The argument that the judge may have relied upon evidence relating
         to a period when the appellant was a child, without taking  account
         of the fact of his minority in the  assessment  of  that  evidence,
         deserves further exploration.


         The appeal should be set down for an error of law  hearing  with  a
         time estimate of one hour.  If an error is found, the  appeal  will
         have to be reheard afresh, probably by another Judge of the  First-
         tier Tribunal, so that credibility findings can be remade."

3.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal had been  concerned  not  only
    with the adverse credibility findings and the point referred to in  the
    grant of permission, but also with the assessment of  risk  on  return,
    and the assessment of Article 8.  At  the  hearing  before  me  it  was
    agreed that both parties would make  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    first ground initially.  As I indicated at the hearing that that ground
    was made out, and the parties both agreed that remittal to  the  First-
    tier for a rehearing, as envisaged in  the  grant  of  permission,  was
    therefore the appropriate course, there was no need for a consideration
    of the other two grounds.

4.   In her submissions at  the  hearing  Ms  Benfield  made  the  following
    points.  It had not been open to the judge to find that there had  been
    a "change of story" on the issue of whether the appellant  had  been  a
    student leader.  There was no inconsistency, and in any event there was
    a time lapse of more than three years between the  screening  interview
    and the asylum interview.  Both the appellant's age at the time of  the
    screening  interview,  and  the  passage  of  time  between   the   two
    interviews, were relevant factors which had not been mentioned  by  the
    judge in assessing  the  evidence.   The  judge's  adverse  credibility
    reasoning was insufficient in that the passage of time in itself was  a
    very significant point for a claimant who was a minor.  The Home Office
    practice for unaccompanied  minors  seeking  asylum  was  to  keep  the
    overall claim assessment process short, and to keep the gap between the
    screening interview and the  asylum  interview  correspondingly  short.
    The extremely long gap in this case was no fault of the appellant,  and
    amounted to a breach of the respondent's guidance.  It had clearly been
    accepted that he had been a minor on arrival, and his age had not  been
    disputed.

5.   The submission was not that the appellant was entitled to  be  believed
    simply because he was a minor.  This was a mischaracterisation  of  the
    argument in the Rule 24 response.  But the UNHCR handbook and the Joint
    Presidential Guidance  Note  2010  both  gave  clear  guidance  on  the
    treatment of unaccompanied minors.  This failure to take  into  account
    the appellant's age when the screening interview was conducted, and the
    delay, was a fundamental point that had coloured the evidence  all  the
    way through the credibility reasoning.

6.   Mr Melvin, for the respondent, relied on the Rule  24  response,  which
    had made the point that unaccompanied minor asylum seekers  should  not
    be believed simply because  of  their  age;  and  that  the  judge  was
    justified in concluding that the account  was  not  credible  based  on
    concealment of an earlier return to Sri Lanka, and other  matters.   It
    was also the case that the adverse  credibility  findings  as  a  whole
    could stand up even if those parts referring to the screening interview
    were taken away.  Any  error  in  relation  to  the  treatment  of  the
    screening interview was therefore immaterial.

7.   Ms Benfield  responded  by  submitting  that  the  adverse  credibility
    findings ran throughout the determination.  They had  been  applied  by
    the judge and were fundamental.  There must be a  holistic  assessment,
    and the parts of the adverse finding suggested could not be isolated.

Error of Law

8.   As I indicated at  the  hearing  I  have  concluded  that  the  judge's
    adverse credibility reasoning did involve an error of law, and that, as
    predicted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor,  the  adverse  credibility
    findings had to be set aside.

9.   I accept the submission made on the appellant's behalf  that  both  his
    age at the date of the  screening  interview,  and  the  unusual  delay
    between that interview and the asylum interview, were relevant  factors
    which needed to be taken into account  in  assessing  his  credibility.
    This was particularly the case where weight  was  placed  on  what  was
    regarded as a change of account between the screening interview and the
    asylum interview.  Without going into the issue of whether  it  was  in
    fact justified to describe it as a change of account  it  would  still,
    even if it had been, have been necessary to  consider  the  appellant's
    age at the date of the screening interview in assessing what weight  to
    place on those answers, quite apart  from  the  normal  concerns  about
    placing weight on screening interview answers,  where  such  interviews
    are not designed to elicit the basis of an asylum claim in any  detail.



10.  I have considered whether paragraphs 15 to 17 of the  judge's  decision
    could be regarded as standing alone, such that the  error  above  would
    not be material.  On this point I accept the submissions put forward by
    Ms Benfield, to the  effect  that  the  adverse  credibility  reasoning
    cannot be divided in this way.  It is  unclear  whether  the  chain  of
    reasoning that starts at paragraph 14 would have been  altered  if  the
    correct approach to the screening interview had been taken.   The  need
    for a holistic  assessment  taking  account  of  all  of  the  evidence
    presented, in the context of available background evidence,  points  to
    the conclusion that the significant point about  the  appellant's  age,
    and the gap between the interviews, cannot be safely separated from the
    rest of the credibility reasoning.

11.  For these reasons my decision is that the judge did  err  in  law,  and
    that the adverse credibility findings as a whole fall to be set  aside.



12.  The parties both agreed that the appropriate course was a  remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings preserved.  The assessment of
    risk on return was obviously closely related to the adverse credibility
    findings, as was that of Article 8.  It was  not  suggested  by  either
    side that this was an appropriate appeal for a remaking to be conducted
    in the Upper Tribunal because  of  the  extent  of  evidence  and  fact
    finding required.  Within the terms  of  the  Practice  Statement  this
    therefore fell within one of the exceptions to  the  normal  course  of
    remakings taking place within the Upper Tribunal.

13.  Neither side mentioned the issue of anonymity, but given the nature  of
    the appeal I have decided that it is appropriate for the matter  to  be
    anonymised, as it was at case  creation.   No  fee  was  paid  for  the
    appeal, and there is therefore no question of any fee award.

Notice of Decision

14.  The decision dismissing the appeal is set  aside,  on  the  basis  that
    there was a material error of law in the adverse credibility  reasoning
    process.

15.  The appeal is remitted for a fresh hearing at the First-tier  Tribunal,
    with no findings preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

