
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02328/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 5th September 2016               |On: 29 September 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                             Hussain Ahmed Hamad
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
& Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born on the 1st January 1979.

    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2007 and claimed asylum.
    That claim was rejected and he  became  'appeal  rights  exhausted'.  A
    subsequent set of representations was accepted  by  the  Respondent  to
    constitute a fresh  claim  for  asylum  albeit  that  they  were  again
    rejected. It was the Appellant's appeal against that refusal which  led
    to these proceedings.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nicol) did not accept that the Appellant
    faced a well-founded fear of persecution in Iraq today, for any of  the
    reasons advanced on his behalf.  The appeal was therefore dismissed, by
    way of decision promulgated on the 12th May 2015.

 4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and on the 24th May 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  made  findings  on
    whether the decision of Judge Nichol contained material errors of  law.
    In brief summary Judge Coker rejected all of the Appellant's grounds of
    appeal bar one. She accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had not given
    adequate consideration to  the  Appellant's  personal  profile  in  its
    assessment of risk of return. He is a Sunni Kurd from Kirkuk. Kirkuk is
    a "contested area" and following the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) it would have to  be
    accepted that there pertains a current risk of indiscriminate  harm  to
    him as a result of internal armed conflict in that area. Article  15(c)
    of the Qualification Directive being  engaged  by  possible  return  to
    Kirkuk the question was whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to be returned to Baghdad, the place of proposed  return.  It
    was the Respondent's case that if the Appellant  could  not  return  to
    Kirkuk he could relocate to the  city.   Judge  Coker  found  that  the
    Tribunal had failed to consider the  Appellant's  personal  profile  in
    addressing that question. This was an error of law. She  directed  that
    the decision in the appeal would need to be re-made to that extent.  To
    this end the matter has now been re-listed before me[1].

    The Appellant

 5. The Appellant's profile, agreed between the parties, is as follows:

       . Speaks Sorani, little Arabic

       . Sunni Kurd

       . No evidence to indicate that he has any family  or  connections  to
         Baghdad

       . Two sisters believed to be in Kirkuk, no contact  with  them  since
         2007

       . Parents deceased

       . Unmarried

       . Healthy

       . Male

       . Aged 39

       . Undocumented (no passport, current or expired,  no  other  identity
         documents of any kind). All documents taken by agent in 2007

       . Been in UK since November 2007

       . Formerly a member of the Iraqi Army

    The Evidence & Country Guidance

 6. The relevant country guidance is AA. On the issue  of  internal  flight
    the Tribunal summarised its guidance at paragraph 15 of the headnote:

         "In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh  for  P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:

         (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part  C
         above);

         (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely to
         find employment);

         (c) whether P has family members or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
         accommodate him;

         (d) whether P is a lone female  (women  face  greater  difficulties
         than men in finding employment);

         (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or  rent
         accommodation;

         (f) whether P is from a minority community;

         (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind  there
         is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers  are  provided
         with the support generally given to IDPs."

 7. In its assessment  of  point  (a)  the  Tribunal  conducted  a  careful
    analysis of the jurisprudence on the question of documentation.  Having
    done so it found:

         "170.    In the absence of an expired or current Iraqi passport,  a
             person can only be returned to Baghdad using a laissez-passer.
             According to Dr Fatah, either a CSID or INC or a photocopy  of
             a previous Iraqi passport and a police report noting  that  it
             had been lost or stolen is  required  in  order  to  obtain  a
             laissez-passer. If  a  person  does  not  have  one  of  these
             documents  then  they  cannot  obtain  a  laissez-passer   and
             therefore cannot be returned. This has a  significant  bearing
             on what we have  just  said.  If  the  position  is  that  the
             Secretary of State can feasibly remove an Iraqi national, then
             she will be expected to tell the tribunal whether  and  if  so
             what documentation has led the Iraqi authorities to issue  the
             national with the passport or laissez passer (or signal  their
             intention to do so).  The  Tribunal  will  need  to  know,  in
             particular, whether the person concerned has  a  CSID.  It  is
             only where return is feasible  but  the  individual  concerned
             does not have a CSID that the consequences of not  having  one
             come into play."

 8. As to the  practicalities  of  obtaining  a  CSID  the  Tribunal  heard
    evidence from Dr Fatah that it is possible  in  some  circumstances  to
    obtain a card from the embassy in London.  If  that  is  not  possible,
    another option would be to appoint a proxy in Iraq to apply for one for
    you in your home state:

         "177.    In summary, we conclude that it is possible for  an  Iraqi
             national living in  the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID  through  the
             consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in  London,  if  such  a
             person is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or
             the  book  and  page  number  for  their  family  registration
             details. For persons without  such  a  passport,  or  who  are
             unable to produce the relevant family registration details,  a
             power of attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq  who  can
             thereafter undertake the process of  obtaining  the  CSID  for
             such person from the Civil Status Affairs Office in their home
             governorate.  For  reasons  identified  in  the  section  that
             follows below, at the present time the process of obtaining  a
             CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the person
             wishing to obtain the CSID is from an area where Article 15(c)
             serious harm is occurring."

 9. The reasons for those latter difficulties are explained  at  paragraphs
    179-183:

         "179.    Dr Fatah in his most  recent  report  indicates  that  the
             starting position  is  that  in  order  to  obtain  a  new  or
             replacement CSID  a  person  usually  had  to  return  to  the
             governorate where his or her birth was  registered  and  where
             the primary family registration book is held i.e. in the local
             population registration/civil status office.  He  went  on  to
             explain that there are 300 population registration offices  in
             Iraq which are responsible to a central Civil  Status  Affairs
             Directorate.

         180. Births are registered manually in volumes held at these  local
             population  registration  offices  and   these   offices   are
             responsible for checking the manual register before issuing  a
             CSID. They also send information on to the central  population
             registry in Baghdad. USAID Iraq told Dr Fatah that the central
             population registry/central archive is not a  searchable  data
             base. Instead a  "search  of  the  central  archive  needs  an
             officer to  open  doors  (literally  or  metaphorically).  The
             search must be done by a government official - members of  the
             public cannot search through the "central  archive".  The  key
             issue is whether the official is willing to do the search - or
             can be made willing. In addition, the individual would need to
             know his volume and page numbers or the official would have to
             trawl through a given governorate's entire archive of  back-up
             files. As a consequence, if an individual does  not  have  his
             volume and page number his only option will  be  to  locate  a
             close family member with the same details  and  hope  that  an
             official will assist him.

         181. There is also some doubt as to whether a CSID could be  handed
             over to anyone but the individual whose details it  contained,
             even if an  individual  did  hold  a  power  of  attorney.  In
             addition, if the person is outside  Iraq  the  details  of  an
             individual's CSID would have to be sent to him  and  he  would
             have to ask the Iraqi Embassy to send any  application  for  a
             CSID through the Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs  to  Iraq.  The
             Ministry of the Interior would then need to issue the CSID and
             send it to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who would  send  it
             back to the Iraqi Embassy in London.

         182. UNHCR-Iraq told Dr Fatah that there  is  no  database  or  any
             electronic system in place to issue CSIDs. Scanned  copies  of
             local paper records are archived in the General Directorate of
             Civil  Status  Affairs  in  Baghdad.  Having   discussed   the
             situation with Landinfo Dr Fatah concluded  that  registration
             is undertaken in the local area  and  that  the  Civil  Status
             Affairs Directorate or central population registry in  Baghdad
             does not generally issue CSIDs.

         183. This is confirmed to some extent by the fact  that  the  Iraqi
             government has set up two  Alternative  Civil  Status  Affairs
             Offices to issue CSIDs to IDPs from  governorates  which  have
             been captured by ISIL. One office has been set up in Najaf  to
             issue copies of CSIDs archived from Mosul, and another  office
             has been set up  in  Baghdad  to  issue  copies  of  CSIDs  to
             individuals from Anbar and Salahaddin. These offices are  only
             authorised to issue CSIDs to IDPs from these governorates.

         184. Dr Fatah was further informed by a  source  at  the  Norwegian
             Refugee Council that the Ministry of the Interior had  refused
             to open up more Alternative Civil Status Affairs offices so as
             to   protect   civil   records   from   fraud,   to    protect
             confidentiality and to avoid  duplication,  as  there  was  no
             database or electronic system.

         185. UNHCR-Iraq provides some  support  to  those  without  a  CSID
             through its Protection, Assistance and Re-integration  Centres
             ("PARC"), but such support is limited  to  providing  guidance
             and legal advice on required procedures and  documents  needed
             to obtain a CSID. It did not issue these  or  other  documents
             itself. It also confirmed that Harikar  and  Qandil  [8]  have
             indicated that they do not issue CSIDs. The Norwegian  Refugee
             Council told Dr Fatah that there is a  network  of  legal  aid
             clinics in Iraq, which is  funded  as  part  of  USAID's  Iraq
             Access to Justice Programme. They also provide  legal  advice,
             but do not issue CSIDs.

         186. Drawing all  of  this  together  we  conclude  that  an  Iraqi
             national should as a general matter be able to obtain  a  CSID
             from  the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office   for   their   home
             Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport  (whether  current  or
             expired), if they have  one.  If  they  do  not  have  such  a
             passport, their ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether
             they know the page and volume number of the book holding their
             information (and that of their family members). Their  ability
             to persuade the officials that they are the  person  named  on
             the relevant page is likely to depend  on  whether  they  have
             family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
             for them.

         187. An Iraqi national's ability to obtain a CSID is likely  to  be
             severely hampered if they are unable to go to the Civil Status
             Affairs Office of their home Governorate because it is  in  an
             area where Article 15(c)  serious  harm  is  occurring.  As  a
             result of the violence, alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,
             Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in  Baghdad  and
             Kerbala. The evidence does not demonstrate that  the  "Central
             Archive", which exists in Baghdad,  is  in  practice  able  to
             provide CSIDs to those in need of them. There is,  however,  a
             National Status Court in Baghdad,  to  which  a  person  could
             apply  for  formal  recognition  of  identity.   The   precise
             operation of this court is, however, unclear."

10. In respect of access  to  accommodation  the  Tribunal  had  regard  to
    figures produced by the International Organisation for Migration. These
    showed that the majority -60%- of internally displaced  persons  (IDPs)
    drawn to Baghdad were hosted by family members already  established  in
    the city.   Figures released in April 2015 show that over 167,000  IDPs
    were renting in the city. The Tribunal conclude from this [at 198] that
    this would tend to indicate that  some  people  are  managing  to  earn
    enough money to pay rent. In terms of  employment  prospects,  men  are
    generally better placed than women, and political or family connections
    are important in gaining employment, particularly in the public sector,
    the government being the largest employer in the  country  [190].   The
    Tribunal concludes:

         "202.    It is clear  from  the  evidence  before  us  that  Arabic
             speaking males with family connections to Baghdad and  a  CSID
             are in the strongest position. At the other end of the  scale,
             those with no family  connections  in  Baghdad  who  are  from
             minority communities and who have no CSID are  least  able  to
             provide  for  themselves.  There   are   a   wide   range   of
             circumstances  falling  between  these  two  extremes.   Those
             without family connections are more vulnerable than those with
             such connections. Women are more vulnerable  than  men.  Those
             who do not speak Arabic are less likely to be able  to  obtain
             employment. Those from minority communities are less likely to
             be able to access community support than those from the  Sunni
             and Shi'a communities.

         203. On the evidence before us, whilst we accept that for a  person
             who has no family or other support in  Baghdad  and  who  also
             does not have a CSID, and cannot obtain  one  reasonably  soon
             after arrival, it would be unreasonable and  unduly  harsh  to
             relocate to Baghdad, for the  generality  of  Iraqis,  despite
             difficulties that  may  be  experienced  in  respect  of  such
             matters such as access to health care, education and jobs,  we
             consider  that  relocation  to  Baghdad  is   safe   and   not
             unreasonable or unduly harsh - one reason being that a  person
             can only be returned to Baghdad if such person has  a  current
             or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez-passer."

11. In addition to the findings in AA, I was asked to consider  the  latest
    Country Information and Guidance issued by the  Respondent,  in  August
    2016: Iraq: Return/Internal relocation (Version  3.0  August  2016).  I
    have done so, and find nothing therein is in contradiction to the  2015
    findings made in AA. In particular it is accepted that  a  person  from
    Kirkuk would find it difficult to access his local government office in
    order to get an identity card that would enable him to access services.

    My Findings

12. The Appellant does not have a current or expired  Iraqi  passport.  Nor
    does he have a CSID.  Nor can he produce  a  police  report  confirming
    that any of these documents have been lost or stolen. It has  been  his
    evidence, since he claimed asylum in 2007, that  all  of  his  identity
    documents were taken by the agent  who  arranged  his  illegal  passage
    across Europe. He has not married and so has no marriage certificate. I
    am satisfied that in those  circumstances,  having  had  regard  to  Dr
    Fatah's accepted evidence in AA, that it will not be possible  for  the
    Appellant to obtain a replacement CSID from the embassy  in  London.  I
    have considered whether it would be possible for him to appoint a proxy
    in Iraq who would be able to go to the office in  Kirkuk  and  make  an
    application for him there. I consider that option  to  have  only  slim
    chances of success. The Appellant has no living relatives in Iraq apart
    from possibly his sisters, but he has had no contact  with  them  since
    2007. He has not been to the country himself for 9 years. Even if there
    was a friend whom he could contact, it seems  extremely  unlikely  that
    such a friend would agree to enter the  contested  area  of  Kirkuk  in
    order to make the application. As the Tribunal in  AA  make  clear,  it
    would not be possible for the Appellant  to  make  his  application  in
    Baghdad. I therefore start from the premise that the Appellant will not
    have a CSID upon return to Baghdad.  This  is  an  important  document,
    enabling the holder to access a variety of services. This would be  the
    Appellant's first difficulty.

13. Add to this the fact that the Appellant is not from Baghdad. He has  no
    connections there.  I see from his asylum interview that many years ago
    he spent three years in an army camp just outside Baghdad, but  on  his
    evidence they were rarely allowed off base to venture into the city. He
    has hardly even visited it. He speaks only very basic Arabic and  avers
    that he could not hold a conversation in that language. Although  is  a
    healthy and relatively young man, I bear in mind what the  Tribunal  in
    AA  found  in  respect  of  employment  prospects  for  IDPs.  With  no
    connections, no identity documents  and  poor  language  skills  it  is
    difficult to see how the Appellant would manage to obtain employment of
    a sufficiently well paid or regular nature  to  enable  him  to  secure
    accommodation.

14. On those facts the Appellant falls at the wrong  end  of  the  spectrum
    posited in AA.    The only matters in his favour are his gender and the
    fact that he is not of minority faith. As the  country  guidance  makes
    clear, those  factors  are  not  in  themselves  sufficient  safeguards
    against the hardships that the Appellant would likely face in  Baghdad.
    I find that he would not be able to live anything like a 'normal'  life
    in Baghdad, and that it would be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate
    there. It follows that the  appeal  must  be  allowed  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

    Decisions

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    such that it was set aside to the limited extent  identified  by  Judge
    Coker in her error of law decision.

16. I remake the decision as follows:

         The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

         The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

         The Appellant is entitled to humanitarian  protection  because  his
         removal  would  lead  to  a  breach  of  Article   15(c)   of   the
         Qualification Directive. The appeal is allowed on that basis.

17. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         26th September 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Judge Coker was not available to re-make the decision in the appeal.
The matter was therefore transferred to me by Order of Judge Dawson on the
21st June 2016.

