
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/02296/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On November 23, 2015                 |On November 26, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                     I K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by GMAU
Respondent  Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  The  appellant  claimed  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on October 1, 2008. He applied
    for  asylum  on  October  2,  2008  but  the  respondent  refused   his
    application  on  December  10,  2008.   Following  an   appeal   before
    Immigration Judge Sykes on January 28, 2009 his appeal was refused.

 2. The appellant made  further  representations  and  was  interviewed  on
    February 27, 2014 but the respondent refused this application on  March
    25, 2014 and took a decision on March 28, 2014  to  remove  him  as  an
    illegal entrant.

 3. On April 11, 2014 the appellant appealed under  section  82(i)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Birrell on  May
    9, 2014 and in a decision promulgated on May 15, 2014 she dismissed the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on June 9, 2014  and  permission
    to appeal was initially refused by Designated Judge of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal McCarthy on June 23, 2014. Permission to appeal was renewed to
    the Upper Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission
    to appeal primarily on the Article 15c ground.

 6. The matter came before me on September 2, 2015 and on that  occasion  I
    gave permission to appeal on  the  basis  the  Tribunal's  approach  to
    Article 15c did not have  regard  to  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
    appellant's representatives.

 7. I adjourned the matter because appeals under Article 15c are  by  their
    very nature "fluid" in that the circumstances can change and there  was
    a pending country guidance case on Iraq.

 8. The matter came back before me on the above date.

 9. I have granted anonymity in this case under Rule  14  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Brown referred me to the refusal letter and the recent  decision  of
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC). He referred  me  to
    paragraphs [150] and [170]. The respondent accepted the  appellant  was
    an Iraqi from Kirkuk but did not accept his ID document as genuine.  In
    light of the Tribunal's findings in AA it  would  not  be  possible  to
    return the appellant. Whilst it was possibly feasible  for  him  to  be
    returned to Baghdad he had no documents as the respondent rejected  the
    ones he had produced. He could not be returned to  Kirkuk  because  the
    Tribunal accepted no-one could be returned there and it was  agreed  he
    could not be returned to what was the KRG. The only place  was  Baghdad
    and the Tribunal made clear at paragraph [170]-

         "In the absence of an expired or current Iraqi passport,  a  person
         can only be returned to Baghdad using a  laissez-passer.  According
         to Dr Fatah, either a CSID or INC or  a  photocopy  of  a  previous
         Iraqi passport and a police report noting that it had been lost  or
         stolen is required in order to obtain a laissez-passer. If a person
         does not have one of these documents  then  they  cannot  obtain  a
         laissez-passer  and  therefore  cannot  be  returned.  This  has  a
         significant bearing on what we have just said. If the  position  is
         that the Secretary of State can feasibly remove an Iraqi  national,
         then she will be expected to tell the tribunal whether  and  if  so
         what documentation has led  the  Iraqi  authorities  to  issue  the
         national with the passport  or  laissez  passer  (or  signal  their
         intention to do so). The Tribunal will need to know, in particular,
         whether the person concerned has a CSID. It is only where return is
         feasible but the individual concerned does not have a CSID that the
         consequences of not having one come into play."

11. Mr Brown invited me to allow the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds
    on the basis he had real fear of persecution from ISIS in Kirkuk and he
    was now unable to relocate.

12. Mr Harrison submitted that returning the appellant was feasible but the
    real issue was the absence of any documents. Mr  Harrison  acknowledged
    he could not go behind the recent country guidance an in light  of  the
    respondent's finding that his documents were not accepted then he could
    not argue that he would be able to obtain any replacement documents  to
    enable him to be  returned.  He  reluctantly  agreed  with  Mr  Brown's
    submissions.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING

13. I had adjourned this matter on  the  basis  there  was  evidence  of  a
    changed position before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  accepted  the
    argument that the documents had not been considered.  I  had  adjourned
    the appeal for further evidence and the decision of  AA  had  not  been
    promulgated.

14. Based on the facts as  found  and  the  respondent's  position  on  the
    documents I agree with Mr Brown's submission that this appellant  would
    be returned without documents-something the Tribunal in AA  made  clear
    the consequences of this would affect the feasibility of return.

15. In light of the earlier findings and the current position I  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on both refugee and Article 3 grounds.

    DECISION

16. There was a material error and I set aside the earlier decision.

17. I allow the appellant's appeal on refugee grounds and under  Article  3
    ECHR.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as no fee was paid.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

