
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02953/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 6 May 2015                                |On 5 June 2015                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Neale, instructed by Virgo Consultancy Services
Limited

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).





Introduction

 2. This is a resumed hearing of the Secretary of State's appeal against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  NJ  Osborne)  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under  Art  8
    of  the  ECHR  against  a  decision  that  the  automatic   deportation
    provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

 3. Following a hearing on 11 March 2015, in a decision dated 24 March 2015
    I upheld Judge Osborne's decision to allow the appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.  However, I concluded that his  decision  to  allow
    the appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law.   I  set
    aside that decision and on 6 May 2015 the appeal was relisted before me
    in order to remake the decision in respect of Art 8 alone.

 4. For convenience, I will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 5. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on  14  April  1965.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 November  2000  and  was  granted
    leave to enter for a period of six months as a visitor with leave valid
    until 3 May 2001.  The appellant, thereafter, overstayed.  He  began  a
    relationship with a British citizen "KH" and on 23 April  2004,  their
    son "M" was born.

 6. On 7 September 2004, the  appellant  was  served  with  notice  of  his
    liability to be administratively  removed  as  an  overstayer.   On  16
    September 2004 he was served with notice IS151A Part  2  and  reporting
    restrictions were imposed.  On 21 July 2005 the appellant was  recorded
    as an absconder as he was in breach of his reporting conditions.

 7.  On  24  March  2006  the  appellant  made  a  human  rights  claim  on
    compassionate grounds based upon his family life with his partner.   On
    26 September 2009 the appellant was granted discretionary  leave  until
    26 September 2012 under Art 8.  The basis of that grant was that he had
    custody of his son, M.

 8. The appellant's relationship with KH broke down and in 2007 he formed a
    new relationship with a British citizen, "SL" and their child, "T"  was
    born on 30 January 2010.  Both the  appellant's  children  are  British
    citizens.

 9. On 14 October 2011, the appellant was convicted at  the  Bristol  Crown
    Court on two counts of  supplying  class  A  controlled  drugs,  namely
    heroin and was sentenced  to  a  total  of  five  years'  imprisonment,
    together with a three year Anti-Social Behaviour Order.

10. On 1 October 2013, the appellant claimed asylum on the  basis  that  he
    was a member of a Jamaican gang known  as  the  "Shower  Posse"  before
    coming to the UK.  He claimed that before leaving Jamaica  in  2000  he
    had attempted to leave the "Shower Posse" and, as a  result,  had  been
    subjected on a number of occasions to violence by gang members who  had
    accused him of being a police informer and threatened  him  with  death
    unless he returned to the gang.  He claimed that he had been beaten up,
    cut with knives and had suffered a gunshot wound to his lower leg.   He
    claimed that he had briefly hidden in Jamaica before coming to  the  UK
    in November 2000.

11. In addition, he relied upon  his  relationship  with  his  two  British
    citizen children although he was  no  longer  in  a  relationship  with
    either of their mothers and  he  claimed  that  his  deportation  would
    breach Art 8 because of the impact  upon  his  relationships  with  the
    children.

12. On 1 May 2014, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and to grant leave under Art 8  of  the
    ECHR.

The Appeal

13. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 26 September 2014, Judge Osborne allowed the  appellant's  appeal
    on humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 8 of  the  ECHR.   The
    appellant's asylum claim was  not  pursued.   The  judge  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence that he had been involved with the "Shower  Posse"
    and he would be at risk  from  them  on  return.   In  addition,  Judge
    Osborne allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 on the basis of  the
    interference with his family life  with  his  two  children  M  and  T,
    concluding that the appellant's deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh"
    upon them.

14. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted, permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  In my decision sent on 24  March  2015,  I  upheld
    Judge Osborne's decision to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds but set aside his decision under Art 8.   The  basis  for  that
    latter decision was that the judge, although  he  had  found  that  the
    impact upon the appellant's children would be "unduly  harsh",  he  had
    failed to consider that there were "very compelling  circumstances"  as
    required by s.117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (and para 398 of the Immigration Rules).

The Hearing

15. At the hearing, the appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Neale  and  the
    respondent by Mr Richards.

16. Without objection from Mr Richards,  I  admitted  in  evidence  witness
    statements from the appellant, M and KH all of whom gave oral  evidence
    before me.  The only issue before me concerned the application  of  Art
    8.  Both representatives acknowledged that the Art  8  issue  would  be
    academic if my decision  to  uphold  Judge  Osborne's  finding  in  the
    appellant's favour  on  humanitarian  protection  was  not  challenged.
    Nevertheless, given the possibility  of  that  decision  being  further
    challenged by the Secretary of State,  it  was  agreed  that  I  should
    decide the Art 8 issue on the hypothetical premise that  the  appellant
    had failed to establish that he was at risk on return to Jamaica.

17. It was common ground between the  parties  that  the  central  issue  I
    should decide was that in s.117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002  (the  "NIA  Act  2002")  as  the  appellant  had  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of "at least four years",  namely
    five  years'  imprisonment.   The  issue  was  whether  it   has   been
    established there were "very compelling circumstances, over and  above"
    those in exception 2 set out in s.117C(5) of the  NIA  Act  2002  which
    provides that:

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

18. It was common ground between the parties that Judge Osborne  had  found
    that  exception  2  applied.   The  appellant's  children   were   both
    "qualifying" children as "British citizens" under s.117D(1).   Further,
    it was accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with both children.  Finally, Judge  Osborne  had
    found, and I  had  concluded  lawfully  so,  that  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's deportation on M  and  T  would  be  "unduly  harsh".   The
    position of both Mr  Richards  and  Mr  Neale  was  that  if  s.117C(6)
    applied, then the appellant succeeded in the appeal.  If, on the  other
    hand, it did not apply then the appellant's appeal failed under Art  8.



The Evidence

19. Mr Neale relied upon the evidence of the appellant, M and KH.

20. Dealing first with the appellant, subject to a correction to  his  date
    of birth in para  1  of  his  statement,  the  appellant  adopted  that
    statement.

21. In that statement,  the  appellant  explained  how  he  had  begun  his
    relationship with KH when he came to the UK.  She is M's mother.  M was
    born on 23 April 2002 and is 12 years old  and  resides  with  KH,  his
    mother.

22. The  appellant's  relationship  with  KH  ended  and  he  began  a  new
    relationship with another British citizen in 2007.  That also ended  in
    late 2011 and during the relationship on 13 January 2010 T, his 5  year
    old daughter was born.  T lives with her mother.

23. The appellant says that he tries to maintain regular contact with  both
    children.  He does not want to affect the children and he  loves  them.
    He states that it is in their best interests for them to grow  up  with
    him in their lives.  He believes that  his  deportation  would  have  a
    serious adverse impact on their development as  he  is  very  close  to
    them.  He says that his primary concern is  for  their  well-being  and
    ensuring that they know they have a father.  He has a  residence  order
    in respect of M.  It would appear that order  was  originally  made  in
    September 2005 and a further order was made on 30 May 2007.

24. In his statement, the  appellant  says  that  he  has  a  very  special
    relationship with his children and he has always been around for  them.
    In relation to M, the  appellant's  evidence  was  that  prior  to  his
    imprisonment he was M's primary carer.  He says that he sees M  once  a
    week at school and every weekend.  He takes him to play football and to
    see his family.  He told me that his deportation would have  an  impact
    on M and his behaviour would deteriorate.  He told me  that  whilst  he
    was in prison, M's behaviour had deteriorated because  he  was  missing
    the appellant.  He told me that the intention of both he and KH is that
    M should live with him.  M had reached an age when he needed his father
    around when he was in his teens.  The appellant also told  me  that  he
    was accessing support from "Mentor Me" which provided him support every
    week and he had, in fact, been accompanied to the Tribunal today.   The
    appellant said that his physical health was  not  good.   He  had  high
    blood pressure, heart problem, stomach ulcer and his  sight  was  going
    also.  He told me he had an appointment at the eye hospital later  this
    month.  He had also had a mini stroke whilst in prison.

25. He told me that the impact on both M and T would be hurtful if he  were
    deported.

26. In cross-examination he was asked how M's  behaviour  had  deteriorated
    when he was in prison and the appellant said he had not  been  behaving
    in class, he was disturbing class and was rude to the teachers.

27. The second witness who gave evidence was M, the appellant's 12 year old
    son.  Having made proper adjustment to the court, M gave  his  evidence
    clearly and helpfully.  He adopted his  short  witness  statement.   In
    that statement he said that he wanted his father  to  live  in  the  UK
    "with me and my mum".  He says that he  does  not  understand  why  his
    father cannot remain in the UK.  He does not want to  live  in  Jamaica
    and he belongs in the UK.  His statement says that as  "a  young  male"
    the presence of his father in his life is very important.

28. In his oral evidence, M told me that he was  really  sad  and  had  not
    behaved in school when his father was in prison.  Since his father  has
    been out of prison, his father has come to see him  every  weekend  and
    takes him out for something to eat.  He said that he was doing "alright
    now" in school.

29. There was no cross-examination.

30. The third witness was KH, the appellant's former partner and mother  of
    M.  She also adopted her witness statement.

31. In that statement she says that it has been very  difficult  to  settle
    without knowing the outcome of the appellant's immigration  status  and
    it has been even more unsettling for their  son.   She  said  that  the
    appellant was a "good father" and that his separation from M, whilst he
    was detained, has "in particular had an impact on our son's behaviour".
     She said that she could never allow the appellant to take M to Jamaica
    because of the crime rate and danger to children in that country.   She
    did not wish her son to be exposed to that environment  and  she  would
    not take her son out of his current  school  setting.   She  says  that
    since the appellant's release from prison, M's behaviour has "very much
    settled" and he has returned to "mainstream school, after being sent to
    a referral unit".  She asks  that  the  appellant's  relationship  with
    their son be allowed to develop.

32. In her oral evidence, she said that the appellant  had  been  M's  main
    carer since birth.  Whilst the appellant was in prison, M's school work
    had deteriorated but since the appellant had come out of prison it  was
    much better.  She said that M was at a difficult age, in his teens, and
    he needed a father.  She said that she had agreed  with  the  appellant
    that he could have full custody of M because M needs  to  be  with  his
    father right now.  When asked what impact the  appellant's  deportation
    would have on M, she said she would not like to say but it would be not
    good.  She did not want M to go there.  It was dangerous and she  would
    not be financially able to afford for M to go over there.  There  would
    also be impact she said on her.  It would  be  devastating.   She  also
    said that it would affect T whom she saw on some weekends  when  T  was
    with the appellant.

33. There was no cross-examination.

Deportation and Art 8

34. The  appellant  is  a  "foreign  criminal"  subject  to  the  automatic
    deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007.  Under s.32, he is a
    "foreign criminal" because he is not a British citizen and he has  been
    convicted of an offence  in  the  UK  and  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least twelve  months,  namely  five  years  for  the
    supply of class A controlled drugs on 14 October 2011.

35. In this resumed hearing, the appellant relies upon Art  8  as  bringing
    him within the exception to deportation under s.33(2)(a).   Deportation
    and Art 8 is dealt with in Part 13 of the Immigration Rules.   For  the
    purposes of this appeal, the relevant provisions are in paras  398  and
    399.

36. The proper structural approach to the Rules and Part 5A of the NIA  Act
    2002 in applying Art 8 in a deportation context is  set  out  in  Chege
    (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 165 (IAC) at [33]:

         "It follows that the correct approach, where  an  appeal  on  human
         rights grounds has been brought in seeking to  resist  deportation,
         is to consider

         a.   is the appellant a foreign criminal as defined  by  s117D  (2)
             (a), (b) or (c);

         b.   if so, does he fall  within  paragraph  399  or  399A  of  the
             Immigration Rules;

         c.   if not are there very compelling circumstances over and  above
             those  falling  within  399  and  399A   relied   upon,   such
             identification to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness  of  the
             criminality and taking into account the  factors  set  out  in
             s117B.

         The task of the judge is to assess the competing interests  and  to
         determine whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
         for private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  or
         whether   the   public   interest    arguments    should    prevail
         notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8."





37. Turning to the Rules, so far as relevant, para 398 provides as follows:



         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the UK's obligations under Art 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
         and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interests because they have been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         .... the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

38. Paragraph 399 provides, so far as relevant, as follows:

         "This paragraph applies where paras 398(b) or (c) applies if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British citizen; ...; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person  who  is  to  be  deported;
                      ...".

39. In this appeal, para 399(a) does not apply as it  is  only  engaged  in
    circumstances where para  398(b)  or  (c)  applies,  namely  where  the
    individual has been convicted of an  offence  for  which  he  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at
    least twelve months (para 398(b)) or  the  individual's  offending  has
    caused serious harm  or  he  is  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
    particular disregard for the law (para 398(c)).

40. The relevance of setting out para 399(a)  is  that  under  para  398  -
    because the appellant has been convicted of an offence for which he has
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four years - the
    public interest will only be outweighed by other  factors  where  there
    are "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above"  those  in  para
    399(a).

41. The "very compelling  circumstances"  rubric  of  para  398,  like  its
    predecessor requiring "exceptional circumstances", enshrines within the
    "complete code" of paras 398 et seq in deportation cases  the  approach
    to be applied in determining whether the public interest  reflected  in
    an individual's offending is outweighed by other factors.

42. In Chege, the UT stated at [24] that:

         "The purpose of the phrase "very compelling circumstances over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A"  ensures  that  a
         decision taken by the Secretary of State (and  the  Tribunal)  does
         not result in a breach of the UK's obligations under the ECHR. This
         reflects s117A NIAA 2002, which requires particular  regard  to  be
         had to the criteria in s117B and s117C in determining  the  "public
         interest question". It is  essential  that  particular  regard  and
         consideration is had to them  in  the  overall  assessment  of  the
         public interest in deportation."

    At [28], the UT recognised that:

         "Those individuals who do not come within  paragraph  399  or  399A
         will need to establish very compelling circumstances over and above
         those described in paragraphs 399 and  399A  because  nothing  else
         will  be  weighty  enough  to  outweigh  the  public  interest   in
         deportation."

    At [29] the UT noted that:

         "It is at this stage that everything relevant is considered as  the
         decision maker  looks  at  the  circumstances  not  falling  within
         paragraphs 399 and 399A to see whether  they  outweigh  the  public
         interest in deportation. That is the exercise of striking a balance
         between the competing interests in play, an exercise to be  carried
         out through the lens of  the  rules,  as  Sales  LJ  expressed  it,
         against the backdrop of s117A to s117D of the 2002 Act so that  the
         deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest and  the
         more serious the offence the greater  is  the  public  interest  in
         deportation."

43. At [30] the UT noted that:

         "Thus the more  serious  or  persistent  the  offending,  the  more
         compelling  the  circumstances  would  have  to  be.  This  is  the
         consequence of the interplay between  s117A(3)  NIAA2002,  s117C(2)
         NIAA2002, and paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.  To  construe
         the Rules in any other way would be to subvert s117A(3) and prevent
         proper assessment of the UK's obligations under Article 8."

44.  It  is,  as  the  UT  stated  in  Chege,  at  the  "very   compelling"
    circumstances stage of the examination of an individual's  claim  under
    Art 8 that the factors now statutorily set out in Part 5A  of  the  NIA
    Act 2002 must also be taken into account.  Section 117A states that  in
    determining the "public interest question" under Art 8.2,  a  court  or
    tribunal:

         "Must (in particular) have regard -

         (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in s.117B, and

         (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to
             the considerations listed in s.117C."

45. Section 117B provides as follows:

         "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

46. Section 117B is applicable in all cases.

47.  Section  117C  sets  out  a  number  of  "additional   considerations"
    applicable  to  cases  involving  "foreign  criminals"  as  defined  in
    s.117D(2).  That provides as follows:

         "Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
         criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

48. Both Mr Neale and Mr Richards focused exclusively upon  s.117C(6).   Mr
    Neale  submitted  that  the  appellant's   circumstances   were   "very
    compelling" over and above those described in Exception 2 in  s.117C(5)
    and Mr Richards submitted they were not.

49. It is clear that in  Chege  the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  that  the
    phraseology of the Rules (and s.117C(6)) introduced from 28  July  2014
    was intended to identify a more onerous  test  to  assess  the  factors
    which could outweigh the public interest than the previous  phraseology
    of "exceptional circumstances" (see [23]).

50. At [25] the UT in Chege commented on the phraseology now in  the  Rules
    (and s.117C(6)) as follows:

         "They can only be circumstances, which are sufficiently  compelling
         to outweigh the public interest  in  deportation  and  render  such
         deportation a breach of Art 8. The present Rules set out particular
         aspects that  must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  weighing  of
         proportionality;   they   allow   for   consideration   of    other
         circumstances that may not fall within  that  rubric  but,  in  the
         language  of  the  Rules,  those  circumstances   "must   be   very
         compelling". The purpose of 398 is to recognise circumstances  that
         are sufficiently compelling to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         deportation but do not fall within 399 and 399A.  It is for reasons
         that the Rules in the deportation scheme constitute a complete code
         in relation to Art 8 claims."

51. At [26] the UT glossed the words as follows:

         ""Compelling" as an adjective has the meaning of having a  powerful
         and irresistible effect; convincing."

52. The UT continued:

         "The annexing of the word "very" indicates the very high  threshold
         that has to be passed to meet the requirements of the Rules."

53. I agree with, and gratefully adopt, what was said by the UT  in  Chege.
    That approach is to be adopted  in  assessing  proportionality  at  the
    fifth stage of the well-known Razgar tests.

54. The five questions set out by Lord Bingham of Cornhill at [17]  ([2004]
    UKHL 27) are as follows:

      1. Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or family life?

      2. If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of Art 8?

      3. If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

      4. If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

      5. If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         aim sought to be achieved?

55. At [20] Lord Bingham pointed out that the  answering  of  question  (5)
    must:

         "always involve the striking of a fair balance between  the  rights
         of the individual and the  interests  of  the  community  which  is
         inherent in the whole of the Convention."

56. It is well established that the public interest  is  reflected  in  the
    three facets of:  seriousness  of  the  offence,  deterrence  of  other
    foreign criminals and society's abhorrence at the offending (see, e.g.,
    N (Kenya) v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 and OH  (Serbia)  v  SSHD  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 694.

57. It is also accepted that the public interest in  deportation  cases  is
    stronger than in other cases such as administrative removals (see  e.g,
    JO (Uganda) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10 and KB (Trinidad  and  Tobago)  v
    SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  11).   A  reality  only  strengthened  by  the
    introduction of the legislative scheme  for  automatic  deportation  of
    'foreign criminals' (see, e.g., SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550
    and LC (China) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  1310).   As  the  UT  in  Chege
    pointed out, the wording of both para 398 of the Rules and s.117C(6) in
    particular makes plain the considerable  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    public interest where the foreign criminal  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least four years.

58. As I have said, both  Mr  Neale  and  Mr  Richards  accepted  that  the
    appellant's case turned simply on whether para  398  and  its  mirrored
    wording in s.117C(6) was satisfied or not.

59. In applying those provisions, the children's "best interests"  must  be
    taken into account.  Those  interests  are  a  "primary  consideration"
    although they need not  be  determinative  and  can  be  outweighed  by
    sufficiently weighty other considerations of the public  interest  (see
    ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, especially  [33];  Zoumbas  v  SSHD
    [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874).

Findings

60. Judge Osborne found that the appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with both M and T.  I accept that finding which is clearly
    supported by all the evidence before me.  I accept, therefore, that the
    appellant has family life with both his  children.   His  relationships
    with his ex-partners have broken down and there is  clearly  no  family
    life between them.

61. The clear evidence of KH was that she would not allow M  to  live  with
    the appellant in Jamaica and, indeed, there would  be  difficulties  in
    visiting him there, not least because of the financial  burden.   There
    was no direct evidence in relation to T.   However  both  children  are
    young and are British citizens and it would not be  reasonable,  in  my
    judgment, to expect the children to live with the appellant in  Jamaica
    and there would be undoubted difficulties even in visiting him.   Judge
    Osborne, of course, found that it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the
    children to live with the appellant in Jamaica.  I accept that finding.



62. Consequently, I am satisfied that  if  the  appellant  is  deported  to
    Jamaica there will be a  sufficiently  serious  interference  with  his
    family life with M and T to engage Art 8.1.

63. The respondent's decision is clearly in accordance with the law and for
    a legitimate aim, namely the prevention of disorder or  crime  and  for
    the economic well-being of the country.  The crucial issue  is  one  of
    proportionality.

64. In assessing that, I must consider the "best interests" of both  M  and
    T.  Judge Osborne concluded, in effect,  that  it  was  in  their  best
    interests to  retain  contact  with  their  father.   The  evidence  in
    relation to M was particularly apparent.  It was both the  evidence  of
    the appellant, M himself and M's mother, KH that the  appellant  was  a
    positive factor in  M's  life.   There  was  less  direct  evidence  in
    relation to T but I am content to accept that it is also  in  her  best
    interests to retain contact with the appellant.  The appellant  appears
    to be a dutiful father having contact with both M and  T  on  a  weekly
    basis at weekends and there is also evidence from M's school  that  the
    appellant is "supportive" and "is always  willing  to  attend  meetings
    when asked".  The evidence before me, which  was  not  challenged,  was
    that the appellant had been  the  primary  carer  of  M  until  he  was
    imprisoned in 2011.  M has clearly lived with  his  mother  since  that
    time and the appellant only has contact with him although there  is  in
    existence a residence order in the appellant's favour.   I  have  taken
    into account the views of M who gave  his  evidence  clearly  and  with
    confidence before me that he wished to continue his  relationship  with
    the appellant.

65. Judge Osborne found that, taking into account  all  the  circumstances:
    "it would be unduly harsh upon [M] and [T] to deprive them of a  direct
    physical relationship with their natural father the appellant."  I,  of
    course, accept that finding which was properly open to the judge.   The
    issue for me is whether the circumstances are "very  compelling"  "over
    and above" those set out in para 399(a) or in Exception 2 in s.117C(5).



66. I  accept  the  evidence  that  M's  behaviour  deteriorated  when  the
    appellant was in prison.  The cause  of  that  was  said  by  both  the
    appellant and KH to be the appellant's  imprisonment.   No  independent
    supporting evidence was produced for that opinion.  It is, however, the
    case that M's behaviour has  improved  and  he  has  been  returned  to
    mainstream school having been  sent  to  a  referral  unit  previously.
    There is no evidence in relation to that from the school.  The evidence
    of the appellant was that M's behaviour had  deteriorated  by  him  not
    behaving in class, disturbing the class and  being  rude  to  teachers.
    KH's evidence did not add to the severity of the impact  said  to  have
    been upon M.  There is no evidence of the impact upon T who is now aged
    5.

67. The appellant has been convicted of a very  serious  criminal  offence,
    namely the supply of class A drugs and received a substantial  sentence
    of five years' imprisonment.  It is not  his  first  offence  involving
    drugs.  The policy set out in the Immigration Rules  and  legislatively
    in the UK Borders Act 2007 and Part 5A of the NIA  Act  2002  places  a
    great significance and weight on the public interest reflected in  such
    offending.  The Upper Tribunal in Chege stated that "compelling"  meant
    "powerful and irresistible effect; convincing" and that the addition of
    the word "very" meant that a "very high threshold" had to be passed  to
    meet the requirements of the Rules.

68. The appellant cannot succeed unless there are circumstances  "over  and
    above" the fact that his deportation would be "unduly harsh" upon M and
    T.  In my judgment, the evidence does not take the appellant's case  to
    that level of  compulsion.   There  is  an  inevitable  effect  upon  a
    parent/child relationship which is genuine if  a  parent  is  separated
    from  that  child.   That  will  be,  of  course,  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's deportation.  Both M and T are very likely to  be  deprived
    of direct contact with the appellant for some  considerable  period  of
    time.  Certainly, the financial circumstances of KH -  which  were  not
    explored in her evidence - may  make  visits  to  Jamaica  unrealistic.
    That is, of course, providing KH would be prepared  to  take,  or  send
    unaccompanied, M to Jamaica at all.  I was not shown  any  evidence  in
    relation to the circumstances of T's mother.  I am  content  to  assume
    they are no better.  I  accept,  as  did  Judge  Osborne,  that  direct
    physical contact between the appellant and his children is the  "best".
    It is trite to state that  modern  electronic  forms  of  communication
    cannot be a wholly satisfactory substitute.  That said,  of  course,  a
    video contact over the internet through, for example Skype, is a modern
    development  that  adds  a  dimension  to  contact  between   separated
    individuals which did not exist until relatively recently.  That  would
    provide some continuing face-to-face contact between the appellant  and
    M and T.

69. In my judgment, the evidence of M's deterioration  when  the  appellant
    was in prison does not, whether taken alone or in combination with  all
    other factors, amount to "very compelling circumstances" having  regard
    to the appellant's criminality so as to outweigh  the  public  interest
    reflected in his offending.

70. Based upon his relationship with M and T I am not  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of para 398 and s.117C(6) are  met.   Consequently,  as  I
    understood Mr Neale's submission, he accepted that the public  interest
    required the appellant's deportation.

71. That said, I have also considered all  the  appellant's  circumstances,
    including his evidence before me concerning his  health.   No  evidence
    was presented that his health would suffer if he returned to Jamaica or
    that what treatment he  required  would  be  unavailable.   Indeed,  Mr
    Neale's written skeleton argument made no reference to this  aspect  of
    the appellant's case which  emerged  in  his  oral  (but  not  written)
    evidence.

72. Looking at the factors under s.117B, I accept that the appellant speaks
    English and therefore is better able  to  integrate  into  society  and
    potentially be less of a burden on taxpayers.  However, no evidence was
    drawn  to  my  attention  concerning  the  appellant's  ability  to  be
    "financially independent".  As I understood it, at present he is unable
    to work.  Mr Neale did not place any weight in his submissions  on  the
    appellant's private life in the UK.  He has obviously been  in  the  UK
    since 2000 and initially had leave as a visitor and  had  discretionary
    leave between September  2009  and  September  2012.   His  immigration
    status has, at best, always been precarious and so little weight should
    be given to his private life.

73. Turning to s.117C, his deportation is in the public interest and, given
    the very serious nature  of  his  offending,  the  public  interest  is
    substantial and strong.  In my judgment, whether seen through the prism
    of para 398  or  s.117C(6)  and  the  requirement  to  establish  "very
    compelling  circumstances",  the  public  interest  reflected  in   the
    seriousness of the appellant's offending outweighs both M and T's  best
    interests to remain in direct physical contact with the appellant.

74. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant's deportation is a
    proportionate interference with his family life with M and T.

75. I dismiss the appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

76. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    on humanitarian protection grounds did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and that decision stands.

77. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 did involve the making of a material error  of  law.   That
    decision is set aside.

78. I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal  under  Art  8.




Signed


A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed


A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

