
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02671/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd August 2015                   |On 21st September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                     TS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka.   On  4th  March  2013,  the
    Secretary of State gave reasons for a decision to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom and for refusing  his  asylum  claim.   The  appellant's
    appeal against the removal  decision  was  dismissed  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on 17th October 2013.  That decision was  set  aside  by
    the Upper Tribunal in a decision promulgated  on  3rd  June  2014.   In
    order to remake the decision, the appeal was  listed  to  be  heard  at
    Field House on 3rd August 2015.

2.   In setting aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  certain
    favourable findings of fact were preserved, as they were  not  infected
    by the error of law.  Broadly, these  concerned  events  prior  to  the
    appellant's claimed return to Sri Lanka in December 2012.

The appellant's case in summary

3.   The appellant claimed to be at risk on return as a  person  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka, by reason of his support  for
    the LTTE and his work for the  organisation,  and  also  by  reason  of
    family connections and the LTTE activities of family members.

4.   The appellant claimed to come from [-]  in  Sri  Lanka.   He  moved  to
    Colombo in 2000 where he spent several years studying, including taking
    a banking and finance course.  He worked as an internal auditor  for  a
    company in 2005 and thereafter as a trainee management  officer  for  a
    building company called [-].  Although never a member,  he  worked  for
    the LTTE, including work in the 1990s as a branch cashier.

5.   After moving to Colombo in 2000, he was  unable  to  remain  in  hostel
    accommodation within the university.  A friend assisted him but he  did
    not have permission from the police to stay at his  friend's  premises.
    Following a police check in January 2001, the  appellant  was  arrested
    and detained for three days.  The university intervened to confirm  his
    student status and he was then provided with accommodation in a hostel.

6.   In 2004, during the period of  the  ceasefire,  the  appellant  renewed
    links to the LTTE and became a "reporter", having been approached by  a
    person called L whom the appellant knew from his local  area.   He  was
    expected to provide L with information about locations and premises  in
    Colombo, the information being sent by post.  The appellant ceased this
    role in 2005  after  L  moved  to  Batticaloa.   The  appellant's  role
    included finding accommodation for LTTE members in Colombo  who  wanted
    to study and work, which he did on four occasions.  Between January and
    July 2006, the appellant  worked  for  [-],  a  building  company,  and
    assisted the LTTE.  The organisation wanted him to work there  so  that
    he could study their rules and regulations  to  assist  the  LTTE  with
    their own construction organisation.

7.   The appellant claimed that he was detained  on  a  second  occasion  in
    2007.  Having finished his studies, he remained in Colombo,  continuing
    with private tuition.  He was stopped by  the  police  and  as  he  had
    recently renewed  his  identity  card,  he  was  asked  about  previous
    addresses.  As he was afraid, he gave the police an  incorrect  address
    in Vavuniya, but a search of the records revealed that he was from [-].
     The appellant was then arrested and detained  for  nearly  five  days.
    Different officers questioned him as a suspected member of the LTTE and
    he was beaten.  He was released after intervention by his  landlady  at
    the time.  She had a relative who was a high ranking officer.   On  the
    fifth day of detention, the appellant was given his own clothes,  taken
    downstairs to reception where his landlady met  him  and  he  signed  a
    letter confirming his release.  No conditions were imposed upon him.

8.   Although he had no further problems after his  release,  the  appellant
    believed that the authorities still suspected that he was a  member  of
    the LTTE.

9.   The appellant applied for  a  student  visa  to  study  in  the  United
    Kingdom, in August 2008 and arrived here the following month,  on  19th
    September.  He had no problems exiting  the  airport  in  Colombo.   He
    studied in the United Kingdom from September 2008 to  January  2009  at
    Northumbria University, without completing his course.  He lost contact
    with his family temporarily but this was resumed in  August  2009.   He
    obtained further leave  to  remain  as  a  student,  valid  until  31st
    December 2012.  He attended a course in London for three months, before
    ceasing his studies in about June 2010.  He then  worked  part-time  to
    support himself.  His mother's sister also provided some support,  this
    relative living in the United Kingdom.

10.  Although the Secretary  of  State  disbelieved  these  aspects  of  the
    appellant's  case,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made   favourable
    findings in this context and accepted the appellant's  claims  to  have
    been detained  and  ill-treated.   He  noted  the  appellant's  release
    without conditions being imposed and the absence  of  any  difficulties
    suffered by the appellant for a period  of  almost  a  year  before  he
    travelled to the United Kingdom.

11.  A salient  feature  of  the  appellant's  case,  however,  is  that  he
    returned to Sri Lanka on 28th December 2012 and was detained  and  ill-
    treated by the authorities, before returning to the United  Kingdom  in
    January 2013.  The Secretary of State drew attention to the absence  of
    any supporting evidence  regarding  this  journey  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge came  to  the  conclusion  that  this  aspect  had  been
    fabricated.  His assessment of risk, therefore, was made in  the  light
    of the two periods of detention suffered by the appellant prior to  his
    entry to the United Kingdom with leave as a student in 2008.

The account of the appellant's return to Sri Lanka in December 2012

12.  The appellant claimed that he left the United Kingdom on  a  flight  to
    Sri Lanka on 28th December 2012, with the  same  passport  he  used  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a student in 2008.  He was stopped  by  the
    authorities at Katunayke Airport, after they asked him where  he  lived
    in Sri Lanka.  His passport and ticket were taken.  He was asked if  he
    were an LTTE escapee and a member of the CID asked him questions  about
    his time in Colombo and where he currently lived.  The interview lasted
    for about two hours and he was then questioned further and beaten.  The
    following day, within a compound at  the  airport,  the  appellant  was
    again questioned.  Three people appeared, a Muslim man, a Sinhalese man
    and his former contact, L, who was now working for the government.  The
    appellant realised that it was L who had disclosed  his  previous  work
    with the LTTE.  He explained to the Muslim man that he worked  for  the
    organisation to earn money but was not a member.  This was all  written
    down and he signed a document.

13.  The appellant claimed that he was then taken to a CID office  and  told
    that he would be sent to a rehabilitation camp.  He was beaten  at  the
    office but not mistreated further.  He  was  released  on  4th  January
    2013, after his uncle arranged a bribe.  Bail was set at Rs150,000  and
    conditions were imposed.  The appellant  was  required  to  sign  at  a
    police station on the 21st day of each month.  His brother  signed  for
    his release.

14.  The appellant stayed at his uncle's friend's house for  one  night  and
    then returned to PKD.  He feared that he  would  be  arrested  on  21st
    January when he went to sign on.  Arrangements were made with an  agent
    for him to leave Sri Lanka on a  French  passport  and  with  a  French
    family.  He managed to exit without problems and arrived  in  Paris  on
    15th January 2013.  He stayed with another agent there who secured  his
    travel to the United Kingdom with another family.  He travelled by  car
    from Paris, showing a French passport at the French border and  took  a
    ferry, arriving here on  19th  January  2013.   He  then  travelled  to
    Portsmouth and on to London where he  discussed  his  problems  with  a
    solicitor  and  claimed  asylum.   The  appellant  claimed   that   the
    authorities in Sri Lanka have continued to enquire about him,  speaking
    to his brother.  The appellant fears that the authorities suspect  that
    he is a member of the LTTE and that he will be arrested on return, sent
    for rehabilitation and punished.

15.  The Secretary of State noted the appellant's claim that his  ticket  to
    Sri Lanka was booked online by a friend who was a  "ticket  agent"  and
    who gave him a printed ticket.  The appellant was unable to provide any
    supporting evidence of the journey, such as the ticket or other details
    and the Secretary of State disbelieved the  claim  that  the  appellant
    returned to Sri Lanka.

16.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge came to a similar conclusion, noting  the
    absence of any  documentary  evidence,  such  as  confirmation  of  the
    appellant's itinerary, in response to the Secretary of State's  adverse
    finding.  He came to the view that it would  have  been  easy  for  the
    appellant to obtain details from the airline and highly  probable  that
    he would have been sent an itinerary by e-mail.   He  would  have  been
    able to show proof of travel  and  proof  of  payment.   Moreover,  the
    appellant was unable in interview to identify  the  port  at  which  he
    boarded the ferry in France on his return journey to the United Kingdom
    and provided no details of the ferry company.

17.  Part of the evidence before the judge was a  report  from  the  Medical
    Foundation regarding scarring on  the  appellant's  body.   The  report
    forms an important part of the evidence and the  author  considered  in
    particular whether one or two of the scars were the result of  injuries
    inflicted in about December 2012 or January 2013, the  period  of  time
    the appellant claimed was spent in Sri Lanka.

18.  The judge expressly took into account part  of  the  report  concerning
    two  scars  which  revealed  healing  between  April  and  June   2013,
    consistent with the appellant's account of injuries being inflicted  at
    the end of 2012 or in the very early in 2013.

Evidence adduced by the appellant since the First-tier Tribunal hearing

19.  Following the grant of permission  to  appeal,  the  appellant  adduced
    further evidence in the  form  a  supplementary  bundle  consisting  of
    witness statements and country evidence.  Included were an article by a
    British journalist, [-], discussing an  interview  with  the  appellant
    which took place in [-] for [-] news and a photocopy  of  a  letter  of
    complaint "from the wife", apparently  lodged  with  the  Human  Rights
    Commission of Sri Lanka on 2nd January  2013.   He  also  provided  two
    further witness statements.   In  one,  dated  15th  January  2014,  he
    claimed that several attempts were made to obtain confirmation  of  his
    journey to Sri Lanka.   He  was  advised  not  to  contact  Sri  Lankan
    Airlines directly as this would alert the authorities and  might  place
    his family at risk.  He tried to obtain  confirmation  through  friends
    but he had been unable to do so.  In a statement prepared on 1st August
    2015, the appellant drew attention to the arrest of Ms BP, a leader  of
    the LTTE Women's Sea Tiger Wing, on her return to Sri  Lanka  in  March
    2015.  Ms BP is the wife of Mr R, mentioned in the  appellant's  asylum
    interview in answer to question 123.  Attached to the witness statement
    was a copy of a news item from The Nation in which Mr R is mentioned in
    his real name, Mr SJ.  The appellant claimed that he knew Ms BP as they
    both went to the same school in Sri Lanka and came from the same  area,
    PKD.   The appellant's uncle, P, put him in contact with Mr R,  as  did
    his friend L.

The Hearing

20.  At the outset, Mr Tufan handed up a copy of  the  most  recent  country
    information and guidance on Sri Lanka, dealing with  Tamil  separatism,
    published on 28th August 2014 and copies of the  decisions  in  GJ  and
    Others [2013] UKUT 00319 and JL (medical reports -  credibility)  China
    [2013] UKUT 145.

21.  The  appellant  gave  evidence.   I  was  satisfied  that  he  and  the
    interpreter understood each other in Tamil and  they  confirmed  to  me
    that this was the case.

22.  The appellant adopted the witness  statement  he  made  on  1st  August
    2015.  He had referred to Mr R in the asylum interview,  in  answer  to
    question 123.  Mr  R  was  the  LTTE  representative  from  France  who
    mentioned an LTTE building company.  The appellant also mentioned Mr  R
    in the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

23.  In the supplementary bundle was a  [-]  (news)  article  following  the
    interview with [-].  The appellant was the subject of the  article  and
    he had used the name Yathavan to conceal his true identity.  He did not
    want to give [-] his real name because the Sri Lankan authorities would
    see the article and his family would be in  danger,  as  the  appellant
    himself would be.  He decided to give the interview because  the  Prime
    Minister, David Cameron, was due to visit Sri Lanka at that time.   [-]
    (news) broadcast a programme and Tamil groups demonstrated here, in the
    United Kingdom.  They requested the Prime Minister not  to  go  to  Sri
    Lanka for a Commonwealth conference.  The appellant was  one  of  those
    affected and he was invited to give an interview.

24.  In cross-examination,  the  appellant  maintained  his  claim  that  he
    returned to Sri Lanka on 28th December 2012,  returning  here  on  19th
    January 2013.

25.  Mr Tufan asked whether he had any evidence that  he  travelled  to  Sri
    Lanka in December 2012.  The appellant replied that he did.   While  he
    was there, his wife complained to the Human Rights  Commission  and  in
    his asylum interview, the appellant said  that  he  would  try  to  get
    evidence of this.  At the First-tier Tribunal hearing, he was  able  to
    produce a document recording his wife's complaint.  A copy appeared  in
    the supplementary bundle.

26.  The appellant said that unfortunately he was unable to obtain  evidence
    in the form of a ticket or booking confirmation but had never  expected
    that he would need such evidence.   He  booked  his  ticket  through  a
    friend's "known person".  Initially he  was  confident  that  he  could
    obtain evidence of the journey and in the asylum interview said that he
    would try to do so.  He approached his friend two or  three  times  but
    his friend avoided him.  The person  who  obtained  the  ticket  was  a
    friend of his friend.

27.  Mr Tufan drew attention to the answers given to questions 206  and  208
    in interview, where the appellant claimed that  he  booked  online  and
    that his friend, a "ticket agent" booked  it.   It  appeared  that  the
    appellant was now claiming that the booking was made by a friend  of  a
    friend.  The appellant said that his friend's friend booked the  ticket
    but he had described this person to the Home Office in interview as his
    friend.  The ticket was paid for by cash and the  appellant  was  given
    the ticket, a printed document.  The appellant was told that the ticket
    was booked online.  Mr Tufan asked whether payment was made  by  credit
    card and the appellant replied that this may have been so  but  he  did
    not know.  The person who paid for the ticket was scared that he  might
    lose his business and now avoided the appellant.

28.  In answer to question 214, the appellant  suggested  that  the  booking
    may have taken place on 25th December 2012.  He could  not  now  recall
    precisely whether this was the date but he did say  in  interview  that
    the booking was made about a week before he travelled and so  it  might
    have been 25th December.  He met the agent in  Tooting.   He  mentioned
    his friend and the agent came to the friend's house.

29.  The appellant said that he had asked his friend to  come  to  court  to
    give evidence.  He was present here with a  student  visa  but  thought
    that coming to court would create a problem for him and so  he  avoided
    it.  His friend was not the ticket agent.  The appellant was unable  to
    contact the agent.  Mr Tufan asked whether the appellant  was  able  to
    find out where the shop or business was.  The appellant replied that he
    had no opportunity to come to London to find it as he lives in  Durham.
    He spoke to his friend but his friend was not helping him and he  tried
    to contact the agent but the agent would not answer.

30.  The appellant had not contacted Sri Lankan Airlines to ask for  a  copy
    of the ticket because the company was established  by  the  Government.
    If he asked for details, they might contact his family and  cause  them
    problems.  The Government of Sri Lanka did not know his whereabouts  at
    present but if he tried to get the evidence in this way,  he  would  be
    putting his family in trouble.  Mr Tufan said that  copies  of  tickets
    might be required by e-mail from anywhere in the world and it would not
    be necessary for the appellant to reveal his location.  Why had he  not
    asked the airline for a copy of the ticket?  The appellant replied that
    if he sent an e-mail he would have to give his name and passport number
    and they would find him out.  Mr Tufan asked whether the appellant  had
    tried to make contact by e-mail without  giving  his  passport  number.
    The appellant said that because of the fear he was in he had not  tried
    to do this at all.

31.  So far as events in Sri Lanka and Logan are concerned,  Mr  Tufan  said
    that country  evidence  indicated  that  Tamils  made  up  10%  of  the
    population of Colombo.  The information the appellant claimed  that  he
    provided to L was public knowledge.  What  use  would  the  information
    have been to the LTTE?  The appellant replied  that  some  things  were
    public information but he gave specific details including the  times  a
    person might gain entry to five star hotels and what particulars had to
    be given in order to stay there.  He was able to provide the  questions
    a person wishing to stay in the hotels would be asked.  He was studying
    in Colombo and had an opportunity to  visit  hotels  with  his  college
    friends.   He  had  to  visit  several  times,  asking  questions   and
    collecting the information that was needed.

32.  Mr Tufan asked the appellant when he last saw L, in the  light  of  his
    claim in interview  that  he  stopped  doing  this  work  when  L  went
    elsewhere.  The appellant replied that it was in about  2005.   He  did
    not provide information to L after that.  He sent  the  information  by
    letter.  He met L at the very beginning but did not  remember  when  he
    last saw him.  He met him several times between 2003 and 2005.

33.  Mr Tufan asked whether it was his case that he met L by chance,  a  few
    days after his arrival in Sri Lanka in December 2012, having  not  seen
    him for seven or eight years.  The appellant replied that this was  so.
    After L joined the Sri Lankan authorities, he disclosed his network  to
    them.

34.  So far as the Medical Foundation report was  concerned,  there  was  no
    updated document.  The appellant was not on any medication, and had not
    been on any since the report was prepared in 2013.

35.  In response to a question from Mr  Tufan,  the  appellant  denied  that
    some of the scars described in  the  report  were  caused  by  injuries
    inflicted by a third party at his request.  He said that he  had  never
    had scars inflicted deliberately, by proxy.  He  was  detained  at  the
    airport when he returned to Sri Lanka and mistreated.  He was  released
    on payment of a bribe.  The intention was clearly to extract money from
    him.  Mr Tufan asked why, in that case, the authorities would have  any
    further interest in him.  The appellant replied that  extracting  money
    would not be the authorities' only intention.

36.  In  re-examination,  the  appellant  said  that  the  original  receipt
    recording the Human Rights Commission complaint, which appeared in copy
    form at page 33 of the supplementary bundle, was made available at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.

37.  Mr Tufan submitted that although the earlier detentions  were  accepted
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, each had lasted for only a  few  days
    and the appellant was released without conditions.  He was not a person
    of interest now.  He was interviewed  substantively  on  23rd  February
    2013, soon after his claimed return to the United Kingdom and knew that
    the journey to Sri Lanka was in issue.  Notwithstanding  this,  he  had
    failed to  provide  supporting  evidence  of  the  journey.   His  oral
    evidence, regarding a  friend  contacting  a  booking  agent,  was  not
    entirely consistent with the account given in interview.   Neither  the
    friend nor  the  agent  had  provided  a  statement.   The  appellant's
    explanation, that his student friend was not  willing  to  help  as  he
    feared that he would get into trouble, was not sustainable.

38.  Any ticket booked online would enable details to be  sent,  with  ease.
    All that was required was an e-mail to the airline  and  the  appellant
    could have made an attempt to obtain the information without giving his
    passport details.

39.  So far as the appellant's claim that he passed  intelligence  to  L  is
    concerned, Mr Tufan submitted that  the  information  would  have  been
    known to almost everyone in Colombo.  The opening times of  hotels  and
    similar details were not likely to be valuable intelligence and a  five
    star hotel would have been open 24 hours a day, in all probability.   L
    might simply be a figment  of  the  appellant's  imagination.   In  any
    event, the claim that he changed sides and turned up at the airport and
    was able to identify the appellant seven or eight years after they last
    met was not a credible one.

40.  The author of  the  medical  report  described  the  scars  as  largely
    consistent or highly consistent with the  appellant's  account  of  the
    injuries giving rise to them.   This  assessment  revealed  that  there
    might be many causes other than those  given  by  the  appellant.   The
    medical evidence was not determinative of the cause of the scars.   The
    report showed that the scar described as S35 is in an unusual  position
    and may have been inflicted at the appellant's request, by proxy.   The
    appellant was not on medication at the time the  report  was  prepared,
    nor was he currently.  There was a suggestion  that  he  suffered  from
    PTSD (Ms Jegarajah confirmed that the  case  against  removal  was  not
    advanced on the basis  of  the  appellant's  ill-health).   The  report
    depended heavily on the appellant's account and so the analysis made by
    the Upper Tribunal in JL fell to be applied.

41.  The Secretary of State's current country guidance was prepared  in  the
    light of GJ.  There was no indication of  diaspora  activities  by  the
    appellant.  He studied  in  Colombo  for  several  years  and  although
    detained in the past, he was released without conditions being imposed.
     He was not a person known to the authorities and his  name  would  not
    appear on a "stop" list.  This was so even if he did, in  fact,  return
    to Sri Lanka in 2012.  He was clearly not of the  calibre  to  threaten
    the unitary state and would not be at risk.

42.  Ms Jegarajah said that the case did not turn entirely  on  whether  the
    appellant returned in 2012 or not.  The  two  earlier  detentions  were
    based on concerns about his identity and the  activities  he  undertook
    for the LTTE.  Although he was ill-treated, the current  risk  did  not
    flow from those detentions.  Rather, the  risk  arose  because  of  the
    family connections he had and the nature of his work for the  LTTE,  as
    disclosed by the appellant in the substantive asylum interview.

43.  The appellant described his work in the intelligence group  and  as  an
    auditor in a company with substantial links  to  the  LTTE.   The  most
    recent witness statement included mention of Mr R, this man's name also
    appearing in the Record of Proceedings before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and in answer to question 123 in the asylum interview, in  the  context
    of the appellant's work for [-].  Mr R was in France and  assisted  the
    LTTE with establishing the  company.   That  part  of  the  appellant's
    account  was  accepted  as  credible.   So  far  as  current  risk  was
    concerned, the news item showed that Mr R's wife had been  arrested  on
    return to Sri Lanka in March 2015.

44.  The appellant worked  for  the  LTTE  during  three  periods  of  time,
    including  with  his  paternal  uncle,  P.   The  appellant's   witness
    statement made on 11th August 2014 included mention of this aspect.   P
    was the equivalent of an attorney-general in LTTE held territory.   The
    appellant's cousin, who gave evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    confirmed that the appellant is P's nephew.

45.  The appellant continued his work for the LTTE,  as  a  cashier  and  an
    informer.  He was clearly seen by the organisation as  a  loyalist  and
    the CID and the SIS would see him in  this  light,  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  Logan too was a prominent member of the intelligence wing.

46.  The country evidence, as assessed by the Upper Tribunal in  GJ,  showed
    that the picture  changed  after  the  defeat  of  the  LTTE  in  2009.
    Prominent members were either killed or  frequently  changed  sides  to
    work for the Government.  As noted in GJ, arrests  by  the  authorities
    are intelligence-based now.  That was precisely why the  appellant  was
    not identified in 2007 as a result of his LTTE work  but  was  when  he
    returned in 2012.  The country evidence supported his case.

47.  It was clear  that  the  appellant  believed  that  the  rehabilitation
    process was under way in 2012 and that it was  safe  to  return.   That
    made sense to him at the time.  Having been  arrested  and  questioned,
    the authorities unsurprisingly asked whether he was an escapee from the
    LTTE, as he came from [-].  They enquired  first  about  his  place  of
    origin,  indicated  that  they  knew  there  was  an  office   on   his
    grandmother's land and then L appeared and identified him and  all  was
    disclosed.  He signed a statement and was then released on 4th  January
    2013, on condition that he sign on monthly thereafter.  He returned  to
    PDK to avoid signing in  Colombo  and  then  left  altogether  on  15th
    January.  The account the appellant  gave  in  the  substantive  asylum
    interview was detailed and credible.

48.  Further evidence of the family  connections  was  given  in  interview,
    regarding the role his elder brother played in the LTTE and  his  death
    in combat.  The appellant said in interview that he would try to obtain
    the document confirming his release on bail.   If  he  were  lying,  he
    might have simply obtained a false document with ease but  he  had  not
    done so.

49.  In summary, the appellant had substantial links with the LTTE,  through
    his uncle and brother.   He  lost  contact  with  his  family  and  was
    concerned about them.  If his account were fabricated, why did  he  not
    provide his real name in the [-] (news) interview and  make  up  a  sur
    place case?  The appellant gave the interview because he genuinely  did
    not want the Prime Minister to endorse Sri Lanka as the  host  for  the
    Commonwealth summit.

50.  It was clear from the Secretary of  State's  refusal  letter  that  the
    absence of evidence showing return to  Sri  Lanka  in  2012  was  given
    substantial weight.  However, the medical evidence shed light  on  this
    aspect too.  The appellant was examined by Dr Coyne on four  occasions,
    in April and June 2013.  Dr Coyne had read the  interview  records  and
    the Secretary of State's refusal letter and so knew  the  case  against
    the appellant and was aware of the particular  presenting  factor,  the
    mismatch between the appellant's claim that he returned  to  Sri  Lanka
    and the Secretary of State's case that he did not.  The report complied
    with guidance given in KV even though it predated that case.   Most  of
    the scars on the appellant's body were consistent or highly  consistent
    with his account of the injuries that caused them and  they  came  from
    different sources.  The conclusion that some of the scars  were  caused
    following whipping with electric cables in  about  December  2012  came
    after Dr Coyne had considered other causes.  The  faint  scars  on  the
    appellant's trunk were consistent with a healing process in place since
    about December 2012.  Other scars were, concluded Dr Coyne, the  result
    of whipping or kicking or beating with a hard implement.

51.  Dr Coyne also concluded that the appellant suffered  from  PTSD.   This
    was important.  The  appellant's  case  was  not  that  his  ill-health
    engaged Article 3 or Article 8 but the PTSD or mental presentation  was
    consistent with his account of events.  It was not possible to generate
    self-inflicted PTSD.  Dr Coyne  considered  other  causes  of  distress
    including separation from the appellant's wife  and  family,  his  poor
    student record and so on.   Overall,  the  medical  report  was  strong
    supporting evidence.  So far as his friend and the  ticket  agent  were
    concerned, the appellant did not realise that he would need  to  retain
    travel documents when he left in 2012 and the  witnesses  were  clearly
    reluctant to give evidence.

52.  Turning to the COIS guidance, this was detailed, and  again,  supported
    the appellant's  case.   Since  2009,  some  300,000  people  had  been
    screened by the authorities and intelligence was  gathered  from  them.
    This was consistent with the appellant's account of events in  2012  as
    intelligence  was  now  available  and  likely  to   lead   to   h   is
    identification.  There was a consolidation  by  the  authorities  after
    2009 and a constant review of intelligence.  It appeared that there was
    an increase in arrests in about April 2014.   The  Human  Rights  Watch
    Report in  the  appellant's  first  bundle,  at  paragraph  2.3.5,  was
    reliable evidence of returnees being arrested on arrival, and supported
    the appellant's case.  So too did the British High Commission  response
    to the COIS regarding returnees being questioned on arrival by the CID,
    the SIS and the TID.  The appellant  would  be  questioned,  not  least
    about any overseas activities.  His family members had been questioned,
    again consistent with the country evidence.

Findings and Conclusions

53.  In this appeal, the burden of proof lies with  the  appellant  and  the
    standard of proof is that of a reasonable degree  of  likelihood.   The
    appellant claims to be at real risk of persecution  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka, as a person of adverse interest to the authorities there.  If he
    is not a refugee, he may be entitled to humanitarian  protection  under
    the rules.  In this context, he must show that he is at  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm on return.  He also claims to be at real risk of
    ill-treatment, in breach of Article 3 of the Human  Rights  Convention.
    His case is not advanced on the basis of  ill-health,  including  post-
    traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD"), nor does he claim that his  removal
    would be disproportionate and in breach  of  Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention,  in  the  light  of  family  or  private  life  ties
    established in the United Kingdom.

54.  As noted at the outset in this decision, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    accepted the appellant's account of events in Sri Lanka prior  to  2012
    and his claim to have been detained for brief periods of time, and ill-
    treated, on two occasions.  Disbelieved, however, was  the  claim  that
    the appellant returned to Sri Lanka in December 2012 and suffered  ill-
    treatment during a third period of detention, on the face of it  recent
    evidence of adverse interest in him on  the  part  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  I turn first to this important feature of the case.

55.  As Ms Jegarajah accepted, there is no doubt that the claimed return  in
    2012 has been in issue from the outset.  The appellant  was  questioned
    in detail in the substantive asylum interview but, taking into  account
    the lack of any supporting documentary  evidence  of  his  travel,  the
    Secretary of State disbelieved the account he  gave.   The  substantive
    interview took place shortly after the appellant's claimed return.  The
    First-tier Tribunal hearing was held several months later, in September
    2013 but the appellant had no supporting evidence  in  the  form  of  a
    ticket or confirmation of his booking.   That  remains  the  case.   In
    careful and effective cross-examination, Mr Tufan pressed the appellant
    on the reasons why no evidence was available, including statements from
    his friend or the "ticket agent".  The explanation which emerged,  that
    the appellant paid cash for the ticket, which was handed  to  him,  and
    that his friend and the agent are not willing to make  a  statement  or
    appear to confirm his account, may reasonably be regarded as very thin.
     Even if he were afraid to give his passport number, for example, there
    is still no evidence of an attempt being made to approach  the  airline
    without such details being provided.  Assessed  in  the  light  of  the
    simple claim that the appellant left the United Kingdom for  Sri  Lanka
    in December 2012 and returned in early January 2013, the net result  is
    that notwithstanding the importance of the  issue,  the  appellant  has
    provided no supporting evidence.

56.  However, the overall assessment requires  consideration  of  the  other
    evidence bearing on his claim.  There is, first, a  copy  receipt  from
    the Human Rights Commission recording a complaint on 2nd January  2013.
    The appellant said that the original was available  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (although it is not present in  the  court  file).   The  copy
    document has, I find, very little weight as supporting  evidence.   The
    name of the complainant bears some similarity  to  that  given  by  the
    appellant as his wife's name but the complete  name  does  not  appear.
    There is no obvious correlation between the address shown in  Vavuniya,
    and the appellant's last address in [-].  There is  no  detail  at  all
    regarding the nature of the complaint and nothing to show that it bears
    directly on the appellant's circumstances.

57.  Of far greater weight is the medical report, prepared by Dr Coyne.   It
    was produced after four meetings with the appellant,  is  thorough  and
    has been carefully prepared.  Ms Jegarajah correctly observed  that  Dr
    Coyne was aware of an important  presenting  factor,  having  read  the
    Secretary of State's refusal letter and a proper focus is maintained in
    the report on the appellant's claim that injuries were  inflicted  upon
    him in late December 2012 or early January 2013.  Dr Coyne's conclusion
    was that some of his scars,  assessed  in  the  light  of  the  healing
    process, bore out the appellant's claim that injuries were inflicted at
    this time.  Mr Tufan is, of course, right  in  pointing  out  that  the
    assessment of those scars as being "consistent" or "highly  consistent"
    with the appellant's account of the infliction of the  injuries  giving
    rise to them admits of  other,  perhaps  many  other  possible  causes.
    Nonetheless, although the possibility that injuries were inflicted by a
    third party at the appellant's request cannot be excluded,  the  report
    does support his case that the  scars  on  his  body  reflect  injuries
    inflicted at precisely the time he says  he  was  abroad,  as  well  as
    injuries inflicted longer ago.

58.  A second important feature of the medical report is  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD.  The appellant was not prescribed medicines when it was  prepared
    and he is not currently on medication.  He has made no claim  that  his
    PTSD is so severe that he cannot be returned to Sri Lanka as a  result.
    Dr Coyne noted when she prepared her report that the symptoms  of  PTSD
    were improving.  What is important, however, is  the  clear  diagnosis.
    Dr Coyne considered other causes  of  his  symptoms,  related  to  slow
    progress in his studies and separation from his wife  and  family,  but
    concluded that the ill-treatment he claimed to have  suffered  was  the
    cause.  The diagnosis of PTSD presents  a  formidable  challenge  to  a
    rival theory that the injuries giving rise to the scars were  inflicted
    at the appellant's request, as there is no evidence before me, nor am I
    aware of any evidence, that PTSD may be self-inflicted.

59.  A third important piece of supporting evidence is the record  taken  at
    the substantive asylum interview.  The account given by  the  appellant
    is extremely detailed, beginning with  the  journey  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    December 2012.  He was, at least, able to give the time  of  departure,
    the name of the airline, the terminal at which he left (Terminal  4  at
    Heathrow), even though he was unable to  remember  the  flight  number.
    When asked to describe events in Sri Lanka, claimed  to  have  occurred
    only a few weeks beforehand,  the  appellant  gave  long  and  detailed
    answers to the questions put to him.  The detail extended to the return
    journey to the United Kingdom, after his release on bail  on  condition
    that he report on the 21st day of each month.

60.  The degree of detail offered by  the  appellant,  regarding  those  who
    were questioning him and the developing nature  of  the  interrogation,
    would be extraordinary in an entirely fabricated account.   As  it  is,
    putting the detail to one side, the appellant's account  of  arrest  on
    return is consistent with  country  evidence  which  includes  material
    contained in the COIS guidance published  in  August  2014.   Paragraph
    2.3.5 refers to a Human Rights Watch report in which it is stated  that
    Tamils living abroad have been arrested immediately on  or  soon  after
    return to Sri Lanka, since the end of the armed conflict.

61.  The account of arrest and detention following return in  December  2012
    is also consistent with the  Upper  Tribunal's  assessment  of  country
    evidence in GJ and Others, as showing that there is a  constant  review
    of intelligence, and that the Sri Lankans approach is now intelligence-
    led.

62.   Overall,   drawing   these   threads   together,   I   conclude   that
    notwithstanding the absence of documentary  evidence  of  travel  or  a
    witness statement from the appellant's friend or the ticket agent,  his
    claim that he returned to Sri Lanka in December 2012 and  was  detained
    and ill-treated following his arrival is reasonably likely to be  true.
    As such, the adverse attention he suffered at  the  hands  of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities is relatively recent evidence that he  is  perceived
    to be a threat to the unitary state.   That such a  perception  on  the
    part of the Sri Lankan authorities  gives  rise  to  a  real  risk  was
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in MP and Another [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

63.  In reaching this conclusion, I have also taken into account  the  other
    evidence before me.  The interview with [-], the  [-]  journalist,  has
    weight.  The detail in [-] article is, I find, sufficient  to  identify
    the appellant as the person interviewed and it is  clear  that  he  was
    anxious to avoid giving his real name as he feared for  his  family  in
    Sri Lanka.  Again, if the account of  relatively  recent  ill-treatment
    were fabricated, the appellant might well have simply given  his  name.
    In any event, the interview is reliable evidence that the appellant was
    not simply making claims about the ill-treatment of Tamils in Sri Lanka
    on an  opportunistic  basis.   I  have  also  taken  into  account  the
    appellant's identification of his brother,  who  died  in  1992,  as  a
    member of the LTTE and, although it has rather less weight, the mention
    of his uncle P.  The account of the presence  of  L  during  the  third
    period of detention, as a person working for the  authorities,  is,  at
    first sight, surprising in view  of  the  passage  of  time  since  the
    appellant last met him.  On the other hand, the country  evidence  does
    show that much of the recent intelligence gathered by  the  Sri  Lankan
    state has come from former LTTE  members,  some  in  senior  positions,
    through the rehabilitation process.

64.  The article attached to the recent witness statement, from The  Nation,
    recording the arrest on return of a former leader of the  LTTE  Women's
    Sea Tiger Wing, apparently the wife of Mr R, the  person  mentioned  by
    the appellant in the substantive interview, has no substantial  weight.
    There is little in the article to link the name  of  the  person  whose
    alias was S with Mr R, although his wife is described  as  having  left
    Sri Lanka for France in 2005.

65.  Nonetheless, having found that the  account  of  the  third  period  of
    detention and ill-treatment, following the appellant's  return  to  Sri
    Lanka in 2012, is reasonably likely  to  be  true,  and  weighing  that
    account with the earlier  detentions,  which  of  themselves  would  be
    insufficient to show a risk on return now,  my  overall  conclusion  is
    that the appellant has made out his grounds of appeal  in  relation  to
    the Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

66.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set  aside,  it  is
    remade as follows: the appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

67.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has  been  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows: appeal allowed on asylum grounds and in relation  to
    Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

ANONYMITY

The anonymity direction made in these proceedings is continued.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable in this appeal, no fee award may be made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

