
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V5

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02055/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2016                 |On 4 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     M N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The case was listed for  10  o'clock.   By  10.25  there  had  been  no
    appearance by anyone on behalf of the appellant, nor had there been any
    communication indicating lateness or any other problem.  Accordingly  I
    concluded that it was appropriate to proceed with the appeal, and heard
    submissions from Ms Brocklesby-Weller, at the end of which I  indicated
    that the appeal would be dismissed  and  that  full  reasons  would  be
    provided subsequently in a determination.

2.   A few minutes after I had risen, Counsel  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, and sent me a note, to the effect that he  had  been  unwell
    for the last few days and had not anticipated that the list could  have
    been completed so swiftly as to preclude him from appearing in it.

3.   I indicated through my clerk that I had heard the appeal  and  notified
    the respondent of my decision in the appeal.  In the  circumstances  as
    the appeal had been heard, and I had indicated what my  decision  would
    be, the matter could not be reopened.  It is clear  from  Patel  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1175 that once the Tribunal has announced its  decision,  that
    decision cannot be reconsidered and reversed.  The  decision  is  made,
    and has effect, when uttered by the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  (paragraph
    51).

4.   The appellant claims to  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan,  in
    essence on the basis that as an undercover police officer in  the  past
    who had gathered intelligence on the Taliban, he is at risk from  them.
    He also fears the government who had sent a summons for him,  and  also
    members of his family who blamed him for the death of his uncle.

5.   It was accepted that the appellant was  an  undercover  police  officer
    who had collected intelligence on the Taliban and reported this to  the
    police.  The judge accepted that at the time when he  left  Afghanistan
    for the first time in 2005 he was at risk in all areas in  Afghanistan.
    He had left in fear of his life as a colleague of his had  defected  to
    the Taliban and informed them about him, and he went to Iran,  then  to
    Turkey and then via Greece to Italy.  In Italy  he  was  granted  three
    years' leave to remain.

6.   In 2007, according to his statement, two Arab men came to the  clothing
    store where he worked in Rome and gave him a mobile phone to  speak  to
    someone who wanted to speak to him.  The man on the phone had told  him
    that he had to help the Arab men avenge their people  against  European
    people and if he refused to help then he knew where his family was  and
    they would all be killed.  The man even knew the names of his children.
     He told the men he could not help them, and was scared to report  this
    to the Italian authorities and decided to leave  Italy.   He  lived  in
    Paris for about four years under what he described as appalling  living
    conditions, and he was deported to Afghanistan in  2011.   He  did  not
    resist because his family were having problems and he decided to  leave
    so he could do something for them.

7.   When he returned he had no  documents  with  him  and  gave  his  name.
    There was no fingerprint machine at the airport.  He  was  taken  to  a
    small town called Saracha, about an  hour  away  from  Jalalabad.   His
    family was close in Jalalabad which was not under Taliban control.   He
    stayed in Saracha for over a year, staying at different  addresses  and
    moving around every three or four months.

8.   He left Afghanistan in January 2012 and went to  Pakistan  for  over  a
    year where again he said he was  in  hiding  because  the  Taliban  had
    headquarters there, and he returned to Europe in 2013, arriving in  the
    United Kingdom in May 2014.

9.   The judge assessed the evidence  in  considerable  detail.   She  noted
    that no background material had been drawn to her  attention  that  the
    government  forces,  the  Taliban  or  any  other   organisation   from
    Afghanistan have the capability of  operating  in  Italy  and  had  the
    ability to track the appellant down in a foreign country.  Nor did  she
    accept that the Taliban had put notes through his front door  after  he
    left Afghanistan, as it would have been obvious to them that there  was
    nobody living there and he claimed that they had been able to find  him
    in Italy and would therefore have realised it was pointless to send the
    letters to an empty house.  The  judge  also  considered  that  if  the
    appellant had been at risk in Italy he would have sought  the  help  of
    the Italian authorities.  He had not returned to  Afghanistan  to  help
    his family but decided to live for a further four years in Paris  which
    in the judge's view did not show any concern for the fate of his family
    and was adverse to his credibility.  It did not make sense to the judge
    that if the appellant was in fear for his family he  would  not  simply
    have done what the Arab men asked rather than escaping to France.   She
    thought that as a matter of common sense, if  he  escaped  the  Taliban
    were more likely to carry out their threats against his family than  if
    he had reported the threats to the Italian police, as they would  never
    know whether he had reported them to the police whereas they would know
    that he had refused to do their bidding by his disappearance.   He  had
    not satisfactorily explained why he did not go anywhere else in  Italy,
    and nor had he given any other reason as to why he went to France other
    than saying he was trying to make his way to the United Kingdom but  it
    was difficult.  He had not given any good reason as to why he  did  not
    claim asylum in France other than his answer to a question  that  Italy
    and France look the same to him.

10.  With regard to the appellant's  evidence  that  informants  would  have
    told the Taliban where he was in Italy, they  could  even  more  easily
    find him on his return to Afghanistan in the judge's view and yet  they
    had not done so.  This to her mind showed that  the  Taliban  were  not
    interested in the appellant.  He had also speculated  that  his  family
    might have informed the Taliban before he left as his family knew where
    he was.  She thought that if that were the case, knowing  that  members
    of his family supported the Taliban it was unclear why  he  would  tell
    them where he was other than perhaps his wife and parents and give them
    strict instructions not to tell any of the other family  members  about
    his location.  This also begged the  question  as  to  why  he  had  no
    problems in Paris or on return to Afghanistan when presumably he  would
    have told his family his whereabouts and therefore why this information
    had not made its way back to the Taliban.  The  judge  also  considered
    that if the Taliban were so efficient and  effective  that  they  could
    find him in Italy, there was no reason to suppose they would  not  have
    been able to find him in Afghanistan whether or not he  was  living  in
    hiding.  Although he had said he was  likely  to  be  easily  found  by
    Taliban members everywhere in Afghanistan and likely to  be  identified
    by them with ease, that was not in fact what had  happened  as  he  had
    managed to live for around a year in  Afghanistan  close  to  his  home
    area.

11.  With regard to the expert report that  had  been  provided,  the  judge
    noted the expert's remark that the appellant  could  have  remained  in
    Jalalabad during that time in 2011 to 2012 as  the  government  was  in
    full control of the major provinces and their districts.  On  this  the
    judge made the point that the appellant was not living in Jalalabad but
    an hour away in Saracha and considered that this inaccuracy  on  a  key
    part of the appellant's claim led her to place  little  weight  on  the
    expert's report.  She also considered  that  bearing  in  mind  he  had
    worked for the police spying on the Taliban and as such would have been
    in the unique position to be fully aware of  the  capabilities  of  the
    Taliban and the police, in those circumstances it made little sense  to
    her that he would risk returning to Afghanistan if he feared them as he
    of all people would know about their abilities to track people down.

12.  He had said that he decided to leave France so he  could  do  something
    for his family who were having problems in Afghanistan  and  yet  there
    was no evidence that he did anything for them other than live with them
    in hiding.  Nor had he explained why he did not try to get  his  family
    out of Afghanistan if they were  being  threatened  and  this  was  the
    reason why he left Italy.  The judge did  not  understand  why,  having
    obtained a three year status in Italy he had made no  attempt  for  his
    family to join him either there or when he moved to  France.   He  said
    that he had called his family after the visit from  the  Arab  men  and
    told them to move and his wife and children  moved  to  his  father-in-
    law's house and his parents moved to his brother's house, and the judge
    considered that if the family were at risk from the Taliban  the  first
    place they would look for them would be in the houses  of  other  close
    relatives.

13.  The judge noted the  figures  from  the  COIS  Report  of  August  2015
    concerning the numbers of deaths of civilians as increasing in 2011 and
    then reducing in 2012 as being inconsistent with the expert's views  of
    the Taliban's effectiveness in 2011 to 2012.  The judge reiterated that
    if the Taliban had the resources and wherewithal to find the  appellant
    in Italy it did not make sense that they would not equally if not  more
    easily be able to locate him in  Afghanistan,  especially  as  he  only
    lived an hour away from his home area.  Also if the government were  in
    full control it begged the question why they were unable  to  find  the
    appellant.

14.  The  judge  also  noted  the  expert's  evidence  that  on  return  the
    appellant would have to pray at the local mosque, but he had said  that
    he did not do so when he returned  to  Afghanistan  and  therefore  the
    judge found he would not need to do so on return.  She considered  that
    in any event the Taliban and the government were no  longer  interested
    in him as neither he nor his family had any significant problems during
    the period he had lived in Afghanistan.

15.  The judge also noted that the document that had been  authenticated  by
    the expert was  the  Afghan  police  reward  certificate,  and  it  was
    accepted that this  was  a  reliable  document,  but  this  begged  the
    question  why  the  other  documents  he   produced   were   not   also
    authenticated and in oral evidence he was unable to  explain  why  that
    was the case.  The judge considered that in any  event  this  so-called
    summons from the authorities was no more  than  a  request  to  him  to
    attend police headquarters due to special information he held  and  the
    request might be for  perfectly  innocent  reasons  and  there  was  no
    indication that it in any way constituted a threat to him or a summons.
     The absence of problems from the government on return again  suggested
    they had no ongoing interest in him.

16.   The  judge  had  concerns  about  the  authentication  by  the  Afghan
    Community and Welfare Centre and the letters from the  Taliban  on  the
    basis that they gave no details of their methodology, analysis  or  the
    enquiries they made and the fact that they  had  authenticated  similar
    letters in the past did not mean that any of the other letters they had
    come across were reliable documents.  She also considered  that  if  it
    were common knowledge as to what the letters looked like  it  would  be
    easy to fabricate them.  The appellant said the expert could not verify
    the letters from the Taliban as they had no office which in the judge's
    mind begged the question how the Afghan Community and Welfare Centre in
    the UK was able to do so.  Taking the evidence in the round  the  judge
    attached little weight to the letters from the Taliban.

17.  She considered that even if she were  wrong,  internal  relocation  was
    available to him.  His family had moved to a safe  area  a  few  months
    previously and if they were safe it begged the question  why  he  would
    not be safe if he lived with them.  It was unclear  why  they  had  not
    targeted his family if they still had personal problems with him as  he
    informed on them and the information he provided led to the  deaths  of
    many Taliban members.  If he were at risk he could move elsewhere where
    the local people would not recognise him.  The  judge  also  considered
    that his family had not had  problems  from  the  Taliban  after  their
    return from Pakistan as they moved to different places and therefore he
    could do the same thing.  His brother had had problems so he had  moved
    to another province and was still there and had no  problems.   It  was
    unclear to the judge why the appellant's knowledge of the  intelligence
    he gathered in 2005 on the Taliban would be of any interest  to  anyone
    now.

18.  She also noted discrepancies in his claim.  In  his  interview  he  had
    said he stayed in a house for one year as he had  the  alternatives  of
    staying in the house or going out and face danger, but nowhere suitable
    could be found after that period which is why he went to Pakistan.   He
    now however said that he was changing houses three times to be safe  on
    return to Afghanistan yet in the judge's view going outside would  have
    increased the risk of someone seeing him and reporting his presence  to
    the government or the Taliban.  He had in fact  accepted  this  in  his
    asylum  interview.   Again,  at  interview  he  had  said  he  did  not
    experience any problems from the government or the  Taliban  as  no-one
    knew he was there, but in oral evidence he said he had to move on three
    occasions because the Taliban found out where he was.

19.   The  judge  considered  that  his  subsequent  return  to  Afghanistan
    undermined his claim to be of  adverse  interest  to  them  and/or  the
    government and/or members of his family.  The  passage  of  time  meant
    that he was no longer of interest to anyone if returned now as  he  had
    had no problems from anyone when he returned  in  2011.   He  had  been
    there for a year which was a long enough period for either the  Taliban
    or the  government  if  they  were  interested  in  him  to  find  him,
    particularly, as he claimed the Taliban had found  him  in  Italy.   In
    fact they had not only not found him in Afghanistan nor had they  found
    him Pakistan.  As regards the expert's view that it was  credible  that
    the appellant's relatives would blame him for the death of  his  uncle,
    the judge said that she had not found him credible concerning his  fear
    from the Taliban or the government and did  not  accept  his  relatives
    would blame him for the death of his uncle and in any event  would  not
    seek revenge on him.  She considered that in any case  the  expert  had
    not set out the sources he considered in reaching this conclusion.

20.  The judge went on to refer to relevant authorities such  as  AK  [2012]
    UKUT 00163 (IAC), Naziri [2015] UKUT 437 (IAC) and H  and  B  v  United
    Kingdom (Application No. 70073/10 and 44539/11).   She  accepted  there
    was a risk of indiscriminate violence in the appellant's  province  but
    in her view he could live elsewhere for the reasons set out above.   He
    had moved around in Afghanistan and had  access  to  funds  as  he  had
    managed to support himself when he moved back to Afghanistan  in  2011.
    She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

21.  In his grounds of appeal the appellant argued first that the judge  had
    failed to apply H and B to the appellant's claim to be  at  risk  as  a
    former undercover police officer, and secondly  pointed  to  what  were
    said to be material errors in relation to returning in  2011  to  2012.
    Permission was granted on all grounds.

22.  With regard to the former, it is argued  that  no  rational  basis  had
    been provided for limiting the analysis to the appellant's situation in
    2005 as opposed to risk on return in 2016.  For example,  it  had  been
    said in H and B at paragraph 100 that individuals who are perceived  as
    supportive of the international community may be able to demonstrate  a
    real and personal risk to them from the Taliban in Kabul  depending  on
    the individual  circumstances  of  their  case,  the  nature  of  their
    connections to the international community and their  profile.   It  is
    argued that in the light of his accepted high profile activities  which
    had led to the deaths of  Taliban  members  and  the  prevention  of  a
    significant assassination plot, as a result of which he was  granted  a
    significant award by the Afghan police, it was incumbent on  the  judge
    to undertake an assessment of risk on return in light of this guidance.
     Clearly his case was capable of being distinguished from that  of  low
    profile individuals  such  as  those  identified  in  the  respondent's
    guidance.

23.  This however in my view fails to take into  account  the  detailed  and
    careful adverse credibility findings that the judge  made.   In  effect
    she gave good reasons for distinguishing the appellant's  situation  as
    regards risk on return in 2016 from the situation in 2005.   I  do  not
    propose to rehearse those points here as I  have  set  them  out  fully
    above, but it is clear from her assessment of the evidence that she did
    give consideration to the individual circumstances  of  the  case,  the
    nature of the appellant's connections to  the  international  community
    and his profile in concluding that he was no longer of interest to  the
    Taliban or the authorities.  I consider  that  her  reasoning  in  this
    regard was properly reasoned and sound, and has not been shown to be in
    error of law.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller drew my attention to paragraph  105
    in H and B which in relation to that case referred  to  the  fact  that
    four years had passed since the first applicant had stopped working for
    the United Nations and had submitted nothing to suggest that even if he
    had previously received  one  telephone  threat  from  the  Taliban  in
    Afghanistan in 2008 he remained of any adverse interest  to  them  now.
    Similarly, on the basis of the judge's findings, the  passage  of  time
    and the absence of credible evidence of an adverse interest in  him  in
    that period justified the judge in concluding as she did.  Again,  with
    regard to paragraph 98 of H and B, it was said that  there  was  little
    evidence that the Taliban were targeting those who had as requested  by
    them already stopped working for the international  community  and  who
    had moved to other areas.  The Landinfo report was noted, which  states
    those who had fled and given up their jobs did not appear to have  been
    actively  targeted  in  the  cities  and  that  those  who  no   longer
    collaborated with the international forces were a low priority for  the
    Taliban who devoted their limited assets in the cities for high-profile
    targets, from serving  government  officials  upwards.   Accordingly  I
    consider that this ground is not made out.

24.  With regard to the second ground, it was  argued  that  the  judge  had
    erred in her assessment of the expert evidence and relied  on  evidence
    not before her in the proceedings.  With regard to the  former,  it  is
    argued that the judge was wrong to reject the expert's evidence on  the
    basis that he was not living in Jalalabad but an hour away in  Saracha,
    since it was argued that the expert evidence was plainly  addressed  to
    major provinces in Afghanistan, including Nangarhar in general, and was
    not limited to the city of Jalalabad.  The point is made  that  in  any
    event the appellant's evidence was that he was  moving  from  house  to
    house within the area of Nangarhar.

25.  That was however one of a number of points in  relation  to  which  the
    judge took issue with the expert's report.  In any event it was open to
    her to make the point that she did that the appellant was not living in
    Jalalabad but in Saracha and the  report  said  nothing  about  Saracha
    itself.  As regards the sources  for  the  expert's  evidence  in  this
    regard, reference is made to footnotes in the report  which  include  a
    reference to a 2009 publication from Dr Giustozzi and  statistics  from
    the Supreme  Court  of  Afghanistan  concerning  the  large  number  of
    prosecutions of the Taliban.  However the judge was entitled  to  place
    against that evidence referring to the numbers of deaths  of  civilians
    as rising during at least  part  of  that  period.   Though  the  judge
    referred to a 2011 COIS Report, whereas the report  relied  on  by  the
    respondent at the hearing was a COIS Report of February  2015,  it  has
    not been shown that that same evidence was not in the 2015 report,  and
    in any event the judge referred to paragraph 12.03 of the  2011  report
    as showing that the Taliban are active and targeting family members  of
    those who were of interest to them in 2011.  The reference to the  2011
    COIS Report must be a reference to a COIR of 11 October 2011  which  is
    in the bundle of trial papers though there is a note on it "not  relied
    on by either party".  I do not consider that that precluded  the  judge
    from referring to that and taking examples from it.

26.  The judge's findings in any event have to  be  taken  as  a  whole.   I
    consider that she was entitled to conclude as she did that  though  the
    appellant would have faced a  real  risk  at  the  time  when  he  left
    Afghanistan in 2005, for the reasons  she  gave  that  risk  no  longer
    exists, bearing in mind the various sound points  she  made  about  the
    credibility of the claim.  Nor do I consider she erred in  any  respect
    in her consideration of  the  expert  evidence.   As  a  consequence  I
    conclude that no error of law in her decision has been  identified  and
    her decision dismissing the appeal is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

