

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/02893/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |          Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 27th January 2016                 |          On: 4th February 2016         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                    DMAK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:          Ms Johnstone,   Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on the 1st  January  1993.  He
    appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge DA Thomas) to dismiss his appeal, on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds, against the Respondent's  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.






    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Appellant claimed to have a well founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Iraq for reasons of his imputed political opinion. He is a  Sunni  Kurd
    from Sulaymaniyah. He claims to have worked as a driver for Susa prison
    and to have wrongly been accused by the governor of having  assisted  a
    high-profile Islamist prisoner escape. The Appellant was  told  by  the
    governor that if this man escaped, he would  be  forced  to  serve  the
    remainder of the escapee's sentence. He fears that he will  be  subject
    to ill treatment.  He  further  fears  harm  from  the  terrorists  who
    organised the escape.


 3. The Appellant was twice interviewed  by  an  immigration  officer.  His
    initial 'screening interview' took place on the 28th December  2013  at
    Yarlswood but it was in his second 'substantive' interview on the  16th
    January 2015 in which  the  Appellant  fully  set  out  his  case.  The
    Appellant had neither solicitor nor  independent  interpreter  present.
    The Appellant supplied one item of corroborative evidence in support of
    his claim, a card which purported to be his identity card issued by the
    Iraqi Correctional Service.

 4. The details of his claim  can  be  summarised  briefly.  He  was  twice
    followed whilst driving by unidentified  men  in  a  BMW.  On  a  third
    occasion these men pulled him off the road at  gunpoint  and  told  him
    that they knew he worked in the prison and that he had to help them get
    a certain prisoner, named S, out. They said if he helped them he  would
    be paid; if he refused he would be killed. The Appellant  went  to  the
    prison and reported the incident to the governor who told him that  the
    prisoner in question had two heavy sentences, one for twenty years  and
    one of execution. He said that this man could not be allowed to  escape
    and that if the Appellant helped him he would serve his sentence.  This
    is the rule  in  Iraq.   Subsequently  the  prisoner  did  escape.  The
    Appellant feared that the governor would be as good  as  his  word  and
    went into hiding.   He claims that the police came looking for  him  at
    home. His family arranged for an agent to take him out of the country.

 5. The refusal letter is dated 23rd January 2015.  The Appellant's account
    is summarised and rejected. The Respondent found there to  be  numerous
    internal inconsistencies in the account, for instance in the  Appellant
    claimed in his screening interview to have been "rescued by the police"
    whereas he had made no mention of this in  his  substantive  interview.
    The Respondent was unimpressed by the ID card which inter alia  bore  a
    photograph of someone who didn't even  look  like  the  Appellant.  The
    Appellant had been asked to describe his uniform and  his  answers  did
    not accord with country background information held by the Home  Office
    in respect of what Iraqi prison guards wear.

 6. When the matter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's
    account  was  similarly  rejected.  The  determination  identified  the
    following inconsistencies as reason to disbelieve the Appellant:

       i)   The interview record shows that the  Appellant  referred  to  a
          "female" prisoner having escaped yet  in  his  oral  evidence  he
          denies this and attributes the record to interpreter error;


      ii) The ID card is not reliable evidence because one side (in Arabic)
          was not translated, the English side does not provide any of  the
          biographical details one would expect to see on such a  document;
          the man in the photograph (whom the Appellant  accepts  does  not
          look entirely like him) is not wearing a uniform;

     iii) It is "not credible" that  the  Appellant  would  have  told  the
          Governor of the prison about the planned escape;

      iv) At the time of the escape the Appellant was with two other guards
          so could not reasonably be suspected of involvement in it;

       v)  There  is  no  country  background  evidence  to   support   the
          Appellant's claim that in Iraq it is  the  law  that  guards  who
          allow prisoners to escape have to serve the sentence in lieu;

      vi) The Appellant does not even claim to be a guard but a  driver  so
          even if that was the law he could not be held responsible;

     vii) It is "not credible" that the Appellant would have  been  at  his
          uncle's house when police came looking  for  him  at  his  family
          home;

    viii) The Appellant's claim to have had an arrest warrant issued in his
          name but that he left it  with  his  agent  is  rejected  as  not
          credible.

 7. The Appellant drafted his own grounds of appeal. There is  one  central
    point. That is that the Appellant never  said  that  it  was  a  female
    prisoner who escaped. The interview record is wrong. The Appellant  has
    had a registered certified interpreter, Mr Ali Sarmeny, listen  to  the
    entire recording of the interview. Mr  Sarmeny  has  written  a  letter
    dated 1st June 2015 wherein he confirms that  having  heard  the  whole
    recording he nowhere heard the Appellant mention the escape of a female
    prisoner.  The Appellant further maintains that it is an error of  fact
    to assert that drivers who work  for  the  Iraqi  prison  service  wear
    uniforms.

 8. Permission was granted on the grounds that it  was  arguable  that  the
    determination contains an error of  fact,  in  that  the  Tribunal  has
    expressly held against the Appellant the inconsistency  in  his  claim,
    then denial, that it was a female prisoner that escaped. If Mr  Sarmeny
    is correct and the interview record is wrong, there would be a material
    unfairness to  the  Appellant  which  arguably  impacts  on  the  whole
    decision.

 9. At the hearing the Appellant appeared in person. He has  had  no  legal
    assistance throughout his entire asylum process and for that  reason  I
    permitted him to make further submissions  about  the  content  of  the
    determination. He wished to make the further  submission  that  he  had
    never stated that the photograph on the card did  not  look  like  him;
    what he had said was that the way the card was printed  may  have  made
    the photograph look different. He maintained that the picture was him.


    My Findings

10. Although no explanation is offered as to why the word "female" makes at
    least two appearances in  the  interview  record,  the  Respondent  now
    accepts (by way of letter dated 22nd January 2016) that  the  Appellant
    has never claimed that a female prisoner escaped. Paragraphs  22-23  of
    the determination specifically reject as not credible  the  Appellant's
    explanation that the interpreter made a mistake in  his  interview.  We
    now know that he was quite right to make that claim. The  determination
    therefore contains a material error of fact.


11. I am further satisfied that the photograph on the ID card (I was  shown
    the original by Ms Johnstone) does in fact look like the Appellant. The
    'concession' made by him was, in  effect,  that  in  the  printing  the
    picture had become slightly distorted. It depicts a man who looks  just
    like the Appellant, albeit with  more  hair.  I  would  note  that  the
    Appellant is quite distinctive looking.

12. Although not raised by the Appellant I am further  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was not rationally entitled  to  describe  as  "not
    credible" the assertion that he informed the Governor  of  Susa  prison
    about the planned escape. The reason given for that conclusion is  that
    he would not have done this given the possible consequences for him  if
    there was in fact an escape.  This appears to overlook  the  fact  that
    the Appellant was, by his account, an  employee  of  the  Iraqi  prison
    service and that in that capacity he might  be  expected,  as  a  basic
    duty, to be loyal to his employers and not allow prisoners  to  escape.
    It also fails to take into account the evidence that the Appellant  had
    been threatened and that he had already sought the  protection  of  the
    police by telling them about what had happened.  In  that  context  his
    visit to the Governor was entirely consistent.   Similarly  the  First-
    tier Tribunal appear to reject without reason the Appellant's  evidence
    that he had gone to his  maternal  uncle's  house  for  dinner  on  the
    evening that police came to his family home. That is simply said to  be
    "not credible"; upon reading the determination I do not understand why.

13.  Ms  Johnstone  argued  that  notwithstanding   any   errors   in   the
    determination the overall decision was sustainable.  The  Tribunal  had
    given a number of other reasons why the account was rejected and  taken
    cumulatively they were sufficient for the appeal to be  dismissed  even
    if the reasons infected by error are taken out of the equation.

14. The Appellant's challenge to this  determination  was  at  first  blush
    unpromising.  My initial view was in accordance with that formed by the
    Respondent. However having read the refusal  letter,  interview  record
    and determination with care, and bearing in mind that the  standard  of
    proof is relatively low and that this was an  appellant  without  legal
    representation,   I am  not  satisfied  that  the  overall  credibility
    findings can survive uninfected by the errors  identified  above.   The
    Tribunal's starting point was that there was  a  glaring  and  material
    inconsistency in the Appellant's  evidence  and  that  he  had  wrongly
    sought to blame this on an interpreter. From there various matters  are
    dismissed as "not credible" without in my view, rational or  sufficient
    reason.   No alternative findings are made in respect of whether or not
    there would be a viable internal flight alternative for this Appellant.
    The decision is therefore set aside in its entirety.

15. The Appellant tells me that he has now managed to obtain a  translation
    of the identity card. He can now admit this into the evidence. In  view
    of the extent of fact finding required it is appropriate to remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.   The Appellant should bear in mind,
    should he continue to represent himself, that at the next  hearing  the
    burden is on him to demonstrate that a) he remains at risk in his  home
    area of Sulaymaniyah and b) that  if  returned  to  Iraq  it  would  be
    unreasonable for him to relocate to Baghdad.



    Decisions


16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains error of laws  and  it
    is set aside.


17. The decision is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

18. The First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity and that stands.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   29th
                                January 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne on the 25th
June 2015.

ng, there airness to the Appellant. that escaped. If Mr Sarmeny is correct
and the interview record is wrong, that would be a m

