
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/02189/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 5 November 2014                    |On 23 December 2014                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                    D.M.
                       (Anonymity Direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay of Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal with permission against a decision by the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Pirotta) dismissing an appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

 2. At the end of the hearing we reserved our determination, accepting that
    if we were to find in favour of the  appellant  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant was born  on  2  December  1960  and  is  a  national  of
    Zimbabwe.  According to the appellant, she entered the  United  Kingdom
    as a visitor in  April  2002  with  leave  for  6  months.   She  twice
    unsuccessfully sought leave to remain as a student  but  on  the  third
    attempt, in December 2002, she was granted leave until April 2005.  She
    was subsequently given leave until April 2006.  An application in  July
    2006 for indefinite leave to remain was rejected.  The  appellant  then
    applied for humanitarian protection but this was  also  rejected.   Two
    further applications were rejected in 2007 and a subsequent appeal  was
    withdrawn, according to the appellant without her instructions.

 4. In 2009 the appellant claimed asylum but her claim was rejected by  the
    respondent.  The appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  and  the
    decision was then withdrawn for reconsideration by  the  respondent  in
    January 2010.  In March 2014 the appellant was served  with  a  removal
    decision, against which this appeal has been brought.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  ("the  Judge")  noted  that  the
    appellant was a teacher in Zimbabwe and did not feel safe there because
    of the prevailing political tension and because of her own, her  second
    husband's, her son's and her extended  family's  political  activities.
    She claimed that as a former teacher with no family in Zimbabwe outside
    Harare she would be unable to relocate internally and would not be able
    to provide for herself.

 6. The Judge found that the appellant  had  lived  in  various  places  in
    Zimbabwe from birth in 1960 until 2002.  She was a teacher but was  not
    employed at government schools but by businesses in different towns  to
    teach employees  and  employees'  children  at  schools  on  their  own
    business premises.  The  appellant  was  never  involved  in  operating
    polling stations, persecuted  for  being  a  teacher,  or  involved  in
    elections, or accused of manipulating voters or  influencing  students,
    parents or other voters.  She was never arrested at school or forced to
    chant slogans for Zanu-PF.  She was not intimidated or abducted and did
    not otherwise come to the attention of Zanu-PF, the Border Gezi or  the
    Green Bombers or war veterans.

 7. The appellant was able to study,  obtain  qualifications,  live,  work,
    move about the country to  pursue  her  career,  marry  twice,  have  3
    children, obtain her own passport and leave Zimbabwe using it,  without
    coming to the adverse attention of  the  authorities.   She  was  never
    arrested, detained, or questioned and never faced  any  other  problems
    apart from the general difficulties that were pervasive in Zimbabwe  at
    those times.

 8. As regards the appellant's own political activities,  the  Judge  found
    that the appellant was never a member of the  MDC  and  was  not  known
    either to the authorities or to Zanu-PF.  She had an aunt, M M, who was
    politically prominent, but there was no evidence that the appellant was
    targeted because of her relationship with her aunt. The appellant lived
    at her aunt's home for  a  time,  but  related  only  one  incident  of
    political violence occurring  there.   The  appellant  had  never  been
    directly attacked herself.

 9. The appellant has not taken part in any MDC activity in the UK but  has
    attended some ZimVigil meetings, although she has not attended one  for
    some years.  She was a member of  the  Labour  Party  and  of  a  peace
    organisation.   The  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    activities in the UK would have brought her to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities in Zimbabwe, including the CIO. The appellant said she  was
    not  involved  in  Zimbabwean  politics  in  the  UK  because  she  was
    disillusioned.  The Judge did not find it credible that  the  appellant
    would become politically active if she returned to Zimbabwe.

10. The Judge referred to the appellant's evidence to the effect  that  she
    had other family members involved in politics, in addition to M M.  Her
    son, S N, was deported to Zimbabwe after having made  two  unsuccessful
    asylum claims.  He has returned to live with his stepbrothers and there
    was no evidence of any adverse treatment having been  accorded  to  him
    after his return.

11. The Judge noted that the appellant had submitted a letter in support of
    her asylum claim purporting to have been written by T Biti of the  MDC.
    This stated that the appellant's son had been framed  for  killing  the
    wife of a war veteran, J C.  The Judge did not find this letter to be a
    reliable document or its contents  to  be  credible.   The  appellant's
    account, like her son's, was that he had been  arrested  twice  by  the
    police but not for any specific crime and had never been  charged.  The
    Judge concluded that the letter submitted by the appellant was a  false
    document.  She also found that the appellant was not a reliable witness
    and was given to exaggeration.  Even  the  account  the  appellant  had
    given of her son's political activity and two arrests was  inconsistent
    with  the  accounts  he  had  given  in  his  application  and  appeal,
    differing, in particular, in respect of the dates, the reasons for  the
    arrests, and his political activities.

12. The appellant's second husband, J W, submitted a  letter  in  which  he
    said he joined the MDC in 1999 and left Zimbabwe  in  2001  because  of
    concern for the party and for himself.  However he had  separated  from
    the appellant in 1990 and made no mention of any persecution of  either
    the appellant or himself.  He was granted refugee status in  Canada  in
    2004 after an appeal.  The appellant also referred to  her  brother-in-
    law, A N, who was said  to  have  been  a  dissident  and  involved  in
    political activity along  with  the  appellant's  son.   There  was  no
    evidence from the appellant's son to suggest that A N  was  persecuted.
    The Judge found that there was no credible evidence that  A  N  was  of
    adverse interest to the authorities, although it was  claimed  that  he
    had been arrested once.

13. The Judge had before her two expert reports, one by Dr Peel and another
    by Dr Steve Kibble.  She found the report by Dr Peel was out of date as
    it related to events before November 2009.  The Judge  considered  that
    the conclusions in Dr  Kibble's  report  concerning  the  risk  to  the
    appellant on return to Zimbabwe relied on the assumption that  she  had
    given a truthful account of being a political  activist  known  to  the
    authorities and to organisations  supporting  the  regime.   The  Judge
    pointed out that Dr  Kibble  was  unable  to  compare  the  appellant's
    account  with  her  son's  account,  and  unable  to  analyse  evidence
    concerning other family members in Zimbabwe and the lack of evidence of
    persecution of the appellant and these other family members.

14.  The Judge found that the appellant's profile as a teacher was entirely
    different from those who were caught up in hostilities during elections
    as the appellant had never worked in a government school and was  never
    a polling officer.  She had never been harassed by the  regime  or  its
    agents or forced to attend rallies or to do anything against her  will.
    The Judge did not accept  that  teachers  or  former  teachers  in  the
    appellant's position faced  a  greater  risk  of  social  or  political
    discrimination, suspicion or political hostility.  She  found  that  in
    any event there was no credible evidence that  the  appellant's  former
    employment would be known or remembered 12 years after she left.

15. Having found the appellant would not face persecution or  serious  harm
    in Zimbabwe, the Judge considered  the  appeal  under  Article  8.  The
    appellant had shown that she had a close connection with  her  daughter
    and son-in-law,  her  former  daughter-in-law  and  her  grandchildren,
    particularly one child  who  has  special  needs.   The  appellant  had
    another former  daughter-in-law  and  grandchild  in  the  UK  but  the
    evidence was that she had no  relationship  with  them.  The  appellant
    lives with her daughter in Northampton, but travels to London to pursue
    activities for her  church.   The  Judge  noted  that  the  appellant's
    daughter pays for full time child care for her daughter, who  is  under
    school age, and pays for child care for her son,  who  attends  school.
    The Judge accepted that the appellant  has  a  good  relationship  with
    these children and  with  her  daughter  and  son-in-law  but  was  not
    satisfied that she was "pivotal" in the running of their  household  or
    played a role which could not be fulfilled  otherwise.   The  appellant
    was not the children's main carer and did not play a  special  role  in
    their upbringing.  The best interests of the children would continue to
    be served if they remained with their parents as at present.

16. The judge found that the  appellant's  granddaughter,  A,  who  is  the
    daughter  of  the  appellant's  son,  is  severely  disabled  and   has
    behavioural as well as medical problems.   She  is  cared  for  by  her
    mother and her mother's new partner and her mother's parents, who  live
    close to A in London.  The appellant has a good relationship with A but
    the appellant is involved with the family for only part of one  weekend
    every month and for some time in the summer.   There  was  no  credible
    evidence that the child was emotionally dependent upon  the  appellant.
    There was no evidence that  the  best  interests  of  A  would  not  be
    protected if the appellant returned to Zimbabwe, or that she could  not
    visit Zimbabwe with her parents.

17. The appellant was extensively involved in  church  activities  but  she
    could pursue these activities in  Zimbabwe.   At  the  age  of  53  the
    appellant had spent all her life in Zimbabwe apart  from  the  last  12
    years.  She would be able to establish her life again in  Zimbabwe  and
    the interference with her private and  family  life  arising  from  her
    removal would not be disproportionate.

18. The Judge accepted that there had been an  "inordinate"  delay  by  the
    respondent in making a decision, during which time  the  appellant  had
    taken the opportunity to develop a place in society and with her family
    and improve her employment skills.  However, the degree  to  which  the
    appellant was committed to her family, to the church and to  her  other
    activities was not so great that her commitment had to continue in  the
    UK.

The grounds of appeal

19.  So far as the rejection  of  the  claim  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection is concerned, the appellant contends that the Judge did  not
    address, or even cite, the country  guideline  case  of  NN  (Teachers:
    Matabeleland/Bulawayo: Risk) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT  198  and  made  a
    finding on the risk to teachers in paragraph 45  of  the  determination
    which directly contradicted the findings of the Upper Tribunal  in  NN.
    Further, the finding that the appellant had submitted a false  document
    with her asylum application was reached through  procedural  unfairness
    amounting  to  an  error  of  law,  because  that  allegation  was  not
    foreshadowed and not put to the  appellant  when  she  was  giving  her
    evidence.

20.  So far as Article 8 was concerned, it was contended that the Judge had
    failed to have regard to a  material  consideration,  namely  that  the
    appellant is HIV positive.  It was alleged  that  the  Judge  erred  in
    making the proportionality assessment by failing to have regard to  the
    public  interest  considerations  set  out  in  section  117B  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014. Two further specific criticisms are:

      a)  that the Judge did not take into account the delay of 4  years  in
         the making of the respondent's decision on  the  asylum  claim,  in
         terms of EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41, and


      b) that the Judge did not make  proper  findings  in  respect  of  the
         relationship  between  the   appellant   and   her   daughter   and
         grandchildren, and the findings which were made were contradictory.


21.  Finally on Article 8, it was contended that the Judge did not properly
    address the correct test in relation to proportionality of  removal  in
    terms of either Gulshan [2013] UKUT 650 or Huang [2007] UKHL 11.


Discussion

22.  Logically the first issue that arises is whether the  Judge's  finding
    about the letter from the MDC being a "false document" (paragraph 35 of
    the determination) was the result of procedural unfairness. As  already
    recorded, the Judge found that this letter was  inconsistent  with  the
    other evidence given by the appellant and the evidence given previously
    by her son. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Lay submitted that it  could
    be inferred that this finding "leaked" into the Judge's  assessment  of
    the other evidence and, in particular, coloured  her  approach  to  the
    appellant's general credibility. He relied on RR (Challenging evidence)
    Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 000274.

23. The expression "false document" is ambiguous: it could  mean  that  the
    document was not what it purported to be, i.e. it was a forgery  (which
    is the sense in which Mr  Lay  invited  us  to  interpret  the  Judge's
    finding) but it could also mean  that  its  contents  were  untruthful.
    There are two main issues arising here.  The first  is  whether,  as  a
    matter of procedural fairness, the Judge was entitled to make a finding
    on this matter without giving the appellant notice of  the  point,  and
    the second is whether the Judge went too far in making a finding to the
    effect that the document was false. The challenge before us is confined
    to the first issue (ground 7 of the grounds of appeal).

24.  On behalf of the respondent, Mr Whitwell referred us to  paragraph  14
    of the respondent's refusal letter  of  21  July  2009,  at  which  the
    respondent stated that the appellant's reliance on this  letter  called
    into question both the credibility of her evidence and the weight which
    could be placed upon it.  The  respondent  did  not  suggest  that  the
    letter was fabricated, but referred instead  to  the  case  of  Tanveer
    Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439.  The respondent correctly drew from this case
    that documents should not be  looked  at  in  isolation  when  deciding
    whether reliance could be placed upon them, but should be looked at  in
    the round with the rest of the evidence.

25. Mr Lay submitted that although this was in the earlier  refusal  letter
    of 21 July 2009 it  was  not  raised  in  the  respondent's  subsequent
    refusal letter of 27 March 2014.

26. That letter refers to  the  appellant's  son's  asylum  claim  and  its
    outcome in paragraphs 16-19.  At paragraph 19 it is  pointed  out  that
    the appellant had provided a letter from MDC with regard to  her  son's
    political activities and this would be considered  in  accordance  with
    the principles of Tanveer Ahmed.  Then, at paragraph 27 of  the  letter
    there is a comment by the respondent similar  to  the  comment  in  the
    refusal letter from 2009, reading as follows:

         "You have submitted an undated letter from the MDC signed by T Biti
         which details your son S's involvement with the MDC and states  "He
         lived [sic] Zimbabwe to United Kingdom in 2000 after he was  framed
         that they killed the wife of J C the Zanu-PF's war veteran."    The
         letter has been carefully considered but  has  not  been  found  to
         assist your credibility as it is  considered  that  this  statement
         does not support your claim that he  was  detained  by  the  police
         twice in 2000 and that he was arrested  but  not  charged  on  both
         occasions (AIR Q.17, Q.60, Q.65, Q.68, Q.71).  You also  failed  to
         mention the charges made against your son in your asylum interview.
          This calls into question the credibility of both your evidence and
         the weight which could be placed upon the letter."


27. There is then a reference to the principles set out  in  Tanveer  Ahmed
    and the conclusion is expressed at paragraph 29 that,  having  examined
    the appellant's claim as a whole "no weight can  be  placed  upon  this
    document".

28. It has to be acknowledged  that  the  respondent's  assessment  of  the
    weight to be given to this letter and the way it should be assessed, in
    terms of Tanveer  Ahmed,  has  more  to  recommend  it  than  the  more
    forthright conclusion by the  Judge  that  the  document  was  "false".
    However, on the issue of procedural fairness, we find Mr  Lay  to  have
    been mistaken in his submission to us that  this  letter  was  not  the
    subject of comment (or challenge) in the refusal  letter  of  27  March
    2014.  We note that when he said this, Mr Lay was responding to part of
    the submissions by Mr Whitwell for  the  respondent.   Clearly  Mr  Lay
    spoke out on the basis of a mistaken recollection and  would  not  have
    made that submission had he been in a position to check the content  of
    the letter.

29. We accept  Mr  Whitwell's  submission  that  there  was  no  procedural
    unfairness to the appellant  arising  from  the  Judge  making  adverse
    findings about this letter in the context of her credibility  findings.
    The appellant was put on notice both in the refusal letter of 2009  and
    the refusal letter of 2014 that the reliability of this letter  was  in
    issue, that the respondent's position was  that  no  weight  should  be
    afforded to it and that it called into question the credibility of  the
    appellant's evidence. As long as the appellant knew that the respondent
    did not accept it as being a reliable document, or  one  on  which  any
    weight could be placed, she had sufficient forewarning to  be  able  to
    deal  with  the  matter.  In  terms  of  procedural  fairness  it   was
    unnecessary for her to be told any more than that its  reliability  was
    not accepted, although it was clear from both refusal letters that  the
    respondent considered there were material inconsistencies  between  the
    contents of the letter and the appellant's and her son's  own  accounts
    of why he left Zimbabwe and that it potentially had an  adverse  effect
    on their credibility.

30. The appellant  was  legally  represented  and  could  have  offered  an
    explanation in respect of the letter either in her witness statement or
    in her evidence at the hearing or in both.  She  did  neither.  In  the
    circumstances that we have described,  the  fact  that  no  explanation
    appears to have been provided does not lead to the inference  that  the
    appellant was taken by surprise. The  Judge  was  clearly  entitled  to
    refer to the letter and to make adverse findings about it, including on
    credibility, without unfairness to the appellant.  We therefore  reject
    the allegation of procedural unfairness.

31. As already indicated, the question of whether the Judge was entitled to
    refer to the letter as a "false" document is a  rather  different  one.
    There was no finding that the appellant was  responsible  for  creating
    the document, and that inference  cannot  be  drawn  from  the  Judge's
    finding. The Judge certainly regarded the letter as  contradicting  the
    appellant's other evidence and she was entitled to do so. In the  light
    of those contradictions and the fact that the appellant's son has faced
    no difficulties on his return to Zimbabwe  she  was  also  entitled  to
    conclude that its contents were untrue, regardless of  its  authorship.
    We do not consider that in this context the use by  the  Judge  of  the
    terminology "false" constituted an error of law.

32. Even if the finding could be read as a finding that  the  document  was
    not authentic, which was the way in which Mr Lay urged us to  interpret
    it, it added nothing of significance to the points  taken  against  the
    appellant, because it did not matter whether the letter  was  genuinely
    written by someone in the MDC. What mattered was whether what  it  said
    was true. The letter was relevant to the assessment of credibility; the
    Judge made use of it for this purpose; the Judge did not err in law  in
    so doing, let alone in a material respect.

33. We therefore turn to the question whether the Judge  properly  assessed
    the risk to the appellant as a teacher or former  teacher  and  whether
    she had proper regard to the country guideline case of NN.  If  it  was
    clear that the Judge did take the guidelines into account, then it  was
    unnecessary for her to have made specific  reference  to  them  in  her
    determination, although it would have been preferable had she done  so.
    If she did not take the guidelines into account, there will have been a
    material error of law in the determination.

34. Dr Kibble considered the risk to the  appellant  as  a  former  teacher
    stating, in particular, at paragraph 25:

         "The likelihood that a newly arrived person would be able to  enter
         the formal job market, for example in the teaching  sector,  is  so
         low as to be considered  negligible.  Here  NN  can  be  considered
         relevant.  Additionally teachers were  especially  targeted  during
         previous elections due to  them  being  perceived  as  natural  MDC
         supporters and were under suspicion  as  they  acted  as  electoral
         officers.  There is also an element of "Pol Potism" within  Zanu-PF
         who prefer to see the population as clients and therefore dependent
         on the party.  As such teachers and indeed preachers would be  seen
         as  too  independent  minded  and  therefore  possible  objects  of
         suspicion."

35. The Judge considered this risk principally at paragraphs 48 and  49  of
    the determination, which read as follows:

    "48.   Dr Kibble did not have the advantage of having all the  evidence
         and  acknowledged  that  his  remit  was  not  to   determine   the
         appellant's credibility.  He did not know that she had submitted  a
         false document from the MDC, nor could he compare  the  appellant's
         account with that of her son, know of the determination in his case
         or analyse the evidence concerning other family members in Zimbabwe
         and the lack of evidence of persecution of the appellant and  these
         persons.  I accept that the report provides a  general  picture  of
         events and developments in Zimbabwe at this time and an analysis of
         the  case  law  concerning  risks.   However,   the   circumstances
         described cannot apply to this  appellant  because  she  is  not  a
         truthful witness, the events alleged had not  been  established  to
         have taken place, to the  lower  level  of  proof  required  of  an
         appellant, the appellant has no political profile  in  Zimbabwe  or
         the United Kingdom and cannot be considered to be or  have  been  a
         member or supporter of MDC.


     49. The evidence of risks to teachers in the past and currently  cannot
         apply to the appellant whose  profile  as  a  teacher  is  entirely
         different to those who were unwittingly caught  up  in  hostilities
         during elections as she never worked in a  government  school,  was
         never a polling officer, has never been harassed by the  regime  or
         its agencies into political activity, slogan singing  or  chanting,
         attending rallies or doing anything against her  will.   I  am  not
         satisfied to the appropriate  standard  of  proof  required  of  an
         appellant that she would be known as a teacher  from  the  past  12
         years ago or more or that she would have to seek work as a  teacher
         if  returned.   The  entire  premise  of   the   risk   feared   is
         misconceived." [emphasis added].


36.  Mr Lay raised three main criticisms. First, he submitted that although
    a case by case evaluation was required, the country guideline  case  of
    NN should be the starting point and the issues arising from  it  needed
    to be addressed with reasons. The Judge did not take that approach  and
    there is no reference to NN in the determination, save by inference  to
    be drawn from the passing reference to Dr Kibble's report in  paragraph
    48 which we have underlined.

37. Mr Lay referred to paragraph 9  of  the  skeleton  argument  which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal. As Dr Kibble pointed out, there  was  a
    heightened risk for teachers. On the basis of the country guidance  and
    Dr Kibble's report, a teacher would be regarded as  an  opinion  former
    even if the teacher had no political profile. Yet  the  Judge  did  not
    address that risk in the determination, which he submitted  she  should
    have done,  even  if  she  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  her
    politicial activities. The appellant had worked as  a  teacher  for  20
    years in Zimbabwe and had also worked as a teacher in the  UK.  Mr  Lay
    submitted that it was unrealistic to suppose that the appellant, having
    been a teacher for so many years, would seek to carry out any different
    job on her return. However we must set  those  submissions  against  Dr
    Kibble's opinion that it was fanciful that she would be able to  obtain
    employment in the teaching sector (particularly given that the  company
    schools in which she used to teach no longer exist).

38. Secondly, Mr Lay submitted  that  there  was  a  contradiction  in  the
    judge's findings between stating, for example  at  paragraph  49,  that
    there was evidence  of  a  risk  to  teachers,  and  her  statement  at
    paragraph 45 where she recorded:

         "There is no credible evidence that  teachers  or  former  teachers
         face  a  greater  risk  of  social  or  political   discrimination,
         suspicion or attract political hostility."

39. That finding follows immediately after, and is made in the context of a
    finding that:

         "There is no  credible  evidence  that  [the  appellant]  would  be
         recognised as  a  teacher  if  she  returned  or  that  her  former
         employment would be known or remembered 12 years after she left".


40.  Thirdly, Mr Lay referred  to  the  appellant's  evidence  that,  as  a
    teacher in the town of K, she had left in order to avoid  getting  into
    trouble once it became a Zanu-PF stronghold;  yet  the  Judge  made  no
    reference to her evidence about those matters and  failed  to  take  it
    into account in evaluating risk. The appellant records  that  she  left
    her job in 1993 and moved away because  it  was  becoming  increasingly
    unsafe for  her  to  work  there  due  to  her  political  beliefs  and
    activities and her relationship to her brother-in-law.

41. Mr Lay helpfully provided a copy of a map which  had  been  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, highlighting the towns in which the appellant  had
    worked.  He also referred us to a useful chronology of her  career,  at
    pages 2-3 of the skeleton  argument.   Mr  Lay  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant's home village was in the area of Kadoma, to the  south  west
    of Harare.  Mr Lay submitted that the appellant was  facing  return  to
    Harare, where there was a danger to teachers.  He  submitted  that  the
    Judge did not adequately address the risk to teachers in  high  density
    areas at paragraphs 48 and 49 of the determination.

42.  So far as internal relocation  was  concerned,  the  Judge  considered
    whether the appellant could return to Bulawayo or some  other  area  in
    which she would not encounter Zanu-PF.  Mr Lay  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant had only lived in Bulawayo for two years in the  1980s.   The
    company schools in  which  she  had  worked  no  longer  existed.   The
    appellant faced a risk of discrimination as a Shona in Matabeleland and
    Bulawayo, in accordance with  CM  (EM  Country  Guidance)  Zimbabwe  CG
    [2013]  UKUT  00059.   According  to  Dr  Kibble's  expert  report  the
    appellant would struggle to get a  job  and  find  accommodation.   She
    would be worse off in Bulawayo than in Harare, where she had family.

43. For the respondent, Mr Whitwell referred to the risk factors set out at
    paragraph 40 of NN.  He submitted that  the  Judge  properly  addressed
    these at paragraph 49 of the determination.  Reference was made  in  NN
    to  a  "geographic  filter"  and  persecution  could  be   avoided   by
    relocation, as considered at paragraph 58.  Mr Whitwell submitted  that
    not all teachers faced a heightened risk on return to Zimbabwe, and the
    country guidance did not go that far.  It  was  necessary  to  look  at
    their individual circumstances.  The Judge did this at paragraph 49  of
    the  determination  where  there  was  an  appropriate  analysis.   The
    question of whether the appellant could work as a teacher on return was
    a different one.

44.  Mr  Whitwell  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  was  related  to   a
    significant political figure with whom she was likely to be associated.
     He referred to paragraphs 53 and 54 of NN.  The Judge  addressed  this
    at paragraph 46 of the determination, and  no  criticism  was  made  of
    that.  The appellant was not at risk from being a teacher without more,
    such as a political profile.  If there was no risk to the appellant  in
    Harare, as the Judge  was  entitled  to  find,  then  any  argument  on
    internal relocation fell away.

45.  We appreciate why the absence of any specific reference to the  latest
    country guidance case has given rise to complaint,  particularly  since
    there is a brief reference at paragraph  59  of  the  determination  to
    three other country guideline cases, but no reference anywhere  to  NN.
    However, the Judge cannot have overlooked NN. She had  before  her  the
    appellant's skeleton argument, in which NN was cited and  quoted.   The
    Judge also had before her Dr Kibble's report, to which she referred  in
    assessing the question of the risk to the appellant  as  a  teacher  or
    former teacher.

46. In our judgment, although it might have been better if  the  Judge  had
    specifically referred to  what  was  said  in  NN  about  the  risk  to
    teachers, she does expressly accept in paragraph 48 that Dr Kibble  set
    out in that passage of his report  a  general  picture  of  events  and
    developments in Zimbabwe and an analysis of the case law concerning the
    risks. Nothing is said by the Judge to  criticize  that  analysis.  The
    sole point the Judge is making about Dr Kibble's report in paragraph 49
    is that his assessment of the risks to the  appellant  is  premised  on
    accepting that the appellant is telling the  truth  about  her  alleged
    political profile, whereas the Judge found that she was not.

47. It is therefore to be inferred that the Judge has taken what Dr  Kibble
    has said as an accurate reflection  of  the  country  guidance.  Whilst
    obviously this approach is less satisfactory than an express  reference
    to NN, it does not constitute a material  error  of  law,  unless  that
    approach led the Judge to  overlook  a  material  factor  or  otherwise
    misdirect herself on the guidance. As Mr Lay  acknowledged,  the  Judge
    had to form an assessment of the risk to the appellant having regard to
    her individual circumstances, as well as to the country information and
    country guideline cases. In our judgment she was entitled to reject the
    appellant's account of her political profile  and  evaluate  the  risks
    identified by Dr Kibble in the light of that rejection.  She  was  also
    entitled to draw the distinction that  she  did  between  teachers  who
    worked in government schools and  teachers  with  a  profile  like  the
    appellant's, who had only  worked  in  the  private  sector  and  never
    encountered any direct hostility.

48. It seems to us that the real problem in the present case  is  that  the
    absence of any  express  reference  to  the  leading  case  on  country
    guidance is coupled with a statement in paragraph 45 which is,  on  the
    face of it, completely at odds with that guidance. It may well be  that
    in context what the Judge meant in paragraph 45 was that there  was  no
    credible evidence that former teachers with a profile such as  that  of
    the appellant faced heightened risks on return, which is what she  went
    on to state in paragraph 49; but that is not the only way in which  the
    earlier passage can be interpreted. In such circumstances it  would  be
    unsatisfactory (and unfair  to  the  appellant)  for  us  to  make  the
    assumption  that  the  Judge  did  not  fall  into  error   by   making
    contradictory findings in the manner that Mr Lay contends she did.

49. We are reinforced in that view by the failure by the Judge specifically
    to engage with the point made by Dr Kibble and  in  NN  about  teachers
    being regarded as opinion formers. Mr  Lay  contends  that  a  lack  of
    political profile would not, in itself, mean that such a risk  was  not
    present, particularly in Harare or its environs. It  may  be  that  the
    answer to that point lies in the Judge's express findings (referred  to
    in paragraph 38 above) that the appellant was unlikely to be recognized
    as a teacher or former teacher on return; but the Judge does  not  make
    that link. It would be inappropriate for an appellate Tribunal to  draw
    an inference that the Judge had  addressed  that  risk  when  there  is
    nothing expressly on the face of the determination to indicate that she
    did.

50. Mr Lay also submitted that in evaluating risk the Judge disregarded the
    appellant's evidence  of  her  reasons  for  leaving  K  in  1993.  The
    chronology lodged with his skeleton argument states that from  1985  to
    1993 the appellant worked as a teacher in K and left  in  1993  due  to
    political problems. The appellant addressed her reasons for  leaving  K
    in her witness statement of 7 July 2014, which was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  She records that her first husband's brother, A N,  was
    politically active in the K area and worked closely with the MDC.   The
    appellant said she supported A N in his work and attended meetings with
    him - often secret ones.  After the company the appellant  was  working
    for was taken  over  by  the  government  the  area  became  a  Zanu-PF
    stronghold.

51. The appellant does not record any specific abuse  or  mistreatment  she
    received in K.  She said left because of a general  fear  that  it  was
    becoming  a  Zanu-PF  stronghold  and  therefore  dangerous  for  those
    involved with opposition activities. The appellant's case is  that  she
    left K before she suffered any mistreatment, by reason of a  fear  that
    she would encounter problems of this nature if she remained there as an
    opposition activist.

52. Although the Judge did not make any specific  findings  in  respect  of
    this incident, she did reject the appellant's general  account  of  her
    political involvement and she did expressly  find  that  there  was  no
    credible evidence  that  A  was  of  any  particular  interest  to  the
    authorities. Since the appellant's account of why she  left  K  was  so
    integrally bound  up  with  the  credibility  of  her  account  of  her
    political activities, and  the  Judge  plainly  disbelieved  her  about
    those, it was not an error of law, let alone a material error  for  the
    Judge to have omitted to make specific findings about the  reasons  why
    she left K.

53.  Mr Lay has strongly argued before us that the  findings  made  by  the
    Judge in relation to the appellant's claim for international protection
    were flawed by errors of law. We have not  accepted  his  arguments  in
    their entirety but we are persuaded, for the reasons given above,  that
    the Judge erred by failing to consider fully the risk factors  relating
    to teachers arising from the case  of  NN  and  by  appearing  to  make
    findings on the risk to teachers which were  contrary  to  the  country
    guidance.  Accordingly we set  aside  the  Judge's  decision.   We  are
    satisfied that in view of the extent of the fact-finding  required  the
    appeal should be remitted to be heard before a differently  constituted
    First-tier Tribunal, in accordance with Practice Statement 7.2(b).

Article 8

54.  Having decided to allow this  appeal  in  respect  of  the  claim  for
    international protection it is unnecessary for us  to  deal  in  detail
    with the challenge in respect of the Judge's findings under Article  8.
    Given that, at its highest, the evidence of Dr Kibble was that it might
    be difficult for the appellant to obtain the medication she requires to
    treat her condition, we are not persuaded that the judge erred  in  law
    in her approach to proportionality.  We note the specific finding  made
    by the Judge at paragraph 62 of the determination that the appellant is
    not in need of medical treatment or specialist services which  are  not
    available in Zimbabwe.  The Judge found that  the  appellant's  medical
    condition was currently under control and there was  no  evidence  that
    her life was threatened by it.  These comments were made in the context
    of Articles 2 and 3 rather than in relation to  Article  8,  but  these
    findings nevertheless show that that the Judge  directed  her  mind  to
    this issue.

55. It was submitted that the  Judge  did  not  deal  adequately  with  the
    question of delay.  We note that at paragraph 76 of  the  determination
    the Judge referred specifically to the respondent having delayed making
    a decision "for an inordinate time".  The Judge stated that during this
    period the appellant took the  opportunity  to  develop  her  place  in
    society, her relationship with her family and  her  employment  skills.
    She recognised that the place  of  the  appellant  in  her  family  and
    outside it had been enhanced by the passage of time, but the  appellant
    nevertheless intended to maintain her own life, career and work and  to
    live apart from her family if she were able to do so.  Accordingly  the
    Judge was entitled to find that this was not a case where  delay  would
    tip the balancing exercise in favour of the appellant.

56. The Judge also had regard to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  her
    grandchildren.  It is stated at paragraph 20  of  the  application  for
    permission  to  appeal  that  according  to  the  Judge  there  was  no
    "credible" evidence of the appellant's relationship with  her  disabled
    grandchild, A.  This is not an accurate reflection of what is  said  at
    paragraph 70 of the determination, where in relation  to  A  the  judge
    stated that although the relationship with a grandmother was  different
    to a relationship with other adults "there is no credible evidence that
    the child is emotionally dependent on the appellant, from whom  she  is
    separated for most of the month."  We are  satisfied  that  this  is  a
    finding that the Judge was entitled to make upon the evidence and we do
    not consider that she misconstrued the evidence in the  course  of  the
    balancing exercise.

57. The remaining submissions for the appellant in relation  to  Article  8
    are of a more directly legal nature.  It is said that the Judge did not
    have regard to section 117B  of  the  2002  Act,  as  inserted  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, and did not properly consider the legal basis  of
    the proportionality test.  On the first of these issues, we  note  that
    submissions in respect of section 117B formed part of  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  this  regard  it
    was pointed out that the appellant is able to speak  English  and  that
    private and family life was established in the UK at a  time  when  she
    was here lawfully between 2002 and 2007, and subsequently while she was
    awaiting a response to her asylum claim.  It was  also  submitted  that
    the appellant received unlawful advice in  2008  from  an  unregistered
    adviser.

58. The Judge was clearly aware of the appellant's immigration history  and
    of the extent of her private and family life  and  addressed  these  in
    some detail.  It does not follow from the fact that the  appellant  can
    speak  English  and  the  fact  that  she  was  here  lawfully  for   a
    considerable period that in the balancing exercise the public  interest
    in maintaining effective  immigration  control  is  outweighed.   These
    factors may be regarded less  as  positive  factors  in  the  balancing
    exercise than as indicating the absence of negative factors.   Although
    the Judge did not specifically refer to section 117B,  it  is  apparent
    that she had the appropriate factors in mind in the balancing  exercise
    and she therefore made no error of law in this regard.

59.  It  was  suggested  that  the  Judge  did  not  seek  to  resolve  any
    inconsistency that might be thought to arise from a comparison  of  the
    Upper Tribunal case of Gulshan with the principles set out by the House
    of Lords in Huang.  According to  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, at paragraph 22, in terms of Gulshan the appellant had to  show
    something "exceptional"  to  succeed  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
    whereas in terms of Huang the judge needed to consider only whether the
    removal of the appellant was reasonable in the circumstances.   It  was
    submitted by Mr Lay that the Judge  did  not  properly  address  either
    test.

60.  We do not accept that there is any such tension  between  Gulshan  and
    Huang. The new Immigration  Rules  are  intended  to  reflect  previous
    domestic and Strasbourg jurisprudence on Article 8, but  although  they
    are intended to be comprehensive, there  may  still  be  cases  falling
    outside the Rules in which the removal of an individual will amount  to
    a disproportionate interference with  his  or  her  Article  8  rights.
    Although in Gulshan the Upper Tribunal certainly referred to  arguments
    about "exceptional" circumstances, the phrase used by the  Tribunal  in
    its conclusions was whether there  were  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules, and thus whether removal would
    be "unjustifiably harsh". The Judge  did  not  need  to  refer  to  the
    Gulshan test, provided that she approached the  balancing  exercise  in
    the correct  legal  manner;  there  is  nothing  on  the  face  of  her
    determination to suggest that she failed to do so.

61. The Judge in this appeal simply referred  to  proportionality  and,  in
    particular, to the best interests of the grandchildren. She carried out
    a straightforward balancing exercise of the type envisaged in Huang and
    made no error of law in so doing.

62. The final argument put before us by Mr Lay at the hearing was that  the
    Judge did not have proper regard to paragraph  276ADE  in  relation  to
    private life.  In particular, Mr Lay pointed out  that  this  provision
    had been amended in favour of an appellant in relation to whether there
    would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into
    the country to which she would have to go.

63. The difficulty Mr Lay faces in this regard is that it does  not  appear
    to have been argued before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant
    satisfied paragraph 276ADE.  Furthermore, even if it  had  been  raised
    before her, the findings made by the Judge and  recorded  at  paragraph
    57, (albeit in respect of the asylum grounds) were that  the  appellant
    would have available to her a home with her brother, his  children,  or
    other extended family, or with her son in Zimbabwe.  The judge  further
    found, at  paragraph  73,  that  the  appellant  could  participate  in
    religious and social activities in Zimbabwe and, at paragraph 74,  that
    she could participate in churches, social groups or clubs.  It was  not
    disputed that she might have difficulty in finding employment  but  the
    Judge found at paragraph 75 that she would be  able  to  establish  her
    life again using the qualifications,  experience  and  skills  she  had
    acquired in the UK.  The  Judge  appears  to  have  accepted  that  the
    appellant would be able to rebuild her life with relatives in  Zimbabwe
    until she was fully independent.   Accordingly,  on  the  fact-findings
    made by the Judge, Mr Lay's argument in  respect  of  paragraph  276ADE
    would not have succeeded, even had it been presented before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

64.  Although  we  do  not  find  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  her
    consideration of  Article  8,  we  are  conscious  that  the  balancing
    exercise under Article  8  may  be  affected  by  findings  on  country
    conditions in Zimbabwe to be made when the appeal is heard again by the
    First-tier Tribunal.  For this reason  we  do  not  consider  that  the
    Judge's findings and reasons under Article 8 should be preserved.

Conclusions

65. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.

66. We set aside the decision and  remit  the  appeal  to  be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be  re-
    made.  None of the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are preserved.

Anonymity

67. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  We continue  that
    order (pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008) for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed      Date 22 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
