
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02607/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 23rd February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     MJ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Lowis, Counsel; Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Page dismissing the Appellant's appeal against  the
    Respondent's decision refusing to grant him asylum. The  judge  however
    allowed the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and was granted permission
    to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam.  The  ground  upon  which
    permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) It is arguable that the judge erred in not determining the risk  on
         return to the Appellant on religious grounds.

 3. I was provided with a Skeleton Argument from Ms Lowis which parties had
    the opportunity to consider before making their submissions.

    Preliminary Issue: Permission to cross-appeal out-of-time

 4. The Respondent  had  originally  sought  to  cross-appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge Page allowing the Appellant's appeal under Article  8
    ECHR. The Appellant's and Respondent's applications for  permission  to
    appeal were considered  simultaneously  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish and both were refused on 16 June 2015.  Whilst  the  Appellant
    sought to renew his application via Form IAUT-1 to the Upper  Tribunal,
    the Respondent did not.

 5. Mr Clarke made an application for permission to  appeal  against  Judge
    Frankish's decision at the start of the hearing.  Mr  Clarke  submitted
    that the Appellant's status was precarious, the  result  of  which  was
    that the Appellant could not benefit from rule 399B. The  judge  should
    have been aware of AM (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) and that  a
    grant of Discretionary Leave did not  lead  to  settlement.  Mr  Clarke
    accepted that the application was not timely renewed and could not give
    any reason given why this was not done nor any accounting for the delay
    in bringing the application before me today.

 6. In reply, Ms Lowis relied on her Skeleton Argument and  submitted  that
    the AM Malawi point was not explicitly mentioned in paragraph 3 of  the
    grounds to Judge Frankish and  it  is  not  a  Robinson  obvious  point
    either. She highlighted that the ratio of Robinson is to  assist  self-
    represented appellants and its ratio shows that the Tribunal is under a
    duty to consider points not raised by the asylum seeker at the Tribunal
    below. In that light, Article  8  grounds  cannot  be  raised  now  via
    Robinson,  particularly  where  the  Respondent  has  not  applied  for
    permission and no notice of appeal has been given at all.

 7. I indicated to the parties that I refused the application.  My  reasons
    are as follows. The Respondent and Appellant  are  both  bound  by  the
    terms and strictures of The Tribunal (Upper Tribunal)  Procedure  Rules
    2008 and its time limits stipulated for bringing an appeal. There is  a
    wealth of authority that makes clear that reasons  must  be  given  for
    every moment of delay that passes (see BO and Others (Extension of time
    for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00035 and Samir (FtT Permission  to
    appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003(IAC). There are no reasons  given  here
    whatsoever, and moreover, the delay from June 2015 to December 2015  is
    a matter of several months and is excessively late in any  view.  I  am
    given to understand that there may have been an internal  lapse  within
    the Presenting Officers' Unit which resulted in the  failure  to  renew
    the appeal; however such a matter does not  excuse  the  need  for  due
    process and observation of the procedure rules. Furthermore, the ground
    is itself without merit. It is trite  that  the  doctrine  of  Robinson
    obvious issues are not normally to be employed in favour of  the  state
    failing to take an issue in an appeal (see Miftari v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 481), however there is  nothing
    Robinson  obvious  in  my  view  either  way  that  would  assist   the
    Respondent. I accept Ms Lowis's submission that  the  precarious  issue
    cannot now be raised without complying with the due process of filing a
    notice of appeal in a timely manner and particularly where there are no
    reasons given for failing to do so, nor any accounting for the delay in
    making the application for permission to appeal only on the morning  of
    the hearing, which would not be occurring  had  it  not  been  for  the
    Appellant's own timely renewal, of course. Consequently, I  refused  to
    extend time to allow the Respondent to bring her appeal.

    Error of Law

 8. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I find that there was an error of law
    in the decision such that it should be set aside.  My  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.

 9. The Skeleton Argument of the Appellant's solicitor, placed  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, is clear in its submission at paragraphs 11-
    17 that the Appellant was pursuing a claim on the grounds of  religion.
    Those paragraphs are sub-headed with that  the  term  'Religion'  also.
    Those paragraphs state that the Appellant is an apostate  and  that  he
    would be questioned on return to Iran in relation to his  religion  and
    cannot be expected to lie and tell the Iranian authorities that he is a
    Muslim. The solicitor bizarrely associated  this  risk  with  political
    opinion, however the fact of apostasy  more  closely  falls  under  the
    convention  reason  for  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  owing  to
    religion rather than a political view.

10. Nonetheless, it is clear from reading the determination that the  judge
    has not considered this matter at all. Whether this ground was  pressed
    orally in submissions or  not,  it  remains  a  convention  reason  and
    clearly a matter that requires adjudication, otherwise it  would  place
    the  Appellant  at  risk  of   arbitrary   refoulement   without   just
    satisfaction of his asylum claim.

11. Therefore, the determination not being subject to particular  criticism
    other than an omission to consider apostasy shall stand, including  the
    findings of fact and credibility assessment made, as far as they go.

12. In the light of the above findings, the appeal shall be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal so that the discrete issue of risk  emanating  from
    the Appellant's apostasy may be considered.

    Decision

13. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand and the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Albeit the error does  not  infect
    any findings made by Judge Page, I direct that  the  remainder  of  the
    appeal be heard by a differently constituted bench.

15. I do not make any anonymity direction for  now.  That  shall  remain  a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal to consider  upon  consideration  of
    the discrete issue before it.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini



Paragraph 14 of the  Decision  and  Reasons  (see  underlined  passages)  is
hereby amended  pursuant  to  Rule  42  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 to read as follows:

14.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on Article 8  shall  stand  and
    the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that the  discrete
    issue  of  risk  emanating  from  the  Appellant's  apostasy   may   be
    considered.  Albeit the error does not  infect  any  findings  made  by
    Judge Page, I direct that the remainder of the appeal  be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted bench.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

