
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02134/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 December 2014                         |On 15 January 2015         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                          MR PARTHEEPAN KUMARASAMY
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mrs J Rothwell of counsel instructed by
    Theva Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant is a Tamil citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  17
         July 1990. He has been given permission to appeal the determination
         of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Afako ("the FTTJ") who  dismissed  his
         appeal against the respondent's decision  of  4  February  2011  to
         remove him from the UK as an illegal entrant.


      2. There is a  long  immigration  and  appeal  history  which  I  will
         summarise. The appellant entered the UK on 7 May 2003  and  claimed
         asylum. He said that he was a Tamil who had been involved with  the
         LTTE and as a consequence feared persecution from the  authorities.
         His application was rejected  by  the  respondent  and  his  appeal
         dismissed by an Adjudicator, Mr Trethowan. It does not appear  that
         this decision was appealed. With his appeal  rights  exhausted  the
         appellant was removed from the UK on 7 July 2003.


      3. The appellant said that he had a wife and two children but has lost
         contact with them. After he returned to Sri Lanka in July  2003  he
         claimed that there was a ceasefire in force and he went to  a  LTTE
         controlled area. He had skills as  a  dance  master  and  the  LTTE
         recruited him to do work for them in their television  station.  He
         assisted with the production  of  documentaries  and  taught  songs
         about the LTTE. He worked in this way until 2009. From 2007 he  was
         required to assist the LTTE by relocating and  helping  look  after
         the families of some LTTE leaders. He did not take part in combat.


      4. Following the military defeat of the LTTE in 2009 the appellant and
         others surrendered to the army. He claimed to have been taken to  a
         forest where the men were separated from the women and  they  could
         hear the women being sexually assaulted. He was slashed and cut  on
         his legs and saw two people beaten to death. He was  held  in  Camp
         Joseph from April 2009, tortured  and  made  to  wear  a  mask  and
         identify members of the LTTE.


      5. After about a year in custody arrangements were  made  for  him  to
         escape by the appellant's father and a man with whom the  appellant
         had worked. The appellant was taken to India where  he  stayed  for
         seven months before travelling to France and then  to  the  UK.  He
         arrived here illegally in January 2011 and made a fresh  claim  for
         asylum.


      6. The respondent rejected the appellant's account of events  and  did
         not accept that he was a refugee. The appellant appealed  and  that
         appeal was heard by First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson  on  9  May
         2011. The appeal was dismissed on asylum,  humanitarian  protection
         and human rights grounds. The appellant appealed and  the  decision
         was set aside on the grounds of error of law. There was a direction
         that the appeal be reheard in the First-Tier Tribunal.  It  was  in
         these circumstances that the appeal came  before  the  FTTJ  on  11
         September 2013.


      7. Both parties were represented.  Oral  evidence  was  given  by  the
         appellant, his sister and a friend. The FTTJ heard submissions from
         both  representatives  and  reserved  his  determination.  In  that
         determination the FTTJ  found  that  the  starting  point  for  the
         assessment of risk was the country guidance case of GJ  and  others
         (post-Civil War: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UK  UT00319  (IAC)
         and reviewed the factors in GJ which might relate to the appellant.
         In paragraph 60 to 78 of the determination the FTTJ  addressed  the
         question of the appellant's credibility in the light of the medical
         and expert evidence. He concluded that  the  appellant  was  not  a
         credible witness. It was not accepted that the appellant  had  been
         targeted by the authorities in Sri  Lanka  or  that  he  left  that
         country in the circumstances he claimed. In any event, even if  the
         key elements of his claim were accepted  at  best,  they  were  not
         sufficient to place him on either a stop or a watch list or attract
         the adverse attention of the authorities. His symptoms of PTSD were
         not so severe that returning him to Sri Lanka would be a breach  of
         his Article 3 or 8 human rights.


      8. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
         and human rights grounds. An anonymity order was made to avoid  any
         suggestion that disclosure of  his  claimed  circumstances  in  Sri
         Lanka would constitute an additional risk factor.


      9. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was refused by
         a First-Tier Tribunal judge. It was renewed to and  granted  by  an
         Upper  Tribunal  judge.  The  grounds  are  not  well  drawn.   The
         individual grounds are not clearly identified or numbered.  I  took
         Mrs Rothwell through the grounds and she accepted that  there  were
         four. Mr Shilliday said that this accorded with his reading of  the
         grounds.


     10. The ground submits that the FTTJ erred in law. Firstly, by  relying
         on discrepancies in the description of scarring as contained in the
         expert medical report filed in  support  of  the  appeal  with  the
         description set out in the determination of  Mr  Trethowan  without
         giving the appellant the opportunity to  respond  and  address  the
         alleged discrepancies. Secondly, following the directions given  by
         the Court of Appeal in granting permission to  appeal  in  GJ,  the
         FTTJ should not have relied on this country guidance  case  or  the
         conclusion that even if the appellant's core account of events  was
         accepted he would not be at risk on return. However,  circumstances
         have changed since this ground was raised and permission to  appeal
         granted. The Court of Appeal have upheld GJ. Mrs Rothwell  withdrew
         the second  ground  of  appeal.  Thirdly,  after  the  hearing  the
         appellant's then representatives submitted a witness statement from
         his mother but without any explanation  as  to  why  it  was  being
         submitted, why it had not been submitted for the  hearing  and  why
         she had not given evidence at the hearing. The FTTJ should not have
         relied  on  inconsistencies  between  the  evidence  given  by  the
         appellant and the evidence revealed by the statement as damaging to
         the appellant's credibility. In  any  event  the  mother's  witness
         statement did not support the  FTTJ's  conclusions.  Fourthly,  the
         FTTJ accepted that the appellant suffered from  PTSD  but  did  not
         properly reflect this as  a  corroborative  factor  supporting  his
         account of events.


     11. Mrs Rothwell has submitted an application dated 30 October 2014 for
         permission to amend the grounds  of  appeal.  The  amended  grounds
         would build on the third ground of appeal by arguing that the  FTTJ
         erred in law by admitting in evidence the  witness  statement  from
         the appellant's mother submitted after the hearing  without  giving
         her the chance to explain the  issues  about  which  the  FTTJ  was
         concerned.  Also,  the  appellant's  mother  was  not   given   the
         opportunity to explain why she had not been able to contact the Sri
         Lankan lawyer who wrote the letter in 2011.  Mr  Shilliday  thought
         that the amended grounds  were  already  covered  by  the  original
         grounds. I gave permission for the amended grounds to  be  admitted
         and argued.


     12. Both sets of representatives have failed to comply with  directions
         to prepare for the hearing. In written directions dated  3  October
         2014 the respondent was directed to produce a duplicate Home Office
         bundle. This has not been done. At the hearing 30 October 2014  the
         appellant's representatives were directed to produce  a  bundle  of
         indexed  and  paginated  documents  and  to  serve  these  on   the
         respondent and the Tribunal. This has not been done.  Mrs  Rothwell
         was not able to provide any explanation. Mr Shilliday said that  he
         was not aware that directions had been given. I gave him a copy. As
         the hearing had already been  adjourned  once  for  lack  of  these
         documents I was reluctant to order  a  further  adjournment.  As  a
         result and as the hearing progressed and it  became  apparent  that
         documents which were not on the Tribunal file  were  needed  copies
         had to be provided and  time  taken  to  study  these.  Finally,  I
         checked with the representatives, who assured me that  I  had  been
         provided with all  the  documents  which  were  needed  for  proper
         consideration of this appeal.


     13. In paragraphs 67 to 69 of the determination the FTTJ  compared  the
         evidence as to the  appellant's  injuries  and  in  particular  his
         scarring set out in the  report  from  Professor  Lingam  with  the
         appellant's evidence about these matters given at  the  hearing  in
         2003. There were  inconsistencies  both  as  to  the  injuries  and
         scarring and the appellant's accounts  of  events  which  the  FTTJ
         relied on in arriving at the conclusion that it  was  difficult  to
         place reliance on Professor Lingam's conclusion that the  appellant
         was tortured in 2009 and as one of  the  matters  damaging  to  the
         appellant's  credibility.  Throughout  this  and  the   appellant's
         earlier appeal it has  always  been  clear  that,  apart  from  his
         identity and nationality, the respondent considered him not  to  be
         credible and did not accept  his  account  of  events.  The  appeal
         hearings have been conducted on this basis and inconsistencies have
         always been part of this. In these circumstances the appellant  and
         those representing him would have known this and been well aware of
         the need to address all matters going to his credibility  including
         the need to search out and address all  potential  inconsistencies.
         There was no obligation on the FTTJ either  to  ensure  that  every
         potential inconsistency was put to the appellant at the hearing  or
         to reconvene the hearing to ask  the  appellant  to  explain  every
         inconsistency  which  became  apparent  the  FTTJ  on  a   detailed
         examination at the time of preparing the determination.  There  was
         also an obligation on the appellant's  representatives  to  provide
         Professor  Lingam  with  all  the  evidence  necessary  for  proper
         consideration of all the relevant circumstances of his  case  prior
         to the preparation of an expert report. As  a  professional  expert
         Professor Lingam should also have ensured that he had been provided
         with all this evidence. The evidence before Professor Lingam is set
         out at pages 3 and 4 of  his  report  and  consisted  only  of  the
         appellant's screening interview and statement of evidence form.  He
         should have been  provided  with  the  documents  relating  to  the
         appellant's  first  appeal  including  the  determination   of   Mr
         Trethowan. In this regard there is no error of law.


     14. The second ground of appeal has been withdrawn.


     15. The third ground of appeal has  been  amended  as  I  have  already
         indicated. The FTTJ records that the appellant's  mother's  witness
         statement was submitted by his representatives on 23  October  2013
         after the hearing and together with a copy of the death certificate
         of  the  appellant's  father.  The  FTTJ  had  given  no  direction
         requiring the production of either of these. They were  unsolicited
         and not accompanied by any explanation either from  the  solicitors
         or the appellant as to why they were being submitted  or  how  this
         evidence might impinge on any  evidence  already  given,  including
         evidence from the appellant. The  appellant's  new  representatives
         are critical of the  former  representatives  for  submitting  this
         statement without any explanation. I asked whether  any  criticisms
         had been put to  the  former  representatives  and  their  response
         sought so that it could be put before the Tribunal. I am told that,
         whilst had been oral communication about this, there  has  been  no
         correspondence. In the absence of evidence to the  contrary  it  is
         reasonable  to  assume  that  the  statement   was   submitted   on
         instructions. I find that the FTTJ was entitled to consider  these,
         compare  them  with  the  evidence  already  given  and   to   draw
         appropriate conclusions. There was no reason why, as  Mrs  Rothwell
         suggests, the FTTJ should have rejected the evidence. Even  if  the
         conclusions were adverse to the appellant the FTTJ was not required
         to  reconvene  the  hearing  to  give   the   appellant   and   his
         representatives the opportunity to address these  matters.  He  was
         entitled to assume that if further material  was  submitted  proper
         consideration had been given to the  effect  of  this  and  whether
         anything else was needed. When they  submitted  this  material  the
         appellant's representatives did not  ask  for  the  hearing  to  be
         reconvened. The points raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  to
         whether it was reasonable for the FTTJ  to  reach  his  conclusions
         arising from differences between the evidence of the appellant  and
         his mother  are  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  conclusions
         properly reached on the evidence.


     16. As to the fourth ground of appeal I find that the FTTJ did not,  as
         Mrs Rothwell suggests, put the cart before  the  horse.  The  final
         credibility  finding  appears  at   paragraph   78   after   proper
         consideration of the medical evidence.


     17. In paragraph 66 the FTTJ accepted that appellant displayed symptoms
         of PTSD and "I am also prepared to accept that some  of  the  minor
         deficiencies in the appellant's account can be  attributed  to  his
         mental condition." This was a proper conclusion open to the FTTJ on
         the evidence of Dr Zapata as a whole and in particular the  extract
         set out in paragraph 23 of the grounds of appeal. I find  that  the
         FTTJ considered the medical evidence as an  integral  part  of  his
         findings on credibility.


     18. Now that the second ground of appeal has been withdrawn there is no
         longer any attack on the conclusion that, even if the core  of  the
         appellant's account is accepted, he would not at risk on return  in
         the light of GJ.


     19. I have not been asked to make an anonymity  direction  and  do  not
         consider that identifying the appellant would give rise to any risk
         factor.


     20. I find that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
         determination.






    .............................................
    Signed        Date 10 December 2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


