
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/02254/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr Burrett, counsel
For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's decision to refuse her asylum  claim.
    Her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  FTTJ  D  A  Pears  ("the
    FTTJ") in a decision and reasons promulgated on 22 June 2015.

 2. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    maintain it in this Tribunal.

 3. For ease of reference, I maintain the descriptions of  the  parties  as
    appellant and respondent, as they were in the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    in the FTTJ's decision and reasons, although it  is  the  Secretary  of
    State who pursues this appeal.

Background

 4. The appellant is an Iraqi citizen who, in 2003, worked for a company in
    Baghdad which transported goods for the  American  military  there.  In
    2004 the company premises and staff were attacked by armed gunmen;  the
    appellant sustained injuries. Whilst recovering at home,  she  received
    threatening telephone calls; the appellant was followed by unidentified
    men and her sister was threatened.  The appellant continued to work for
    the company. After five months, as  the  appellant  was  continuing  to
    receive threats, the company asked her to work for  an  Iraqi  company.
    The appellant worked for that company for five months.   The  appellant
    subsequently moved to Jordan  where  she  married.  The  appellant  was
    granted asylum in  Jordan  by  the  UNHCR  until  September  2010.  The
    appellant came to the UK in 2014 to support  her  parents-in-law.   The
    appellant's relationship with her husband was abusive and  she  is  now
    separated from him. She has a British daughter  for  whom  she  is  the
    primary carer.

 5. The respondent accepted the  appellant's  account  of  events  in  Iraq
    before her departure to Jordan. However, she asserted  that  there  was
    sufficiency of protection and that the appellant could relocate  within
    Iraq on return. As a result, the appellant pursued her appeal which was
    successful.

 6. The respondent pursues this appeal against the decision of the FTTJ  on
    the following grounds:

      a. The FTTJ gave weight to immaterial matters, having referred to  the
         travel advice issued to British nationals  when  finding  that  the
         appellant's British daughter could not be  expected  to  return  to
         Iraq; he had confused the nature and purpose of "travel advice" and
         the assessment of the risk on return. This was not relevant to  the
         assessment of the appellant's asylum claim.

      b. The FTTJ's finding at paragraph 34 that "there is  no  evidence  to
         suggest that the risk she was under then ... would be any less" was
         unreasoned and reversed the evidential burden. The FTTJ had  failed
         to engage with the fact that the passage of time  had  reduced  the
         level of risk and the nature and reach of the threat.

      c. The FTTJ's finding that the appellant could not internally relocate
         within southern Iraq or to the KRG was not reasoned.

      d. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds  but  the  appellant
         had been granted discretionary leave to remain;  her  appeal  could
         only  be  brought  on  asylum  grounds   under   s83,   Nationality
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler
    who noted there were arguable errors of law in relation to the adequacy
    of the FTTJ's  findings  on  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
    relocation, taking British government travel advice into  account,  and
    allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.  He considered it unlikely
    that the ground at b. above would amount to a material  error  of  law,
    but indicated that "all grounds could  be  argued".   Thus  the  matter
    comes before me.

The Submissions

 8. Ms Everett, for the respondent, relied on the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    grant of permission. She accepted that a fair part of  the  appellant's
    claim had been accepted by the respondent. Nonetheless, with regard  to
    the FTTJ's reference to the FCO travel advice, it was not known on what
    basis that advice had been drafted, whether  it  related  to  the  same
    standard of risk as applied in asylum appeals. It was only of relevance
    to the appellant's British daughter. She said that, having spoken to Mr
    Burrett, prior to the hearing before me, she now understood the essence
    of the appellant's claim, namely that she would be  returning  to  Iraq
    with a dependent British child. She said she could "see the  merit  and
    force  of  that  argument"  and  that  it  "may  make   a   significant
    difference". She accepted that it was  an  issue  which  had  not  been
    clearly set out in the FTTJ's decision but which was relevant and  went
    to the materiality of any error of law.

 9.  Ms  Everett  submitted  that  the  FTTJ's  reasoning  with  regard  to
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation was  inadequate.  She
    submitted that he should have given more reasons as to why she remained
    at risk given the passage of time and that she no longer worked for the
    organisation  she  had  done  when  last  in  Iraq.  Having  made  this
    submission she then conceded that it was uncertain "how far that  point
    would run".

10. Ms Everett accepted that the wording in paragraph 34, which appeared to
    suggest a reversed burden of proof, may  not  withstand  scrutiny  when
    seen in the context of the whole decision.

11. Mr Burrett submitted for the appellant that the  findings  and  reasons
    were brief but, read  as  a  whole,  were  sufficient.   The  FTTJ  had
    identified the issues raised in the reasons for refusal and focussed on
    them. This was relevant because the respondent  had  accepted  material
    aspects of the appellant's claim such as her employment history and her
    account of previous persecution. She had also  accepted  the  appellant
    had a British child. Mr Burrett submitted that if the FTTJ  had  relied
    only on the FCO travel advice,  the  respondent's  challenge  would  be
    sustainable. However, the FTTJ had also relied on the respondent's  own
    operational guidance note (paragraph 28).  In particular, the FTTJ  had
    cited the  conclusion  in  the  guidance  that  "persons  perceived  to
    collaborate with or  who  have  collaborated  with  the  current  Iraqi
    Government and its institutions, the former US/multi-national forces or
    foreign companies are at risk of persecution in Iraq..." This  was,  he
    submitted, of direct application to  the  appellant  and  it  could  be
    inferred that the FTTJ  had  based  his  findings  on  this  background
    material amongst other factors.

12. Mr Burrett submitted that the content of  the  FCO  travel  advice  was
    relevant to the fact that, if the appellant were removed to  Iraq,  she
    would be accompanied by her dependent British daughter.   He  submitted
    that the FTTJ had taken into account  (Paragraph  40)  the  appellant's
    "status as a lone female with a foreign national child"; there  was  no
    suggestion in the decision that the travel advice was relevant  to  the
    assessment of risk to the appellant on return.

Discussion

13. The FTTJ's decision should be read as a whole. He cites the appropriate
    burden and standard of  proof  at  paragraph  8.  Whilst  it  could  be
    inferred from paragraphs 34 and 37 that he had reversed that burden,  I
    am satisfied that, taking the decision as a whole, he did not do so and
    that the unfortunate phrasing in those paragraphs, and paragraph 37  in
    particular, does not render the decision  unsafe.  Indeed,  Ms  Everett
    accepted as much in her submissions. Whilst  it  is  further  suggested
    that the FTTJ failed to engage with the respondent's assertion that the
    passage of time and the fact the appellant was no  longer  working  for
    the organisation which had previously put her  at  risk  of  harm  were
    factors to be taken into  account  in  assessing  current  risk,  these
    matters had  been  addressed  by  the  FTTJ,  albeit  briefly,  in  his
    reference to the background material (his paragraphs 35  and  28):  the
    FTTJ refers to the respondent's operational guidance and, in particular
    cites the following:

         "3.10.6  ...individuals who had cooperated with  ....those  working
         for foreign companies ... including relatives  to  all  the  above-
         mentioned categories of persons could also  be  at  risk  of  being
         targeted." [my emphasis]

         ...

         3.10.9   Conclusion. Persons ... who  have  collaborated  with  ...
         foreign companies are at risk of persecution in Iraq.  ... The case
         owner will need to take into consideration the  particular  profile
         of the claimant, the nature of the threat  and  how  far  it  would
         extend, and whether it would be unduly harsh to expect the claimant
         to relocate." [again, my emphasis]

14. In assessing the risk on return, the FTTJ took into  account  that  the
    appellant would be accompanied by her dependent British  daughter.   He
    found that the appellant would not have family  support  and  that  she
    would be a lone single female on return.  These were factors,  together
    with the appellant's history of working with a foreign  company,  which
    would put her at risk. It was not unreasonable for  the  FTTJ  to  take
    into account the FCO travel advice (which had been placed  before  him)
    in assessing whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant,
    accompanied by her British dependent daughter, to relocate within Iraq.
    The travel advice was of relevance to whether it would be  safe  for  a
    British citizen to travel to the areas proposed by the  respondent  for
    relocation. Whilst not  clearly  stated  within  the  decision,  it  is
    implicit that the appellant's status as a lone  single  female  with  a
    foreign national child was sufficient,  with  her  previous  employment
    history, to put her at risk of continued adverse interest.

15. I agree that the issue of sufficiency of  protection  could  have  been
    addressed more fully by the FTTJ. However, in paragraph 30, in  setting
    out the appellant's evidence as to the  risk  of  harm  from  the  Shia
    militia "who are backed up by the government and the police force", the
    FTTJ states "That seems to chime with the background evidence".   There
    is no suggestion by the respondent that this  finding  is  perverse  or
    unfounded and I find therefore that it is unchallenged.  The FTTJ  sets
    out in detail  the  appellant's  evidence,  including  in  relation  to
    sufficiency of protection (paragraphs 30 and 31).  At paragraph  33  he
    finds "(as did the  Respondent)  that  the  Appellant  has  provided  a
    credible and internal consistent account that she worked with a company
    who transported goods for  the  American  military  and  that  she  was
    attacked and suffered threats in Iraq as a consequence."  He goes on to
    find "there is no evidence to suggest that the risk she was under  then
    as a perceived collaborator or a traitor, as I find she would then have
    characterised [sic], would be any less".    This  phrasing  calls  into
    question the burden of proof  applied  by  the  FTTJ  but,  taking  the
    decision as a whole, I  find  that  he  adopted  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant, which he found credible, to form  the  view  that,  together
    with the background  material  cited  in  full  at  paragraph  28,  the
    appellant remains at risk as a person who had in the past worked for  a
    company allied with  the  American  military.   Whilst  the  respondent
    submits the FTTJ had failed to take into account the  passage  of  time
    and the appellant's current circumstances,  it  is  implicit  from  the
    decision as a whole that the FTTJ did take these issues  into  account.
    However, he also considered there were further factors to be taken into
    account, namely the appellant's status as a lone single female  with  a
    foreign national child, the inference being that the existence  of  her
    foreign child strengthened the risk of perceived historical links  with
    foreigners/foreign interests.

16. For these reasons, whilst the decision could be criticised for  lacking
    detail, read as a whole, sufficient reasons are given for the  findings
    that the appellant is at  real  risk  on  return,  that  there  is  not
    sufficiency of protection available to her and that it would be  unduly
    harsh for her to relocate with her British daughter. I  therefore  find
    that the decision is sustainable and that there is no error of law.

17. Whilst the FTTJ misdirected himself in allowing  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds when it had been brought on asylum grounds  only,  under
    s83 Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, this error of  law  is
    immaterial given my findings above. Nonetheless it should be set  aside
    given the lack of jurisdiction.

Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    any material error on a point of law.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds shall stand.

20. The decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds is set  aside,
    the FTTJ having no jurisdiction to make such a decision.


Signed A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date





Anonymity Direction
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black   Date

