
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02738/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 12th August 2013                           |on 13th August 2013          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               GJYLIJE HALILAJ
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Harrison of Halliday Reeves Law Firm.
For the Respondent: Mr Mangion - Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Bircher promulgated on 7th May 2013 in which she  allowed  Ms
        Halilaj's appeal against a direction for her removal to Albania  on
        both asylum and human rights (Article 3) Grounds.


     2. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  alleging  a
        material error by the Judge in the chronology of events as a result
        of which her finding Ms Halilaj was trafficked is not sustainable.









Discussion



     3. In her summary of the evidence Judge Bircher stated Ms Halilaj flew
        from Albania to Germany [22]. From there she travelled  to  Ireland
        and attempted to gain entry to Ireland at Dublin Airport,  but  was
        refused entry and returned to Germany [34]. In Germany she met four
        Albania males who told her to accompany them  as  they  could  find
        work for her. They took her to her hotel to work  as  a  prostitute
        [34-5]. Whilst working for the men she was moved around  places  in
        Germany, France, and mostly Belgium,  but  was  never  allowed  out
        unless accompanied by the men [36]. This appears to be a  recording
        of Ms Halilaj's evidence regarding the chronology of events.


     4. At paragraphs 52  and  53  of  the  determination,  however,  Judge
        Bircher made the following findings:


              52. I am satisfied that arrangements were put in place for the
   appellant               to be trafficked to the UK  as  a  prostitute.  I
   recognise that she did not                 seek  asylum  in  Germany  and
   Belgium also attempted to enter                    Ireland .......


              53. The appellant at this stage may well have been  under  the
   control of                   the traffickers who assisted her  to  go  to
   Ireland  possibly  because  they                  deemed  it  easier   to
   illegally    enter     the     UK.     This     approach     would     be
   consistent with later arrangements to send  her  to  Newcastle  to  claim
          asylum because it was safer and or easier.


     5. The grounds argue, with some justification, that the chronology  in
        paragraph 53 is at odds with  Ms  Halilaj's  own  evidence  as  she
        claims that he was only after she returned from  Ireland  that  she
        met the men in Germany. I find that if Ms Halilaj had not met these
        men until she returned from Ireland the finding that she  may  have
        been under the control of traffickers at the time of seeking  entry
        to Ireland is perverse.


     6. Similarly, Ms Halilaj's own evidence was that she was  assisted  by
        "good Samaritans" who helped as her escape from  those  controlling
        her, drove her to London, and brought her a  ticket  to  Newcastle.
        The Judge's finding that she was trafficked into the United Kingdom
        is contrary to this and Ms Halilaj's own evidence that she was not.
        She claimed she entered the United Kingdom with the  assistance  of
        those who offered to help as later confirmed in paragraph 62 of the
        determination. The Judge's findings are contrary  to  the  evidence
        and perverse.


     7. The Secretary of State acknowledges that  a  safe  and  sustainable
        finding that Ms Halilaj was held as a prostitute  in  Germany,  and
        trafficked to France and Belgium, may put her at risk on return  to
        Albania as a vulnerable woman although this finding is unsafe as  a
        result of the material errors made by the Judge.


     8. It was accepted that the findings referred to above are contrary to
        the evidence and I find a material error of law made on  the  basis
        of the failure  to  properly  consider  the  evidence,  failure  to
        understand  and  apply  that  evidence,  and  findings  made  being
        affected by perversity, when the evidence is properly considered.


     9. The determination shall be set aside with there being no  preserved
        findings. The appeal shall be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
        for, having considered the Senior  Presidents  Practice  Direction,
        this is an appeal in which Ms  Halilaj  has  yet  to  have  a  fair
        hearing as the evidence she relies upon has not been shown to  have
        been properly considered.


    10. The following  directions  shall  therefore  apply  to  the  future
        conduct of this appeal:




              i.  The appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   sitting at North                  Shields  to  be  heard,  on  the  first
   available date, by a Designated Judge                  of  that  Tribunal
   or    a    senior    salaried    First-tier    Judge    only,    to    be
   nominated by Designated Judge Zucker. Time estimate three hours.


              ii. The appellant and respondent  shall  file  any  additional
   evidence they                wish the First-tier Tribunal to consider  no
   later than seven days                      before  the  hearing.  Witness
   statements shall stand as the evidence in                   chief of  the
   maker.


              iii.     An Albanian interpreter is required.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12th August 2013












