
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
AA/02249/2014

                                                    AA/02250/2014

                                                     AA/02251/2014

                                                     AA/02252/2014

                                                     AA/02253/2014

                                                     AA/02254/2014

                                                     AA/02376/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th February 2016                     | On 30th March 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                          a a a o (first appellant)
                          o o o (second appellant)
                           a a o (third appellant)
                          a o o (fourth appellant)
                           a o o (fifth appellant)
                           o i o (sixth appellant)
                         a o o o (seventh appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  Their dates of birth are  23rd
    February 1971, 2nd August 1975, 3rd August 2000,  1st  September  2001,
    20th June 2003, 1st March 2005, and 19th March 2012 respectively.   The
    First two Appellants are husband and wife and the other five Appellants
    are their children.  They appealed against the  Respondent's  decisions
    made on 20th March 2014 giving directions for their  removal  from  the
    United  Kingdom  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality  Act  2006  and  refusing  to  grant  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or a right to remain based on human rights.

 2. I shall refer to the First Appellant as "the Appellant"  throughout  as
    the other six Appellants are his dependants.

 3. Their appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lucas  on
    20th May and 17th June 2015.  He  dismissed  their  appeals  on  asylum
    grounds, on human rights grounds and on humanitarian protection grounds
    in a decision promulgated on 20th July 2015.

 4. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 30th  July  2015.   An
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  lodged
    and permission was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
    on 16th October 2015.  The permission states that it is  arguable  that
    the judge  failed  to  deal  adequately  with  relevant  evidence  when
    assessing the asylum claim and inadequate  reasons  were  provided  for
    adverse findings.  The permission states that it is  also  arguable  in
    respect of the Article 8 claims that the  judge  failed  to  adequately
    assess the particular circumstances of the children and in  consequence
    their respective best interests as a whole.

 5. There is a Rule 24 response dated 7th November 2015.  This states  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself appropriately  and  made
    reasonable sustainable findings that were open to him on  the  evidence
    before him and that there was and is a  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Nigeria.  The response states  that  the  grounds  advanced  about  the
    Appellant's and his family's claimed risk on return to their home  area
    in Nigeria, and in the unlikely event of the family facing a real  risk
    in their home area the possibility of internal relocation, have  little
    merit.   The  response  states  that  the  First-tier  Judge   properly
    considered the objective and subjective evidence that was  before  him,
    including the expert evidence and properly engaged with  the  objective
    country information before him and made reasonable sustainable findings
    properly open to him based on that evidence.  The response states  that
    the Appellants failed to discharge the  burden  of  proof  to  the  low
    standard required and it was properly open to the First-tier Judge,  on
    the evidence before him, to find this.   The response states  that  the
    judge properly considered the Section 55 best interests of the children
    and the case of EA (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC) and it was open to
    the First-tier Judge to find that those who are living  in  the  United
    Kingdom in a temporary capacity with their  families,  must  expect  to
    return to their own country and that in this case the best interests of
    the children would not be adversely affected on return so as to  engage
    Article 8 of ECHR.

The Hearing

 6. The issues in this case are the fear of FGM on the  Appellant's  female
    children on return and the fear of tribal incisions on the  Appellant's
    children on return and whether the family would be targeted on return.

 7. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that this is an Article 8 claim and
    that the judge's findings in paragraphs 73 and 74 were not open to him.
     At paragraph 73 the Appellant's history is narrated.  The judge states
    that his history undermines his asylum claim.  Counsel  submitted  that
    the basis for this claim arose after the  Appellant  left  Nigeria  and
    came to the United Kingdom.  Counsel submitted that at paragraph 74, to
    state that the Appellant waited till his family members were settled in
    the United Kingdom before claiming asylum, is not a  lawful  assessment
    of the claim.

 8. Counsel referred to the five grounds in the application for  permission
    to appeal.  She submitted that the Appellant left Nigeria to study  and
    to get away from his domineering father and intended going to Canada to
    stay when his studies ended and it was only when he was in  the  United
    Kingdom and his father died that he realised he  could  not  return  to
    Nigeria.  She submitted that the Appellant was not cross-examined about
    this.  She submitted that the judge has not given  proper  reasons  for
    rejecting the Appellant's explanations of why  he  did  not  return  to
    Nigeria.  The situation arose when he was in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    that is why he claimed asylum when he did.

 9. Counsel submitted that the judge  failed  to  take  proper  account  of
    relevant evidence about the Appellant's children  being  cut  by  their
    grandfather without the knowledge of their parents.  She submitted that
    the judge has not explained why he found it not to be credible that the
    Appellant would not have been aware of this.  She submitted  that  what
    the judge did not take into account was that the children were  staying
    with their grandfather when this happened.  She submitted that there is
    not only the evidence of  the  children  about  this,  Professor  Sarah
    Creighton  also  mentions  incisions  on  one  child's  abdomen.    She
    submitted that the judge should have taken this into this account.

10. Counsel then referred to the judge's conclusion  that  FGM  and  ritual
    cleansing would not or could not occur without the  permission  of  the
    First and Second Appellants and submitted  that  this  finding  is  not
    based on any evidence before the judge and  is  inconsistent  with  the
    evidence relied on by the Appellant.  I  was  referred  to  the  expert
    report of Ms Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi who states  that  the  King  of  the
    Yoruba kinship families must ensure that men and women in their  domain
    adhere to the traditions and customs of  their  communities  and  royal
    household.  She submitted that this applies to this Appellant  and  his
    family.  She submitted that the expert report states that permission of
    the parents is not necessary and the judge gave no adequate reasons for
    rejecting the expert report on this.  She submitted that the  Appellant
    and his family do not form part of the general public in Nigeria,  they
    are a special case.

11. Counsel  referred  to  the  judge's  failure  to  carry  out  a  lawful
    assessment under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  She referred to the  five
    children, the eldest of whom, at the date of the hearing,  was  16  and
    the youngest 4.  She submitted that when the youngest child was born in
    the UK both parents had leave to remain and  the  other  children  have
    been in the United Kingdom for six and a  half  years.   She  submitted
    that the judge did not give proper weight  to  the  children's  letters
    stating that they do not wish to return to Nigeria.  She submitted that
    no adequate assessment was made on Article 8 outside the Rules  and  no
    adequate assessment was made relating to  Section  55.   She  submitted
    that the judge did not properly consider the cases  of  EV  Philippines
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and MK (India) [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC).

12. Counsel submitted that the judge did not deal with Section 117B of Part
    5A of the 2002 Act and public interest.   I  pointed  out  that  public
    interest is referred to at paragraph 91 of the decision, although there
    is no explicit reference to Section 117B.  Counsel submitted  that  the
    Appellant's immigration history  has  to  be  taken  into  account.   I
    pointed out that the Appellant was a student in the United Kingdom  and
    his stay here was therefore always precarious.  Counsel submitted  that
    he did not overstay and he speaks  English.   It  was  only  after  his
    student leave expired and he was waiting to hear  about  his  extension
    that he applied for asylum.  Counsel submitted that when the children's
    education is considered and the length of  their  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom (two of them were born in the  United  Kingdom)  this  must  be
    given considerable weight.  She submitted that the situation  when  the
    Appellant left Nigeria was different to when he claimed  asylum.    She
    submitted that the Appellant's father had been pressurising him to have
    his daughters subjected to FGM and his  children  subjected  to  ritual
    cleansing.  She submitted that when the Appellant and his  family  were
    in the United Kingdom they were safe but once the  Appellant's  studies
    were over he had no reason to remain in the United Kingdom  and  if  he
    returned to Nigeria his children would be  in  danger.   She  submitted
    that the situation evolved  while  the  Appellant  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the Appellant eventually realised he could  not  return  to
    Nigeria.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is relying  on  her  Rule  24
    response.  She submitted that the decision is detailed  and  everything
    that was before the judge has been set out therein.  She submitted that
    the judge has taken all  matters  into  account  and  has  applied  the
    relevant standard of proof and come to sustainable conclusions.

14. The Presenting Officer referred to the first  Ground  of  Appeal  which
    states that the judge's decision is perverse  and  she  submitted  that
    this is an extremely high challenge and there is  nothing  perverse  or
    irrational  in  the  First-tier  Judge's  findings.   She  referred  to
    paragraphs 73 and 74 of the decision in which the judge  sets  out  the
    Appellant's immigration history and refers to the late stage  at  which
    asylum was claimed.  She submitted that the judge was entitled to  come
    to the conclusion he did.   The  immigration  history  in  the  refusal
    letter has not been disputed by the Appellant.   The  judge  took  into
    account the fact that the Appellant had intended  going  to  Canada  to
    stay.   She  submitted  that  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    questioned about his immigration history does not mean that the  appeal
    went ahead on a procedurally unfair basis.  The judge is  not  required
    to put every point to the Appellant.  She submitted that the judge made
    his decision after he had considered all the evidence  before  him  and
    the first Ground fails entirely as there is no material error.

15. With regard to the second  Ground  of  Appeal  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the judge took into account the children's evidence.  He
    refers to this at paragraph 41 of the decision.  At paragraph 75 of the
    decision he states that he is putting no weight on the  assertion  that
    the children of the Appellant were cut by their grandfather in  Nigeria
    without any knowledge of their parents.   She  submitted  that  he  has
    given reasons for this finding and has found  that  this  part  of  the
    claim  is  unrealistic  and  has  only  recently  been  added  to   the
    Appellant's evidence. The judge finds that the Appellant is  trying  to
    create a risk that does not exist to bolster his claim.  She  submitted
    that the Appellant merely disagrees with the judge's decision after the
    judge has properly assessed the evidence.  She submitted that the judge
    states he has taken all the evidence into account.  He does not need to
    refer specifically to Professor Creighton's letter in which she  states
    that incisions  on  one  of  the  children  could  be  consistent  with
    traditional cuts.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge  has
    given reasons for giving the children's evidence about the cuts  little
    weight and he cannot be criticised for this finding.

16. With regard to the third ground, the Presenting Officer submitted  that
    when the judge states that parental  consent  is  required  for  ritual
    cleansing and FGM the Appellant had to show that the children would  be
    at risk of this on return.  The First-tier Judge has stated that on the
    evidence before him he is not satisfied that there will be any risk  to
    the children.  He has taken into account the written evidence, the oral
    evidence and the expert report relating to this and I was  referred  to
    paragraphs 79, 80 and 82 of the decision.  The judge  refers  to  State
    protection in Nigeria and refers in particular to the urban areas, such
    as Lagos, being socially and commercially  advanced  with  a  developed
    police force and criminal justice system.  At paragraph  47  the  judge
    refers to the Appellant stating that  he  had  protected  his  children
    before from FGM.    The Appellant's wife has said that  she  fears  the
    Appellant will give in  to  his  family  in  Nigeria.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that  that  supports  the  finding  that  consent  is
    required so the judge was right  to  find  that  the  children  can  be
    protected.  The judge refers to the expert report at paragraphs 79  and
    83.   Counsel  states  that  this  is  not  a  normal  family  but  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that the judge has considered the specific
    facts of this case and has found that the family can go to  live  in  a
    city in Nigeria and can withhold consent for FGM and ritual cutting and
    the police can help them.

17. The Presenting Officer then went on to Grounds 4 and  5  and  the  best
    interests of the children.  She submitted that with regard to Ground  5
    this is a mere disagreement with the judge's decision.  At paragraph 89
    of the decision the judge has taken the children's best interests  into
    account.  He states that the older children of the Appellant adapted to
    life in the UK after their arrival in 2008 and there is no  reason  why
    they could not readapt to life in Nigeria  on  return  and  that  these
    children and the two youngest children will have the support  of  their
    parents in Nigeria.  They  can  relocate  as  a  family  unit  and  the
    children's best interests will  be  well  served  by  the  support  and
    nurture of an established family unit.  She submitted that at the  date
    of the hearing the children had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  less
    than seven years and she submitted that all the evidence was taken into
    account by the judge in his decision.

18. The terms of the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied  in  this  case.
    The Judge had to decide whether anything had not  been  properly  dealt
    with under the Rules.  She submitted that it is only  if  that  is  the
    case that the claim requires to be considered outside the Rules.  I was
    referred to paragraphs 87 to 91 of the decision and the fact  that  the
    First-tier Judge  did  consider  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   She
    submitted that this must go in the Appellant's favour as based  on  the
    evidence, the judge did not require to consider Article 8  outside  the
    Rules.

19. With regard to Section 117B of Part 5A of the 2002  Act  she  submitted
    that although this is not specifically  mentioned,  its  substance  has
    been considered.  At paragraph 91 public interest  is  considered.  The
    Appellant came to the United Kingdom on  a  student  visa  and  had  no
    legitimate expectation of being able to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that at all times his  leave  and  his
    family's leave was precarious.

20. She submitted that everything  was  considered  by  the  judge  in  his
    decision and there is no material error of law.

21. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that this is not  an  irrationality
    challenge.  She submitted that the decision made by the judge  was  not
    open to him.  She submitted that it is not for the First-tier Judge  to
    accept everything the  Appellant  says  but  if  he  rejects  what  the
    Appellant says he has to give reasons for doing so  and  she  submitted
    that he has not done this, particularly  as  the  Appellant's  need  to
    claim asylum arose after he left Nigeria.

22. Counsel submitted that relevant evidence was  not  taken  into  account
    about the cuts made to the Appellant's children.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 41 which refers to one of the children's statements in  which
    he states that he is better off in London than Nigeria.  She  submitted
    that the judge does not deal with the children's wishes and  has  given
    inadequate reasons for not  accepting  the  children's  evidence.   She
    submitted that Dr Creighton reported  on  the  incisions  and  this  is
    supportive of  the  Appellant's  account.   She  referred  to  the  low
    standard of proof  in  the  asylum  claim  and  submitted  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that the children were cut by their grandfather.

23. She submitted that Dr Creighton's letter arrived between the  dates  of
    the first part of the hearing and the second part of  the  hearing  and
    was before the judge.

24. She submitted that the judge was wrong to state that  ritual  cleansing
    cannot occur without permission.  This goes against the evidence before
    him.  She submitted that the fact the Appellant's wife  stated  she  is
    afraid her husband will succumb to  pressure  does  not  indicate  that
    circumcision and ritual cutting can  only  go  ahead  with  consent  of
    parents.

25. With regard to Article 8 I was asked to consider the skeleton argument,
    the relevant case law set out therein and the evidence of the children.
     She submitted that the First-tier Judge did not analyse the  claim  or
    give proper reasons for his decision.  I was referred to the  cases  of
    MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC) and JO and  Others  (Nigeria)
    [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).  These cases state that analysis is  required.
    She submitted that the judge  has  not  properly  considered  the  best
    interests of these children whose separate  needs  all  require  to  be
    taken into account.  The Home Office policy is that every child matters
    and the terms of the said case of EV Philippines  must  be  taken  into
    account.

26. With regard to Section 117B Counsel submitted that  the  judge  has  to
    consider every aspect of the  claim.   The  family  members  all  speak
    English, they are financially independent and  to  say  their  position
    here  is  precarious  is  not  enough.   She  submitted  that  all  the
    categories of 117B have not been properly considered by the judge.

27. I was asked to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and set the decision aside.

Decision and Reasons

28. The Appellant's argument is that he came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student and studied from 2007 until 2013 and it was only in  2013  that
    he realised he could not return to Nigeria so he claimed asylum at that
    point.  His representative submits that this situation evolved while he
    was in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant states that he  is  a  Yoruba
    prince of the Sataloya ruling house of Ode-Remo in Ogun State.  This is
    why his representative is submitting that his is not a normal case  and
    why his case is different when sufficiency of protection is considered.
     The Appellant's claim is that on return he will have no choice but  to
    have his children subjected to  FGM  and  ritual  cutting  because  his
    father was raised in the full traditions of the Sataloya ruling  house.
    The Appellant's father died on 9th September 2013.  It  is  clear  from
    the evidence that the Appellant and his  wife  are  opposed  to  ritual
    cleansing and FGM.

29. All of these matters have been considered by the judge in his decision.
      The judge has stated that he does not believe the children's evidence
    that their grandfather cut them when they were in Nigeria staying  with
    him and the Appellant and his wife were unaware of this.  This was  new
    evidence and the judge found it had only been provided to  bolster  the
    claim and it is not true.  Counsel states  that  Professor  Creighton's
    report supports the children's evidence.  The judge has considered  all
    the evidence before him including the children's evidence and has given
    proper reasons and explanations in his decision at paragraph 75 of  why
    he does not believe this happened.  He was entitled to this finding and
    his explanation for reaching it is adequate.

30. The Appellant's evidence is that his tribe blame him for  his  father's
    death because he did not get his children cut.   He  states  he  cannot
    internally relocate as his family name is well-known.  At paragraph  72
    of the decision the judge sets out the basic issues in this claim.  The
    judge does not state that  FGM  and  ritual  cutting  cannot  go  ahead
    without the parents' consent, what he states at paragraph  80  is  that
    the parents have the  ability  to  consent  or  not  consent  to  their
    children undergoing  any  harm  in  Nigeria.   The  Appellant's  wife's
    evidence is that the Appellant has previously stopped this happening to
    the children and she now fears that he will succumb  to  pressure  from
    his family.  Based on this the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    parents would be able to stop this happening  to  their  children.   At
    paragraph 85 the judge refers to there  being  no  risk  on  return  to
    Nigeria  for  the  Appellant  and  his  family.   He  refers  to  State
    protection and also the option of relocating to another  part  of  that
    country. He finds that Nigeria is a big country and the  Appellants  do
    not require to return to their home  area  in  Nigeria  if  they  truly
    believe they would be in danger there.  This does not  mean  that  they
    cannot return to Nigeria. He has considered their special position.

31. The asylum claim is based on the family being targeted because  of  who
    they are.  This has been properly considered  by  the  judge.   He  has
    explained how he comes to his decision  and  has  made  out  his  case.
    Reasons have been given for his findings and   he has considered all of
    the evidence before him and has given weight to relevant  evidence.  At
    paragraph 83 he explains why he is giving little weight to  the  expert
    report of Bisi Olateru Olagbegi and at paragraph 84 his  views  on  the
    claim and the expert report are made  abundantly  clear.  There  is  no
    error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision  relating  the   Appellant's
    humanitarian protection claims.

32. The judge has then considered the best interests of the  children.   He
    notes that the terms of the  Immigration  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied.
    Article 8 within the Rules cannot be satisfied.  The best interests  of
    a  child  can  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect   of   other
    considerations.

33. The judge notes that when the Appellant came to the United  Kingdom  he
    came as a student with no  legitimate  expectation  of  being  able  to
    remain here.  His family came to join him here.  They had no legitimate
    expectation of being able to remain here,  (paragraph  73).  The  older
    children in this case have lived in Nigeria.  They adapted to  life  in
    the United Kingdom and can adapt to life on  return  to  Nigeria.   The
    judge finds the children who were  born  here  can  adapt  to  life  in
    Nigeria.  Their main interest is their parents and their  parents  will
    be returning with them and they  will  remain  in  their  family  unit.
    These important issues have been considered by the judge.  The case  of
    EV Philippines lists what is in the best interests  of  children.   The
    judge finds their best interests are to be with their parents who  have
    no right to be in the United Kingdom.  All of this has  been  explained
    in the decision. The judge clearly does not believe that the  situation
    evolved. His decision reflects that he finds the Appellant's  situation
    was as it was when he first came as a student when he left  his  spouse
    and children in Nigeria for a year.

34. It seems that there is nothing compelling in this claim which  requires
    it to be considered outside the Immigration Rules.  Everything that has
    been put forward is covered by the Rules but the judge  considered  the
    claim outside the Immigration Rules.   This was not necessary but to do
    so is not an error of law.

35. When proportionality is considered under Article 8  outside  the  Rules
    the fact that the claims cannot succeed  under  the  Rules  must  weigh
    against the Appellants.  The Appellants have  built  up  a  family  and
    private life in the United Kingdom but if  the  family  all  return  to
    Nigeria as a unit their family life will not be disturbed.  All of this
    is considered by the judge at paragraphs 88, 89 and 90.  There will  be
    disruption to the education of the children but the  judge  notes  that
    there is an education system in Nigeria.  He finds  that  the  children
    will not be adversely affected so as to engage Article 8 of ECHR.

36. At paragraph 91, public interest is considered and although  the  judge
    does  not  refer  to  Section  117B  specifically,  its  substance   is
    considered in the decision.   When  effective  immigration  control  is
    considered this must weigh against  the  Appellants.   The  Appellant's
    family is in the United Kingdom and is  accessing  free  education  and
    presumably free healthcare.  This must go against public interest.   It
    is true that they can all speak English.  The  children  have  probably
    integrated into society.  But when 117B(5) is taken into account little
    weight should be given to a private life established  by  a  person  at
    time when  his  immigration  status  is  precarious  and  that  is  the
    situation here.  Although these matters are not narrated in  detail  by
    the judge it is clear that they have been taken  into  account  in  his
    decision.   In paragraph 91 the judge states that the reality  is  that
    the individual self-interest of the Appellant and  his  family  and  in
    particular their clear desire to remain in the UK  is  subject  to  the
    broader public interest in effective  immigration  control.  He  states
    that there is nothing which displaces that public interest in this case
    and so the Article 8 claim is dismissed.

37. I find that everything has been properly considered by  the  judge  and
    that the grounds of application are in the  main  a  mere  disagreement
    with the judge's decision.  The grounds are lengthy  and  case  law  is
    referred to but when the skeleton argument  is  dissected  the  judge's
    decision cannot be faulted.  Proper reasons have  been  given  for  his
    findings.

Notice of Decision

38. There is no material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    promulgated on 20th July 2015.  The decision must stand.

39. Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray









