
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/02290/2015
                                                               AA/02297/2015
                                                               AA/02298/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2015                  |On 11 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                            N D (first Appellant)
                         S A H D (second Appellant)
                          A H K D (third Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms L Taylor-Gee (Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision made  by  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Moore) ("FtT") promulgated  on  31  July  2015  in
    which the FtT dismissed the appellants' appeals on asylum, humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The first appellant is the main appellant and he is the father  of  the
    second and third appellants.  Their dates of birth are  respectively  1
    July 1955, 5 May 1985, and 28 July 1994.  They are nationals  of  Iraq.
    The appellant was separated from his wife who lived in Kuwait where all
    the appellants had lived prior to coming to the UK.

3.   The appellants  claimed  that  if  returned  to  Iraq,  they  would  be
    persecuted by members  of  a  militia  group,  who  had  taken  illegal
    possession of land belonging to the  first  appellant.  The  appellants
    relied on a country expert report by Dr Alan George dated 2 July  2015,
    and copies of documentary evidence in the form of a police  report  and
    property purchase contract.

4.    The  FtT  made  adverse  findings  with  regard  to  the   appellants'
    credibility based on inconsistencies  in  the  interviews  and  witness
    statements and with the evidence given at the oral hearing.  [30].

5.   The FtT was not satisfied that there had been any land dispute. It  did
    not find it credible that there was a militia group which had  attacked
    the appellants' home.  The FtT found  that  there  was  "no  reasonable
    explanation" as to why the appellant's wife would  not  be  willing  to
    sponsor him in any residence application in Kuwait.  [45].

6.   In considering human rights under the  Rules  the  FtT  considered  the
    question of whether or not the appellants had substantial ties to Iraq.
     [52].

Grounds of application for Permission

7.   Ground 1 argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
    account evidence  of  the  lead  appellant's  witness  statement  which
    addressed the issue of why he and his wife had separated and/or  failed
    to indicate that this was a live issue and did not raise the matter  at
    the hearing.  The FtT  erred  as  it  may  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion had the witnesses been given the opportunity to address  the
    issue and/or reference made to the main appellant's witness  statement.



8.   Ground 2 argued that the FtT failed to reach  sustainable  findings  by
    failing to take into account relevant evidence; alternatively  the  FtT
    drew inferences from the evidence that it  was  not  entitled  to  draw
    and/or reached conclusions that were perverse or rational and/or failed
    to provide sufficiently reasoned  explanation  for  material  findings.
    The FtT accepted that the expert Dr George had a wealth  of  experience
    [31].  The FtT however failed to have any regard to the expert's report
    when reaching its findings and did not provide any adequate reasons for
    not attaching weight to the  expert's  conclusions,  specifically  with
    regard to the militia, the land dispute, the killing of the appellant's
    brother and sufficiency of protection.

9.   Ground 3 argued that the FtT failed  to  apply  the  correct  test  for
    Article 8; it referred to the issue  of  "ties",  rather  than  whether
    there would be "very significant obstacles"  to  their  integration  in
    Iraq.  Further the FtT failed to take into account  evidence  from  the
    second and third appellants' as to their ability to integrate into Iraq
    in light of the fact that they had never visited there.

10.  Ground 4 the FtT  failed  to  reach  sustainable  credibility  findings
    and/or failed  to  provide  a  sufficiently  reasoned  explanation  for
    material findings.  The FtT twice referred in its  decision  to  having
    provided reasons for finding that the appellant's  documents  were  not
    reliable, when in fact no such reasoning appeared in the decision.

Permission to Appeal

11.  Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  on  28
    August 2015 on each of the four grounds in the following terms:

         "The lengthy grounds seeking  permissions  assert  that  the  judge
         erred in law by failing to give the appellants  an  opportunity  to
         comment  on  matters  on  which  he   subsequently   made   adverse
         credibility findings, that he failed to have adequate regard to the
         expert's report, that he applied the incorrect test under paragraph
         276ADE of the Rules and that his findings  on  the  documents  were
         irrational".

12.  In its decision, the FtT made very little reference to the evidence  of
    the second and third appellants. It mentioned the  expert's  report  in
    [31], on the issue of verifying the documentary evidence, but  did  not
    refer to it when assessing the remainder of  the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal.   The  current  version  of  paragraph   276ADE   refers   to
    "integration", rather than "ties".  At the end of [31] the  FtT  stated
    that for reasons which would be amplified later  in  the  decision,  it
    found that the documents were not reliable.  However at  [35]  the  FtT
    stated that it had already found the documents unreliable.

Error of Law Hearing

13.  At the hearing before me Ms Taylor-Gee relied on the grounds of  appeal
    and amplified the same.  As  to  ground  1  there  was  clear  evidence
    available to the FtT in  the  form  of  the  main  appellant's  witness
    statement at paragraph 9 and from the second and third  appellants  who
    were at the hearing and could have been asked to provide oral  evidence
    about the reasons for the separation of the  first  appellant  and  his
    wife.  The FtT failed to ask any questions of those witnesses at all.

14.  As to ground 2 the FtT made significant  adverse  credibility  findings
    but without any reference  to  the  expert  report  which  specifically
    covered  those  issues,  in  particular  as  regards  the  militia   at
    paragraphs 105 and  117.   Furthermore  the  FtT  failed  to  give  any
    detailed reasons as to why it rejected the expert opinion.

15.  The failure to apply the correct test under Article 8 was  particularly
    relevant in light of the fact that the main appellant is a Shia  muslim
    and the expert report referred to its relevance at paragraphs  118  and
    160, which was not taken into account by the FtT.   Furthermore,  there
    was no consideration of the second and third  appellants  return  to  a
    country/society where they had never lived  and  where  they  would  be
    identifiable as from out of the area.

16.  Ms Taylor Gee submitted that ground 4 argued that the FtT  provided  no
    adequate reasons for finding that the documents were  unreliable.  This
    may have been an error or omission but it was material.

17.  In response  Ms  Sreeraman  submitted  that  the  FtT  had  produced  a
    comprehensive and detailed  decision  that  should  be  viewed  in  its
    entirety.  It was clear that the FtT had taken  into  account  all  the
    evidence from the witnesses and considered all relevant issues  at  [11
    to 25], including references to the expert report at [117].  Central to
    the decision were the adverse findings of credibility; the FtT had  set
    out clear reasons for rejecting the appellants' claims,  in  particular
    the FtT  identified  inconsistencies.   The  documentary  evidence  was
    considered in light of Tanveer  Ahmed  and  the  amplification  of  the
    reasons for rejecting the documents was to be found  in   [32]  in  the
    findings of negative credibility.

18.  As to Article 8, whilst accepting that there was no specific  reference
    to the correct test, the findings made by the FtT would be the same  if
    considered under "significant obstacles test"; the outcome would be the
    same.

19.  It was conceded that the FtT failed specifically to refer  to  evidence
    from  the  second  and  third  appellants,  in  particular   to   their
    statements, but there was very  little  they  could  add  to  the  main
    appellant's claim as regards the  events  in  Iraq.   This  was  not  a
    material error of law.

20.  Ms Taylor-Gee responded that it was not adequate for the  FtT  to  have
    applied a broad approach to considering Article 8; it was necessary  to
    consider the proper test.  The FtT's  generic  statement  that  it  had
    taken into account "all of  the  evidence"  but  had  not  specifically
    engaged with any  of  the  evidence  given  by  the  second  and  third
    appellants, was inadequate.  Equally important was the  fact  that  the
    FtT erred by failing to engage with the contents of the  expert  report
    in reaching its decision.

Decision and Discussion

21.  I was satisfied that all the grounds 1 to 4 were  made  out.   The  FtT
    failed to specifically engage with  the  expert's  evidence  which  was
    clearly capable of corroborating the appellants' claim as  to  material
    particulars about the militia, land disputes, the  revenge  killing  of
    the appellant's brother, sufficiency of protection and risk  on  return
    on religious grounds and\or failed to give reasons for why it disagreed
    with the expert report.  Furthermore I am satisfied that the FtT failed
    to give reasons for finding the documentary evidence to be  unreliable.
    This amounts to a material omission given  that  the  FtT  specifically
    stated that such reasons would be provided. I further conclude that the
    FtT failed  to  have  regard  to  evidence  of  the  second  and  third
    appellants and/or the main appellant's  witness  statement  as  regards
    reasons for his separation from his wife, which formed the basis  of  a
    negative finding of fact and was thus material to the  appeal.  It  was
    incumbent on the FtT to have drawn attention  at  the  hearing  to  the
    significance it placed on this  issue  and  given  the  appellants  the
    opportunity to address this issue. I am also  satisfied  that  the  FtT
    considered Article 8 with reference to paragraph 276ADE  the  incorrect
    statutory test in relation to  ties  in  the  UK.   Given  the  factual
    background that the second and third  appellants  had  never  lived  in
    Iraq, the FtT failed to engage with the correct  test  which  considers
    whether there would be very significant obstacles to integration in the
    country of origin.

22.  At the end of the hearing I found material errors of law  on  all  four
    grounds.  In light of the fact that the errors went to the core of  all
    of the findings made by the FtT,  I  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
    entirety. There were no findings of fact that could be preserved.

Decision

23.  The decision and reasons does disclose a material error  of  law.   The
    determination shall be set aside.

24.  The matter is remitted to Taylor House for a hearing de  novo  with  an
    interpreter in the Iraqi language, time estimate three hours and  three
    witnesses.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Dated 7.1.2016

G A Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made.


Signed   Dated 7.1.2016

G A Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

