
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02613/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 October 2014                           |On 6 November 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    s v t
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Bostwick-Barnes of Thompson & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on 9  October  1995.
    He left Vietnam on 11 June 2011 and arrived in the UK clandestinely  in
    a lorry sometime in June 2011.  On 2 April 2013, the appellant  claimed
    asylum.   On  4  April  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   the
    appellant's claim for asylum and humanitarian protection and under Arts
    2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal

 3. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant
    claimed to be at risk  of  persecution  and  serious  ill-treatment  in
    Vietnam because of his father's political  activities  in  Vietnam  and
    because he was of the Catholic faith.  In a  determination  promulgated
    on 12 June 2014, Judge Waygood dismissed the appellant's appeal on  all
    grounds.

 4. First, Judge Waygood rejected the appellant's evidence that he had been
    arrested and ill-treated by the Vietnamese authorities because  of  his
    father's involvement with the  anti-government,  Catholic  group  "Bloc
    8406" after the family home had been raided and  material  relating  to
    that  group  found.   Secondly,  the  judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had been arrested on 28 May 2010 and detained and ill-
    treated by the police after they broke up a Catholic prayer meeting  at
    his grandmother's house.  Thirdly, the judge rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had been arrested  in  June  2011  after  distributing
    leaflets and DVDs promoting  a  demonstration  against  the  Vietnamese
    government organised by the  Catholic  Church  and  that  he  had  been
    released after a bribe was paid.   Fourthly,  the  judge  accepted  the
    appellant's  evidence  that  he   had   attended   an   anti-government
    demonstration  in  the  UK  and  that  a  photograph  of  him  at  that
    demonstration was on the internet.  Further, the  judge  accepted  that
    the appellant had made comments on a  Facebook  page  in  his  Catholic
    name.  However, the judge found  that,  in  relation  to  the  Facebook
    comments, this had been done in order to bolster his claim.  The  judge
    did not accept that the appellant was a political activist  who,  as  a
    result of his sur place activities, would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Vietnam.  Fifthly, whilst accepting that the appellant was a  Catholic,
    the judge did not accept that the appellant was  a  religious  activist
    and would therefore be at risk on return to Vietnam on that basis.

 5. On 3 July 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge PJG White)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The basis of the
    grant of permission is set out in para 2 of Judge  White's  reasons  as
    follows:

         "2.  Having had regard to the grounds for permission to appeal  and
             the  determination,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  reaching  his
             decision the judge arguably made  an  error  of  law  for  the
             following reasons:-

             a.   In considering the Appellant's credibility in his account
                  concerning the activities and arrest of his father, it  is
                  arguable that the judge failed to make adequate  allowance
                  for the Appellant's young age.

             b.   In regard to sur place activities, it  is  arguable  that
                  the  judge  failed  to  take  adequate  account   of   the
                  likelihood of the Vietnamese  authorities  monitoring  the
                  internet.

             c.   In regard to the risk on return  as  a  Catholic,  it  is
                  arguable that the judge failed to take adequate account of
                  the background country information."

 6. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 7. Ms Bostwick-Barnes challenged the judge's adverse  credibility  finding
    and reasoning at paras 44-52 of his determination where he rejected the
    appellant's account that his father was an active member of  Bloc  8406
    and that the appellant had  been  arrested,  detained  and  ill-treated
    following a search of the family home in August 2009.

 8. First, Ms Bostwick-Barnes submitted that the judge had failed  to  take
    into account the appellant's age, in  particular  at  para  46  of  his
    determination, when he counted  against  the  appellant  that  he  knew
    little about his father's activities until the raid in August 2009.  Ms
    Bostwick-Barnes submitted that the appellant was only 13  at  the  time
    and the judge had failed to take this into account.

 9. At paras 46-47, the judge said this:

         "46. In his asylum interview the appellant  also  referred  to  his
             father belonging to a group called '8406' he said  they  fight
             for justice, freedom and freedom of  religion  for  people  in
             Vietnam.  He said he only knew his father was a member of  the
             group  because  when  they  searched  the  house  they   found
             materials relating to the group.  The  police  told  him  they
             found notes relating to that group and  said  they  had  found
             some documents but he did not know exactly what they found.  I
             find that this part of the appellant's account is particularly
             vague, given the fact that the police were at  the  house  for
             three hours and he on  his  own  account  was  questioned  for
             either two  or  three  days  and  asked  questions  about  his
             father's alleged involvement with the  group.   The  appellant
             said that he does not know any more about his father situation
             or where he is now.

         47.  In oral evidence today during cross-examination the  appellant
             confirmed that he did not know that his father was involved in
             Bloc 8406 until the police searched his house in August  2009.
             It was put to the appellant that if his  father  was  a  high-
             profile member of the group he would  have  known  before  the
             police came to his house.  But said before the police  arrived
             he  did  not  know  about  his  father's  activity.   He  also
             confirmed that he himself was not involved  in  any  way  with
             Bloc 8406.  He said the police did not give him a copy of  the
             warrant when they arrived they just read out the warrant."

10. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards pointed out that at  para  101
    of his determination, the judge specifically said that in coming to his
    adverse  credibility  finding:   "I  have  taken   into   account   the
    appellant's young age".  The judge also refers  to  the  submission  on
    behalf of the appellant by Ms Bostwick-Barnes that the appellant's  age
    should be considered (see para 27 of the determination).

11. The assessment of evidence is essentially a matter for the fact-finding
    judge in the First-tier.  Only if a finding was  inadequately  reasoned
    or was not properly open to the judge because  it  is  irrational  will
    there be an error of law such that an appellate Tribunal may, if it  is
    material, interfere with the judge's findings.

12. Even bearing that caution in mind, it does seem to me that the  judge's
    finding on this matter is difficult to sustain.  The appellant  was  13
    years of age in 2009 and there is no reason to believe that  he  should
    have had a detailed  knowledge  of  any  political  activities  by  his
    father.

13. Secondly, Ms Bostwick-Barnes submitted that the judge had  fallen  into
    error in paras 49 and 51 of his determination by  taking  into  account
    that the name of the appellant's father was not among the  118  members
    of  Bloc  8406  referred  to  on  their  website.   Ms  Bostwick-Barnes
    submitted that there was no reason for the judge  to  assume  that  the
    appellant's father was one of the "first" 118 members who  were  listed
    on the website.

14. At paras 49-51 the judge said this:

         "49. The respondent produced a webpage taken  from  the  Bloc  8406
             blogspot.co.uk website.  It refers to the first  118  peaceful
             democratic fighters who have been the first  members  of  Bloc
             8406 since the beginning of April 8, 2006.  As the  respondent
             has stated nowhere in that list is  the  appellant's  father's
             name.

         50.  In addition the respondent has produced  a  webpage  from  the
             Vietnam committee on human rights from www.queme.net which has
             a list of political and religious prisoners in Vietnam.   This
             is  described  as  a   non-exhaustive   list.    However   the
             appellant's father's name of Truc Van Tran does not appear  on
             that list either even though there are some 180  names  on  it
             and even includes people, for example, who  are  simply  under
             house  arrest.   The  appellant's  father  has  now  been   in
             detention for some four and a half years and yet there  is  no
             mention of him on that list either.

         51.  .... As the respondent pointed out the  fact  that  he  is  in
             detention and has been for the last 4�  years  would  indicate
             that he is of significant interest to the  authorities  and  a
             significant member of Bloc 8406.  Yet his name does not appear
             on the Bloc 8406 website and he does not appear on the list of
             persons  detained  in  Vietnam  for  political  or   religious
             activities or views.  Whilst I note that neither list  can  be
             taken to be exhaustive the onus is upon the appellant  and  he
             has provided no objective evidence or indeed evidence  of  any
             kind to support his claim  that  his  father  was  politically
             active and a member of  Bloc  8406  in  Vietnam,  not  even  a
             confirmation from the organisation itself.   In  addition  the
             appellant has provided, for example, as part of his  objective
             evidence the Wikipedia web page on Bloc 8406.  This refers  to
             members of Block 8406 such as Roman Catholic priest Nguyen Van
             Ly being sentenced to eight years in prison for his support of
             the group's manifesto.  A former communist party  official  Vi
             Duc  Hoi  being  imprisoned  in  2011  for  'spreading   anti-
             government propaganda'.  There are other articles such as  one
             from the Vietnam interfaith Confederation which  refers  to  a
             number of members named being under  house  arrest  and  still
             facing restrictions yet there is no evidence  at  all  of  the
             appellant's father."

15.  Whilst  the  judge  recognised  in  para  51  that  the  list  is  not
    "exhaustive", he appears to place a  premium  on  the  absence  of  the
    appellant's father's name from the list or reference to him as  someone
    who has been in detention for some  four  and  a  half  years.   In  my
    judgment, again bearing in  mind  the  caution  required  in  assessing
    factual findings made by a First-tier Judge, I  am,  albeit  with  some
    hesitation, led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  judge's  reasoning  is
    difficult to sustain.

16. Thirdly, Ms Bostwick-Barnes submitted that the judge had been wrong  to
    count against the appellant at para 51 of his  determination  that  the
    appellant had not referred to his father's activities as a  reason  for
    him coming to  the  UK  in  his  screening  interview  referring  only,
    instead, to problems he subsequently faced  because  of  his  religion.
    She pointed out  that  the  appellant  had  referred  to  his  father's
    activities in his asylum interview (see questions  41-44)  and  in  his
    statement attached to his SEF form.

17. At para 51 the judge said this:

         ".... In addition whilst I accept that he raised the issue  of  his
         father's arrest in his screening interview by that time he had been
         in the United Kingdom for more than two years and therefore had had
         plenty of time in which to consider any basis upon  which  a  claim
         was made.  Furthermore he stated at question 5.1 of  his  screening
         interview that he was arrested in August 2009 but clearly indicates
         this was for practising  a  banned  religion  not  because  of  his
         father's activities.  He did not say anything at  that  time  about
         being arrested in connection with his father's activities.  Further
         at question 4.1 of the screening interview under the heading 'basis
         of claim' when asked what the reason was for coming to  the  UK  he
         said that he was ill-treated in Vietnam due to his  religion,  that
         he was beaten up and put into prison  by  the  police.   Once  more
         there was no mention  whatsoever  of  being  arrested  or  detained
         because of his father's involvement in Bloc 8406."

18.  A  screening  interview  provides  an  asylum-seeker  with  the  first
    opportunity to set out the basis for his claim to remain in the UK.  It
    is not, however, an opportunity to set out the  detail  of  any  claim.
    The appellant referred to his father's arrest in August 2009 (at 1.16).
     In answering the question: "What was your reason  for  coming  to  the
    UK?" the appellant replied at 4.1:  "I was ill-treated in  Vietnam  due
    to my religion.  I was beaten up and put into prison  by  the  Police."
    Whilst it is true that  the  appellant  made  no  mention  of  what  he
    subsequently set out  in  detail  in  his  SEF,  asylum  interview  and
    statement concerning the authorities' raid on the family home in August
    2009 and his arrest, detention and ill-treatment as  a  result  of  his
    father's involvement with Bloc 8406, there is a real  danger  that  the
    judge placed too great an emphasis on the absence of that detail in the
    appellant's screening interview. Particular care was required  in  this
    case because, of course, at the time of  his  screening  interview  the
    appellant was still only 17  years  old.   In  truth,  the  absence  of
    specific reference to that  and,  more  particularly,  the  appellant's
    answer at 4.1 was perhaps more (or at least equally) indicative of  the
    appellant's real fear based upon his Catholic faith which  led  him  to
    leave Vietnam.

19. Ordinarily such errors would inevitably lead to  the  Judge's  decision
    being fatally flawed and unsustainable.  That, however, is not the case
    in this appeal.  Despite the difficulties  identified  in  the  judge's
    reasoning by Ms Bostwick-Barnes, I do not consider these were  material
    to the judge's ultimate finding that the appellant would not be at real
    risk on return to Vietnam because of his father's political activities.
     That is because at para 53 of his determination, the  judge  made  the
    following finding taking the appellant's claim on this  basis  "at  its
    highest":

         "53. Even if a contrary view should be taken on this point the fact
             remains that taken at its highest he was  arrested  in  August
             2009 he says he was detained for a period of two or three days
             then released, he says he was beaten and has a scar.   He  has
             produced no medical evidence to support the fact that he has a
             scar as a result of this beating or even has a  scar  at  all.
             In addition he on his own account accepts that he has not been
             subsequently arrested or detained  by  the  authorities  as  a
             result of his father's alleged activities and also on his  own
             account when arrested he could tell the police  nothing  about
             his father's activities or Bloc 8406.   In  the  circumstances
             taking the appellant's account at its highest on this point  I
             find that he is of no interest to the authorities  because  of
             the alleged involvement by his father with Bloc 8406."

20. Neither the grounds nor Ms Bostwick-Barnes' submissions challenged this
    specific finding by the judge.  In my  judgment,  in  any  event,  that
    reasoning is unassailable.  In my view, the judge was entitled to  find
    that, even if he were arrested and ill-treated as he claimed in  August
    2009 as a result of  his  father's  involvement  with  Bloc  8406,  the
    appellant has not been detained or  subject  to  any  adverse  interest
    beyond his claim  that  he  was  being  watched.   Even  if  that  were
    accepted, the appellant between  August  2009  and  when  the  he  left
    Vietnam in June 2011 was  not  subject  to  any  adverse  ill-treatment
    because of his father's political involvement.  The judge was  entitled
    to find that on return the authorities would have no  interest  in  him
    and he would not be at real risk of ill-treatment on this basis.

21. Ms Bostwick-Barnes also  challenged  the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding and his conclusion that he did not accept  that  the  appellant
    had been arrested in  May  2010  and  ill-treated  following  a  prayer
    meeting at his grandmother's house.  The judge  gave  detailed  reasons
    for this finding at paras 60-61 as follows:

         "60. In relation to his account of the  arrests  in  May  2010  the
             respondent did not accept this account because they  indicated
             that it would be far more practical to hold such an event at a
             church.  I consider this to be a valid point.  The appellant's
             explanation was during his oral evidence that because  he  was
             praying for the spirit of his mother  that  therefore  it  was
             felt it should be held at their  private  home.   However  the
             appellant stated in his first witness statement that after his
             father's  arrest  for  supporting  what  was  a  Catholic  led
             organisation, the local police 'came to our house very often'.
              The  police  were  therefore,  if  this  evidence  is  to  be
             believed, still very interested in what was going  on  at  the
             house.  However once again there is no evidence to corroborate
             the reason for holding the ceremony  at  the  house  from  his
             grandmother who was once again arrested at the same  time,  or
             from any of the 50  or  60  people  who  attended  the  prayer
             meeting.  Further I do not find it credible that if the police
             were visiting the house very often that the appellant and  his
             grandmother  would  not  have  been  aware  that   there   was
             potentially a large element of risk in holding  such  a  large
             Catholic event at their home, when it could have been held  at
             church.  In addition this account was slightly different  from
             what he said at paragraph 15 of his second statement dated  19
             May 2014 when  he  was  dealing  with  issues  raised  by  the
             respondent in the refusal letter when he said that they  asked
             for people to attend their house in  order  to  pray  for  his
             mother's death as they simply prefer to pray at home  on  such
             occasions as it was more intimate even though  once  again  he
             also said at paragraph 15 of the  second  statement  that  the
             local police always  kept  an  eye  on  them  because  of  his
             father's political activity.

         61.  He said in his first statement at  paragraph  11  that  having
             been  arrested,  in  the  morning  they  called   people   out
             individually and warned them not to gather at their house  and
             he was simply asked to sign to confirm that he would not  hold
             gatherings at home.  Nothing further  happened  to  him  after
             that in relation to his practising of religion until June 2011
             which I consider indicates that the authorities did not regard
             him as an activist.  I  do  not  accept  the  account  of  the
             ceremony at the house or the arrests taking into consideration
             the appellant states that he was being watched because of  his
             father's arrest.  It would have made much more sense  to  hold
             such a large  gathering  at  a  church  when  there  was  less
             likelihood of trouble and taking  into  account  there  is  no
             evidence whatsoever to substantiate his claim.  In  any  event
             even if his account is to be accepted his release and the fact
             that he was simply asked to sign to confirm that he would  not
             hold gatherings at his home clearly indicates that he  was  of
             no particular interest to the  authorities  after  that  event
             occurred.  There was no indication at this point that  he  was
             an activist simply a Catholic pursuing his religion.  In  oral
             evidence today, during cross examination,  he  confirmed  that
             there were no incidents between May 2010 and June 2011 because
             of his religion  even  though  he  attended  religious  events
             weekly."

22. Ms Bostwick-Barnes  submitted,  relying  upon  the  grounds,  that  the
    judge's reasoning was flawed: in effect that it  was  implausible  that
    the appellant would hold such a large gathering in his home, whilst the
    police were watching his home, rather than  in  a  church  because  the
    appellant's evidence was that the authorities were also keeping a close
    watch on the church.

23. Ms Bostwick-Barnes did not place great emphasis on this  point  in  her
    oral submissions.  In my judgment, she was right not  to  do  so.   The
    point made by the judge was one open to him  on  the  evidence,  namely
    that a large gathering at the home of the appellant's  grandmother  was
    likely to attract attention more than if it took  place  in  a  church,
    particularly as the appellant's  evidence  was  that  the  police  were
    visiting the house very often.

24. The ground challenging the judge's reasoning  in  paras  60-61  of  his
    determination is, in my judgment, without merit and I reject it.

25. Ms Bostwick-Barnes did not directly criticise the judge's reasoning  at
    para 62-70 which led him to conclude that he did not  accept  that  the
    appellant had been arrested following the distribution of leaflets  and
    DVDs promoting an anti-government demonstration by the Catholic Church.
     To the extent that Ms Bostwick-Barnes' submission in relation  to  the
    judge's failure to take into account the appellant's age is read across
    to his finding on this issue,  I see no merit in that  submission.   In
    large measure, the judge's reasoning is based upon  the  implausibility
    of the appellant distributing 300 to 400 leaflets to Catholic homes and
    also clear inconsistencies in his evidence concerning  the  person  who
    assisted  the  priest  in  bribing  the  authorities  to  release   the
    appellant.  The reasoning is unaffected by  any  issue  concerning  the
    appellant's age.

26. Turning now to the appellant's sur place activities,  the  judge  dealt
    with this in some detail at paras  71-78  of  his  determination.   His
    principal reasons are at paras 76-78 as follows:


         "76. Taking all this into account and the  Nature  of  'sur  place'
             activity.  The appellant has produced evidence  of  attendance
             at  one  rally  outside  the  Vietnamese  Embassy  where   the
             photographs on the 'UK - Fight' website for 'human  rights  of
             peoples who were fighting for freedom and  democracy  Vietnam'
             shows the appellant in the  background  in  three  photographs
             from  which  I  conclude  it  would  be  very   difficult   to
             specifically identify him.  I conclude  from  the  photographs
             that the appellant could in no way be described  as  taking  a
             prominent role.  He is certainly not identified as a leader or
             mobiliser and there is no evidence that he has  addressed  the
             crowd he is simply a member of the crowd.  Although he appears
             to carry a banner I have been unable because of  the  position
             of the appellant  to  identify  what  the  banner  says.   The
             indication from the banners held by protesters is  that  those
             who are demonstrating are asking the Vietnamese Communists  to
             stop trading  their  motherland  and  it  is  a  human  rights
             protest.  There is no indication that  they  are  for  example
             seeking the violent overthrow of the government.  No  evidence
             has been placed before me that this  particular  demonstration
             would be viewed by the Vietnamese  government.   There  is  no
             evidence that the demonstrators have attracted any  particular
             media coverage in the United Kingdom or  Vietnam.   There  has
             been  no  evidence  placed  before  me  that  surveillance  of
             demonstrators took place through  filming  them  or  that  the
             Vietnamese government had for example agents in the crowd.  In
             addition no evidence has been placed before me of the regime's
             capacity  to  identify  individuals.   The  appellant  himself
             accepts he did not know if his name would appear in connection
             with the rallies.


         77.  If the appellant were returned to Vietnam I  do  not  consider
             that he has the profile of a  committed  opponent  or  someone
             with a significant political profile or any political profile.
              No evidence has been placed before me of anything that  would
             lead the appellant to be specifically identified  or  targeted
             upon return to Vietnam.  As far as his Facebook  comments  are
             concerned there is no photograph of the appellant to associate
             him with those comments which  appear  to  have  started  very
             shortly before his asylum claim.   I  am  not  satisfied  that
             these comments  would  bring  him  to  the  attention  of  the
             authorities in Vietnam as an activist.  In the circumstances I
             am not satisfied that his 'sur place' activities in the United
             Kingdom will bring him to  the  attention  of  the  Vietnamese
             authorities as an activist that will  place  him  at  risk  on
             return.


         78.  In the appellant's  case  I  do  not  accept  his  account  as
             credible for the reasons I have previously stated.  As far  as
             political  involvement  is  concerned  there  is  evidence  of
             attendance at one demonstration in the UK.  I do not  consider
             him to  be  a  regular  or  high  profile  demonstrator.   His
             postings on Facebook would not I conclude on the basis of  the
             evidence  lead  him  to  be  identified  by   the   Vietnamese
             authorities.  I do not therefore consider that he is likely to
             come to the attention of the authorities or  that  they  would
             give any priority to tracing him.  I therefore do not consider
             taking into account that I do not accept his  account  of  his
             activities in Vietnam or the low profile of his activities  in
             the UK that there is a real risk  of  him  facing  persecution
             upon return."

27. Ms Bostwick-Barnes submitted that the judge had  failed  to  take  into
    account evidence at pages 59-64 of the bundle  which  demonstrate  that
    the government in Vietnam was overseeing the internet and public domain
    and tracing people who criticised the government.

28. Mr Richards submitted that the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant's  involvement  in  one  demonstration  showing  him   in   a
    photograph, but not apparently named, would not place him  at  risk  on
    return.  Further, in relation to his Facebook page, the appellant would
    not be at risk for the reasons given by the judge.

29. As regards the appellant's involvement in a demonstration, Ms Bostwick-
    Barnes did not rely before me, nor would it seem before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, upon any background material showing that activities of  this
    sort were monitored and led to action against those involved.  Even  if
    the Vietnamese authorities do track websites of the sort on  which  the
    photograph was placed, the judge was entitled to find that a photograph
    merely showing the appellant as a member of a crowd, albeit carrying  a
    banner, but unnamed, would not create a real risk that the  authorities
    would be interested in the appellant as a political activist on  return
    to Vietnam.

30. As regards the  appellant's  Facebook  page,  the  background  material
    relied upon by Ms Bostwick-Barnes relates to the arrests of a number of
    "prominent bloggers" by the Vietnamese authorities.  It  is  not  clear
    whether the judge was specifically referred to this  material  but,  in
    any event, it does not in my judgment undermine the  judge's  findings.
    The appellant's Facebook page contained no photograph of the  appellant
    and his name was limited to his Catholic name.  The background material
    relied upon by Ms  Bostwick-Barnes  related  to  "prominent  bloggers".
    Nothing in the material  justifies  the  conclusion,  contrary  to  the
    judge's finding at paras 77-78, that the appellant  fell  into  such  a
    category or would  be  identified  by,  and  be  of  interest  to,  the
    Vietnamese authorities on return.

31. Finally, Ms Bostwick-Barnes submitted that the judge had been wrong  in
    law to find that the appellant would not be at risk on return by reason
    of his Catholic faith.  She submitted that,  contrary  to  the  judge's
    finding, the background material  supported  a  risk  to  Catholics  in
    Vietnam even if they were not "Catholic activists".   She  relied  upon
    para 3.12.7 of the Operational Guidance Note for Vietnam (at page 89 of
    the bundle) which stated that:

         "In the past several years, including last year, police  have  used
         tear gas and batons against, and  have  detained,  participants  at
         peaceful prayer vigils and demonstrations  at  properties  formerly
         owned by the Catholic Church."

32. Further, she relied on background  materials  at  pages  48-56  of  the
    bundle which, she submitted, showed the risk to  Catholics  in  Vietnam
    and  that  despite  the  Constitution's  provision  allowing  religious
    freedom, the reality was different.

33. Ms Bostwick-Barnes also relied upon the Supreme Court's decision in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 and submitted that the appellant would be at risk
    as a result of his Catholic faith or would be required to  be  discreet
    or lie about his religious beliefs in order to avoid persecution and so
    had a claim on that basis.

34. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had made a clear finding  at  para
    83 that the appellant was not  a  "religious  activist".   Mr  Richards
    submitted that the judge had set out at length the background  evidence
    at paras 80-81, 87 and 89 including the OGN and the Country  of  Origin
    Information Report (August 2013).  Mr Richards  submitted  that  having
    taken that evidence into account, in particular what was said  at  para
    3.12.18 of the OGN that:  "the majority of Vietnamese Catholics are not
    generally at risk of treatment amounting to persecution", the judge was
    entitled to find,  having  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    detention in both 2010 and 2011, that he would not be at risk on return
    as an "ordinary Catholic".  Mr Richards submitted that in the light  of
    that, the HJ (Iran) point did not 'get off the ground'.

35. There is no doubt that Judge Waygood took into account  the  background
    material to which he was  referred,  in  particular  the  OGN  and  COI
    Reports.  He sets extracts out at some length at paras 80-81, 87 and 89
    of his determination.  The background evidence  demonstrates  that  the
    Vietnam authorities do restrict religious worship,  in  particular  for
    these purposes, of those of the Catholic faith.

36. In the grounds, the appellant relies upon an extract  from  the  USCIRF
    Annual Report 2013 set out at para 18.37 of the COI Report as follows:

         "Catholicism continues to grow rapidly in Vietnam, and  the  church
         has expanded both clerical training and  charitable  activities  in
         recent years.  Hanoi and the Vatican continue to  discuss  resuming
         diplomatic relations.  Nevertheless, the relationship  between  the
         Vietnamese government, some  members  of  the  Church's  hierarchy,
         Catholic laity, and members of the Redemptiorist Order continue  to
         be tense.  Over the past several years, including in the past year,
         Catholics have been detained for participating in  peaceful  prayer
         vigils and demonstrations  at  properties  formerly  owned  by  the
         Catholic Church.  In addition, government officials  have  employed
         'contract thugs' to assault and intimidate Catholics from  engaging
         in both private study and worship at 'unregistered' locations.'"

37. At para 3.12.18, the OGN reaches the following conclusion:

         "Although there are restrictions  on  religious  freedom,  and  the
         Vietnamese  authorities  seek  to  control  religious  groups,  the
         treatment individual members  of  officially  registered  religious
         groups suffer  on  account  of  these  restrictions  does  not,  in
         general, amount to persecution.  The majority  of  applicants  from
         this category of claim are therefore unlikely to qualify for asylum
         or Humanitarian Protection.  However, in some instances, Catholics,
         including priests, Catholic activists  and  Catholics  from  ethnic
         minorities have faced treatment that does  amount  to  persecution.
         Applications should be considered on a case by  case  basis,  since
         the majority of Vietnamese Catholics are not generally at  risk  of
         treatment amounting to persecution."


38. At para 90 of his determination, Judge Waygood, having  considered  the
    background  evidence  (including  these  two  passages),  reached   the
    following conclusion:

        "I consider the appellant has demonstrated that he is no more  than
        an ordinary Catholic who is at no greater danger of coming  to  the
        attention of the authorities if returned to Vietnam than any  other
        Catholic.  I also consider that  the  background  evidence  overall
        indicates that the ordinary Catholic can observe their religion  in
        Vietnam."

39. In my judgment, that finding is entirely consistent with the background
    evidence, even though the evidence does show that a Catholic in Vietnam
    may experience problems from the authorities.  However, the  level  and
    incidence of the problems identified in the  background  material  does
    not, in my judgment, establish that there is a real risk of persecution
    or serious ill-treatment merely on the basis of being of  the  Catholic
    faith and practising  that  faith.   The  judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings left the appellant, as regards his claim based upon  religion,
    relying only on the risk to himself  as  a  Catholic  who  has  had  no
    problems with the authorities.  He had no history of activism.   Taking
    away the specific  incidents  which  the  judge  did  not  believe  had
    occurred, the appellant was able safely to practise his faith before he
    came to the UK.

40. I agree with Mr Richards' submission that, as  a  consequence,  the  HJ
    (Iran) point cannot succeed as the appellant would not be  required  to
    act discreetly in order to  avoid  persecution.   He  can  continue  to
    practise his religion as he did  before  and  there  is  no  basis  for
    inferring that he would chose to do anything  more.   Linking  the  two
    findings together the judge said at paras 83-85:

         "83. As far as his religious activity is concerned.  Whilst  it  is
             accepted that he is a Catholic, I do  not  find  for  all  the
             reasons I have outlined that he has demonstrated that he is  a
             religious activist.

         84.  Accepting the fact that he would wish to continue  to  worship
             as a  Catholic.   The  appellant  is  not  a  priest,  I  have
             concluded he is not a  Catholic  activist  and  therefore  has
             displayed no evidence that he is likely to a Catholic activist
             upon return to Vietnam.  Nor is he a Catholic from  an  ethnic
             minority and therefore I conclude would not be at any  greater
             risk upon return than any other Catholic in Vietnam.

         85.  On this basis I do not accept  that  he  would  be  liable  to
             persecution in  Vietnam  because  of  his  religion.   I  also
             conclude there is no reason why he would be  required  to  act
             discreetly with regard to his political activity  or  religion
             as I do not  accept  that  he  is  a  religious  or  political
             activist.  I therefore do not accept that he would be at  risk
             on return to Vietnam for that reason."

41. That finding is, in my judgment, legally unassailable on the  basis  of
    the judge's findings and the background evidence before him.

42. I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to conclude on the basis  of
    his findings and the background material that the appellant had  failed
    to establish a real risk of persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment  in
    Vietnam on the basis of his religion.

Decision

43. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal did not involve the making of a  material  error  of
    law.  The decision stands.

44.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is,   accordingly,
    dismissed.




Signed


A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
14 October 2014


