
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/02469/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 November 2015                   |On 2 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL


                                   Between

                              Mr DUNCAN KASOLO
                        (NO ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Muzira, Solicitor (Solomons)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  on   8   September   2015   against   the
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd promulgated on  11
         July  2015  dismissing   the   Appellant's   asylum,   humanitarian
         protection and human rights claims.  Those claims had  been  raised
         in response to the Secretary of State's decision dated  27  January
         2015 to deport the Appellant, made pursuant to section 32(5) of the
         UK Borders Act 2007.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Rwanda, born  there  on  5  April
         1991.  The Appellant had entered the United Kingdom with his mother
         and his sister on 3 September 2001, when he was 10  years  of  age.
         His mother's asylum claim was refused on 29 November 2001, but  she
         was granted ELR with her  children  as  her  dependants,  until  29
         November 2005, in accordance with the Home Office  policy  then  in
         force.  The Appellant, his mother and sister were granted ILR on 29
         May 2007.

    3.     The Appellant's first criminal conviction was on 2 December 2004
         at Stratford Juvenile Court, attempt/robbery.  He was sentenced  to
         a curfew order of 3 months with electronic tagging.  There  was  an
         action plan order of 3  months.   The  extent  of  the  Appellant's
         subsequent convictions (set out  in  the  reasons  for  deportation
         decision) are not in dispute.  Convictions are  recorded  in  2006,
         2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and  2013.   The  last  recorded
         conviction was on 14 October 2013, at Kingston  upon  Thames  Crown
         Court.  The Appellant  was  convicted  of  possession  of  a  knife
         blade/sharp pointed article in a  public  place  and  burglary  and
         theft - dwelling.   The  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  36  months'
         imprisonment.  The judge's sentencing remarks are extracted at [19]
         of Judge Lloyd's determination.

    4.     Judge Lloyd heard the appeal at Newport (Columbus  House)  on  5
         August  2015,  in  the  Appellant's  absence.   At  that  time  the
         Appellant was unrepresented and was living  in  London.   Enquiries
         had been made of his previous solicitors as the judge  recorded  at
         [5] and [6] of his determination.  As of  11.30am  the  Appellant's
         absence was unexplained.  At approximately  1.00pm  the  judge  was
         informed that the Appellant had arrived at court, and had handed in
         a written request for an adjournment, on  the  notepaper  of  newly
         instructed solicitors: see [9], [10] and [11] of the determination.
          The judge refused to reopen the hearing  or  indeed  to  hear  the
         Appellant.  He considered that the travel  arrangements  which  the
         Appellant had made to reach his hearing were "entirely unacceptable
         to this Tribunal". The  judge  went  on  to  determine  the  appeal
         without any evidence from the Appellant.

    5.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         O'Garro considered that it was arguable that Judge Lloyd had  erred
         in law by refusing an adjournment and/or to hear the  appeal  after
         the Appellant's late arrival.  It was arguable that  the  Appellant
         had not received a fair hearing.

    6.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
         appeal was opposed.  Standard directions were made by the  tribunal
         and the appeal was listed for adjudication of whether or not  there
         was a material error of law.  The Appellant was informed  that,  in
         the event that a material error of law were found, his appeal would
         be reheard immediately.

    Submissions

    7.     The tribunal indicated at the commencement of  the  hearing  its
         provisional view that there had indeed been manifest unfairness  as
         indicated by the grant of permission to appeal, which  necessitated
         the setting aside of the decision and reasons, and a rehearing.  Ms
         Willocks-Briscoe  for  the  Respondent  indicated  no  dissent  and
         further formal submissions were not required.

    The material error of law

    8.     No doubt  Judge  Lloyd  was  sorely  tried  by  the  Appellant's
         unaccountably casual attitude towards  timekeeping,  especially  an
         Appellant who had such long experience  of  the  courts.   Had  the
         Appellant simply failed to attend  at  all,  the  judge's  decision
         would have been unimpeachable.  The judge's  consideration  of  the
         evidence which was available was commendably  thorough.    But  the
         late  arrival  of  the  Appellant,  even  as  the  result  of   the
         Appellant's mismanagement of his travel arrangements, fundamentally
         changed the situation.  The judge had at that point not  yet  given
         any decision in the appeal,  let  alone  prepared  a  decision  and
         reasons.  Having neither seen nor heard the Appellant, but  relying
         on an intermediary, the judge  reached  a  decision  which  was  in
         effect to exclude the Appellant and which was on its  face  unfair.
         The judge  should  certainly  at  the  least  have  reconvened  the
         hearing, to hear what the Appellant had to say.  It was clear  that
         the  Appellant  had  travelled  a  substantial  distance  and   was
         unrepresented.   It was of particular relevance that the  Appellant
         was at that time raising an asylum claim, to which the principle of
         anxious scrutiny always applies.

    9.     The tribunal finds that the judge's decision  not  to  hear  the
         Appellant notwithstanding his late arrival appeared unfair and  was
         unfair, despite the reasons which the judge gave for his  decision.
           There had not been a proper hearing.  The appeal of the Appellant
         is allowed.  The decision and reasons of Judge Lloyd is accordingly
         set aside.

    10.    In compliance with the tribunal's  directions,  the  Appellant's
         solicitors had filed two bundles of evidence in the  event  that  a
         rehearing was ordered.  These had not reached the Respondent and so
         time was given to Ms Willocks-Briscoe to prepare.  The Respondent's
         evidence was available, including the Appellant's  criminal  record
         and OASys Assessments.

    The fresh hearing

    11.    Ms Muszira indicated that the Appellant was no longer relying on
         asylum grounds to contest the  deportation  order.   He  relied  on
         Article 8 ECHR family life grounds only.

    12.    The Appellant gave  evidence  in  accordance  with  his  witness
         statement dated  2  November  2015.   In  summary  in  his  written
         evidence the Appellant said that he had been released  on  bail  to
         join his partner, Ms Charlotte Anne Dawson-Smith  ("Dawson-Smith"),
         on 7 May 2015.   His offending had been connected  to  alcohol  and
         drugs.  He was deeply remorseful.  Facing  deportation  had  caused
         him to reflect further on his actions.  He did not intend to offend
         again.  He was due to attend another  course  shortly.   His  son's
         ties were with the United Kingdom, as were his partner's.  His  son
         would be adversely affected by his absence. The Appellant was close
         to  his  own  mother  and  siblings,  especially  because  of   the
         circumstances in which they left  Rwanda.   The  Appellant  had  no
         social, cultural or family ties in Rwanda.  He  had  lived  in  the
         United Kingdom for 14 years.  The  Appellant  served  a  bundle  of
         supporting evidence to which further  reference  will  be  made  as
         necessary in due course.

    13.    In his oral evidence the Appellant said that Ms Dawson-Smith was
         not at the hearing because of her agoraphobia. She  suffered  panic
         attacks and stayed at home.   She struggled  to  shop  or  to  take
         their son to school.  He had requested a medical  report  but  none
         had been provided in the time available.

    14.    Cross-examined, the  Appellant  said  that  he  did  everything,
         cooking, shopping  and  cleaning.   Ms  Dawson-Smith's  mother  and
         sister lived 5 minutes away in Hammersmith and her father lived  in
         Shepherd's Bush.   There was another  sister  in  Oxfordshire.   Ms
         Dawson-Smith was on medication.  He had been released  on  bail  to
         her.

    15.    The Appellant was shown Ms Dawson-Smith's  letter  to  the  Home
         Office dated 1 April 2015, in which she stated  that  she  and  the
         Appellant were not living together and that their relationship  had
         its ups and downs.  He said that they had had a 2 or  3  day  break
         when he was at his mother's.  Their relationship had  started  when
         they were both young, only 19, and Ms Dawson-Smith had soon  had  a
         baby.     He had only lived with her full time since  he  had  come
         out of prison.

    16.    The Appellant said that the couple lived  on  Ms  Dawson-Smith's
         income support and charity.  His family  couldn't  afford  to  help
         him.  He took his son to school.  While the Appellant was in prison
         Ms Dawson-Smith collected him.  The school was in the same road  as
         their flat.  His own mother came to visit his son quite a lot.

    17.    The Appellant said that he spoke no French or Rwandan.   He  had
         no house or job in Rwanda.  His mother and younger brother had been
         to Rwanda about 4 years ago but the Appellant had never been  back.
         The Appellant believed that his mother had caught up with a  friend
         but he knew of no family.  He did not believe  that  Rwanda  was  a
         safe place.  The Appellant saw his brother  and  sister  regularly.
         He  doubted  that  Ms  Dawson-Smith  could  get  help  from  social
         services.  The Appellant thought that his son would end up in  care
         if he were deported.

    18.    Evidence was also given by the Appellant's  mother,  Mrs  Jeanne
         Kimenyi, his sister Ms Cynthia Nalubwama and his younger brother Mr
         Joachim Ntumwa.  Each had filed a witness  statement,  respectively
         dated 2 November 2015 (2) and 3 November 2015.  They  testified  to
         their close relationship and requested that the appeal be allowed.

    19.    A witness statement dated 2 November 2015 was filed on behalf of
         Ms Dawson-Smith, where she identified herself  as  the  Appellant's
         partner  and  the  mother  of  his  son.   She  had  supported  the
         Appellant's application for bail.  She believed that he had changed
         for the better.   He  was  a  good  father.   She  was  emotionally
         dependant on the Appellant and loved him.   She  was  unwilling  to
         travel to Rwanda for a  number  of  reasons  which  she  explained.
         Their son would miss his father if the Appellant were deported.

    The Law

    20.    Since 2 October 2000, the commencement date of the Human  Rights
         Act 1998, public authorities (including the tribunal) may  not  act
         in a way which is incompatible  with  the  European  Convention  on
         Human Rights and the tribunal must by Section 2 take  into  account
         the body of material commonly  known  by  the  convenient  term  of
         "Strasbourg jurisprudence".

    21.    The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The  ordinary  civil
         standard of proof applies to his Article 8 ECHR claim (as there  is
         no physical and moral integrity component).  The relevant  date  is
         the date of the hearing.  Section 117A-D of the Immigration, Asylum
         and Nationality Act  2006  applies  to  the  consideration  of  the
         Appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim.

    22.    Deportation orders are governed by paragraphs A398, 398, 399 and
         399A of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  general  law  relating  to
         deportation has been explained and usefully summarised by the Upper
         Tribunal  in  Masih  (deportation  -  public   interest   -   basic
         principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC).    The  tribunal  has
         followed and applied MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192,  where  the
         Court of Appeal explains the approach to be taken to the assessment
         of proportionality under the current Immigration Rules.   In brief,
         the new Immigration Rules, i.e.,  paragraphs  A398,  398,  399  and
         399A, provide a  complete  code  concerning  deportation,  and  the
         exceptional  circumstances  to  be  considered  in  the   balancing
         exercise involve the  application  of  a  proportionality  test  as
         required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence.  The  tribunal  has  also
         taken  account  of  recent  relevant   authorities   such   as   EV
         (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
         387.

    Findings

    23.    The Appellant's witnesses were impressive and the  tribunal  has
         no difficulty in accepting them as reliable.   The Appellant's  own
         evidence was more problematic, making due allowance  for  the  fact
         that he has only recently been released from  custody  and  may  be
         inclined to feel some degree of resentment about his situation.  In
         the tribunal's view, the Appellant was inclined to  exaggerate  any
         difficulties which would or might be caused by his absence from the
         home in which his son Anthony resides.   The  Appellant  sought  to
         minimise his  ties  to  Rwanda.   The  tribunal  is,  for  example,
         satisfied that he speaks Lugandan which  his  mother  also  speaks.
         The Appellant stressed his involvement with his young son, but  the
         sad reality is that his involvement has been spasmodic and  recent,
         interrupted by the Appellant's frequent  and  extended  periods  of
         custody.

    24.    It was perhaps unfortunate that Ms Dawson-Smith  was  unable  to
         attend the hearing in person.  The tribunal  is  however  satisfied
         from the medical records produced that Ms Dawson-Smith is suffering
         from a form of anxiety complex.   The  tribunal  is  not,  however,
         satisfied from the evidence before it that this complex is anywhere
         near as debilitating as the  Appellant  claimed.   The  Appellant's
         suggestion that his son might have to be taken into local authority
         care if the Appellant were not able to assist in his son's life the
         tribunal finds was not supported by the evidence  produced.   There
         was no suggestion that Ms Dawson-Smith was other than  a  competent
         and loving mother, managing under the difficult circumstances which
         the Appellant's life of crime and absence from the home has  helped
         create.  The tribunal is also satisfied that Ms Dawson-Smith has  a
         supportive  family  and  that  the  Appellant's  family  are   also
         supportive, and that she is able to turn to them  for  help.   That
         support in the tribunal's  judgment  makes  it  unlikely  that  the
         Appellant's son is in danger of being placed into  local  authority
         care because of the Appellant's deportation.

    25.    The tribunal is satisfied that  the  quasi-marital  relationship
         between Ms Dawson-Smith is a genuine one, and  has  survived  under
         the   difficult   circumstances   mentioned   above.    Like   many
         relationships formed in late teenage years, both partners have  had
         to come to greater  maturity  together.   Fortunately,  as  already
         noted, they have had the benefit of the support of their respective
         families.

    Discussion and Conclusions

    26.    The tribunal finds that it would not be reasonable to expect  Ms
         Dawson-Smith and their young son  to  accompany  the  Appellant  to
         Rwanda, to the extent that it  would  amount  to  an  unduly  harsh
         expectation.  In the first  place,  at  the  time  Ms  Dawson-Smith
         formed her relationship with the Appellant and indeed had  a  child
         with him, the Appellant was present in the United Kingdom  lawfully
         with ILR: see paragraph 399(b)(i) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Ms
         Dawson-Smith at that  time  had  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
         Appellant would not be remaining in the United Kingdom permanently,
         alongside his family members who have  achieved  a  high  level  of
         integration.   Although  she  is  well  aware  of  the  Appellant's
         criminal record, the Appellant  has  always  claimed  that  he  has
         reformed himself and Ms Dawson-Smith no doubt  hoped  and  believed
         that the Appellant's assertions were true.  Regrettably it was  not
         true, as his continued offences and convictions show.

    27.    As noted above, Ms  Dawson-Smith  has  a  close  and  supportive
         family in the United Kingdom, not only her own family but also  the
         Appellant's mother and siblings.  It would be unreasonable  to  the
         extent of being unduly harsh to expect her to forgo such  important
         contact, for herself as much as for her son.  Nor is it likely that
         Ms Dawson-Smith would want her son to grow up in Rwanda, as perhaps
         opposed to paying a visit there at some suitable stage when  he  is
         older.  The benefits to a British Citizen from growing  up  in  the
         United Kingdom are all obvious.  There can be no  sensible  quarrel
         with the choice that he should remain in the United Kingdom.

    28.    It follows that the tribunal has to consider  whether  a  family
         split  is  justified,  i.e.,  whether  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances on  the  facts  as  found.   Paragraph  398  (b)  and
         paragraph A398(c) of the Immigration  Rules  apply,  requiring  the
         application of paragraph 399 as noted above.

    29.    Plainly the best interests of the Appellant's son indicate  that
         his father should remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  evidence
         indicates that the Appellant, despite the disappointing example  he
         has so far set for his son, is a competent and loving  parent.   It
         would be to his son's  advantage  that  the  Appellant  worked  and
         perhaps studied in the United  Kingdom,  as  well  as  sharing  the
         burdens of parenthood with the Appellant's mother.  There can be no
         real contest about that, save that  the  Appellant  is  capable  of
         finding work in Rwanda and providing financial support  from  there
         if he is at all serious about  his  paternal  responsibilities,  as
         well as his responsibilities towards Ms Dawson-Smith.

    30.    In the tribunal's judgment, however, the  private  interests  of
         the Appellant's son and partner, and the Appellant's family in  the
         United Kingdom  are  outweighed  by  the  public  interest  in  the
         Appellant's  deportation,  by  a  clear  margin.   The  Appellant's
         predilection for crime has been a pattern of worsening offences  as
         he has become older  and  stronger.  This  can  be  seen  from  his
         criminal record.  It may be that the Appellant has  benefited  from
         the courses he has undertaken in prison, but it is far too soon  to
         say that with any degree of confidence.  The Respondent's view that
         the Appellant's deportation is conducive  to  the  public  good  is
         supported by the evidence.

    31.    Indeed, the OASys reports available indicate that the  Appellant
         remains a risk to the  public.   The  report  dated  13  June  2014
         assessed the Appellant as a high risk to the public.  That risk has
         now been reduced to medium, in  the  latest  assessment  available.
         Now that still represents a serious level of  risk  of  harm.   The
         Appellant has, for example, been willing  to  obtain  and  carry  a
         knife, despite his previous  convictions.   Plainly  the  Appellant
         succumbs to temptation easily and is careless of the harm he  might
         cause to others, not least  to  his  own  loving  and  law  abiding
         family.   The  tribunal  considers  that  the  evidence   currently
         available shows that he presents a substantial risk of reoffending,
         notwithstanding the courses he  has  attended  in  prison.   It  is
         regrettable from the perspective of his son and partner, and of his
         mother and siblings, but the tribunal finds that there are no  very
         compelling circumstances on the facts of this appeal.  It would not
         be unduly harsh for the Appellant's son and partner  to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom without him.  The tribunal so finds.

    32.    As the tribunal has explained above, the tribunal is  unable  to
         find that there very significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  re-
         integration into  Rwanda:  paragraph  399A(c)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.  He lived in Rwanda until he was 10, when  he  came  to  the
         United Kingdom, speaks Lugandan and has grown up within  a  Rwandan
         family.   English  is  in  any  event  one  of  Rwanda's   official
         languages.  He is  of  sufficient  intelligence  and  education  to
         readapt as necessary. Thus the Appellant must be deported.

    33.    The tribunal bears in mind the fact that the  Appellant  may  be
         able, after an appropriate period outside the  United  Kingdom,  to
         produce  substantial  and  persuasive  evidence  of  his   reformed
         character.  He may then be in a position to apply for revocation of
         the deportation order, and to seek leave  to  re-enter  the  United
         Kingdom.  But that will be a matter for him.  His appeal as  remade
         must be dismissed.

    DECISION

    The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The tribunal finds that there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which must be set aside.  The original  decision  is
    remade as follows:

    The Appellant's appeal is DISMISSED




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
