
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02653/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     V S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen, instructed by S Satha & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  a
    First-tier Judge allowing the appeal  of  the  respondent  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 30 January 2015 to remove her from the
    United Kingdom as an illegal entrant by way of directions.  It will  be
    convenient to refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent and  to
    Ms Surharshan as the appellant, as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Judge.

2.   The judge found the appellant to have given a credible account  of  her
    history, including detention and serious ill-treatment  in  Sri  Lanka,
    save with regard to one matter and that  concerns  an  injury  she  had
    sustained to her back.  Her claim was that she had been imprisoned  and
    mistreated on three occasions.  At the end of the second  occasion  she
    was released on payment of a bribe which was paid  by  her  aunt.   The
    third occasion took place in  or  around  January  2014  when  she  was
    arrested again and taken away in a white van and ill-treated  including
    being raped several times and burned with cigarettes.  Her  aunt  again
    secured her release by paying a bribe.

3.   It is relevant to note from her interview notes that her husband was  a
    member of the LTTE and their home was used as a hospital for the  LTTE.
    Her husband was killed by a shell, and his  mother  died  at  the  same
    time.  He had gone to see the appellant at  the  hospital  as  she  was
    because she was pregnant and it was when he was leaving after  visiting
    her that he and his mother died due to the shelling.  She said that she
    had escaped and was in a bunker.  She said that the LTTE had identified
    her as her husband's wife and hence their interest in her.   When  they
    detained her they did not believe her when she said  that  her  husband
    was dead and he had died on 6 February 2009.  Evidence was given on the
    appellant's behalf (she did not give evidence due to her mental  state)
    by her brother who has  been  granted  refugee  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He had been an LTTE conscript.  He gave evidence among  other
    things that he saw the appellant in the hospital  with  a  back  injury
    caused by shrapnel.

4.   However the appellant's evidence with regard to the scar  on  her  back
    was that she did not see what caused it but  she  attributed  it  to  a
    beating she had received.  Dr Goldwyn, who examined her, found a number
    of alternative causes for this wound.  Dr Goldwyn noted that there were
    alternative explanations for this  scar:  it  could  be  an  injury  by
    shrapnel: the appellant told her that she was not with her husband when
    he was struck by a shell and killed, not having gone with him to  visit
    his injured brother-in-law because she was in later pregnancy.

5.   The judge noted the discrepancy  in  the  evidence  and  concluded  the
    appellant had not been truthful concerning the injuries  she  sustained
    to her back in the shelling on 6 February 2006  stating  that  she  had
    either not mentioned it or had been untruthful  to  Dr  Goldwyn.   This
    appears to be on the basis that the judge without setting his reasoning
    out in any detail, preferred the reasoning of the appellant's  brother,
    whom he found to be a credible witness.

6.   The judge went on to say that the rest of  the  appellant's  story  was
    highly detailed.  It was clear that she was suffering to a high  degree
    from post-traumatic stress disorder.  He noted what Dr Goldwyn  had  to
    say about this and also the  report  of  Dr  Persaud,  who  provided  a
    psychiatric report.  The judge stated the back injury  did  not  affect
    the conclusions about the origin of other scars.   In  that  regard  Dr
    Goldwyn had said that round scars on  the  appellant  were  typical  of
    cigarette burns.  She had also found that the scar on  the  appellant's
    back was highly consistent with her account  of  maltreatment.   Having
    said that the back injury did not  affect  the  conclusions  about  the
    origin of other scars the judge noted that  though  part  of  the  PTSD
    might be down to being injured by shelling while eight months pregnant,
    that did not remove the PTSD arising from the torture the appellant had
    endured.  He accepted the credibility of her account  of  ill-treatment
    noting among other things that she had not claimed to have  been  raped
    save on the third detention unless she was inventing the whole story it
    would be unlikely that she would not claim to have been  raped  on  all
    occasions.  He did not think it likely that the medical  evidence  from
    either doctor would be any different if they were told  that  the  back
    injury was caused by shelling  not  torture,  and  that  she  had  been
    untruthful about it.  Dr Persaud had anticipated that  possibility  and
    took it into account in stating that it was highly  unlikely  that  the
    core parts of the account were fabricated or  exaggerated.   It  seemed
    highly unlikely, the judge thought, that any of the  other  scars  were
    caused by the shelling, not least as the one scar that  was  so  caused
    was on the appellant's back whereas all the others were on her front.

7.   The judge also went  on  to  say,  at  paragraph  54,  that  given  the
    findings of fact in his conclusions he did not set out  the  case  law.
    Earlier on he had referred to the fact that reliance was placed on  the
    country guidance decision in GJ [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

8.   In her submissions Ms Holmes relied on the grounds  in  their  entirety
    and developed them as follows.  With regard to the issue of the scar on
    the appellant's back, she argued that the problem was  that  the  judge
    treated the dishonesty in respect of the  back  injury  as  not  really
    being important, but it  did  affect  the  conclusions  concerning  the
    origins of the other scars.   It  was  not  a  minor  untruth  but  was
    important.  The doctors made their findings not realising that what the
    appellant said was not true and that must have made a  difference.   It
    had to be factored in.  Dr Persaud had no reason to  believe  that  the
    appellant had lied and therefore it was unsurprising that  he  said  it
    was highly unlikely that the core parts of the appellant's account were
    fabricated or exaggerated.  This cast doubt on the  usefulness  of  the
    psychiatric report.  The judge should have looked at the matter in  the
    round.

9.   Also, as was contended in the grounds, he had failed to consider  self-
    infliction by proxy.  Reference was made to the decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in KV [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) in particular to the headnote at
    paragraphs 3 and 4 and paragraph 287 and paragraph 291.

10.  As regards the second ground, it was argued that it could be seen  from
    headnote 7 in GJ that the appellant did not  fall  within  sub-category
    (a) being a threat to  Sri  Lanka  and  (8)  was  also  relevant.   The
    appellant had not done anything.  She was ill and the judge should have
    considered risk on return and factored  that  into  his  consideration.
    Paragraph 54 in GJ referred to evidence given to TAG  but  it  was  not
    referred to other relevant factors and TAG had been discreet about whom
    they interviewed and it did not seem from  the  country  guidance  that
    giving evidence to TAG was a risk factor in any event, though the judge
    regarded this as being a significant extra factor.

11.  In her submissions Ms Allen argued that the judge  had  looked  at  all
    the evidence in the round.  With regard to the first ground, it was the
    case that the appellant was not with her husband when he was struck  by
    the shell and killed.  There might have been a misunderstanding  as  on
    that date it was the appellant's family home and the hospital that were
    shelled so she did not necessarily go to the hospital with her  husband
    when he was struck by the shell, but she was in her home which had also
    been attacked.  It was also clear from her evidence that as well as the
    family home being shelled she had been beaten including being beaten on
    the back.  Ms Allen accepted that there had been  no  cross-appeal  nor
    Rule 24 response, but said that they were  there  today  to  rebut  the
    grounds of the respondent.

12.  The judge had gone on at paragraph 50 to consider that the rest of  the
    appellant's story was highly detailed, and it could be seen for example
    from M7 and M9 of the refusal letter that parts  of  her  evidence  had
    been accepted.  The judge had considered  the  appellant's  account  in
    terms of Dr Goldwyn's report and considered  that   setting  aside  the
    back injury due to shelling that would not  necessarily  impact  on  Dr
    Goldwyn's other findings.  Reference was made to Dr Goldwyn's report at
    page 6  of  the  bundle  concerning  the  scarring  and  paragraph  (c)
    concerning the foreleg.  Also what she had to say at paragraph  page  7
    at paragraph 59e about  the  mode  of  infliction  was  relevant.   She
    clearly had this in mind when considering the  scars.   Again  she  had
    considered the issue of self-harming at page 8 paragraph  61e  and  any
    possible alternative explanation.  At paragraph 65 she referred to  the
    point in the grounds concerning the possibility that  the  back  injury
    was caused by shrapnel.  This had been discounted as the appellant said
    she was not with her husband when he was struck and Dr Goldwyn had  not
    realised about the home.  Page 9 paragraph  75  was  relevant  in  this
    regard.  The report had been carried out having considered the Istanbul
    Protocol and the overall clinical picture was very much  in  line  with
    what was said in KV.

13.  Ms Holmes had referred to paragraph 287 in KV but  that  was  concerned
    more with the doctor's approach while  the  approach  of  the  decision
    maker was set out at paragraph 295.  It was  a  holistic  approach  and
    this had been done at paragraph 50 where the judge had  recognised  the
    inconsistency but looked at all the other  evidence.   Ms  Holmes  said
    that Dr Persaud had not been told the truth but he had not been looking
    at the scarring.  At page 20 of his report in the  third  paragraph  he
    showed he was aware of the shelling so when he looked at  the  evidence
    he considered the shelling of the appellant's home and the death of her
    husband and her experiences during  detention.   Also  Dr  Goldwyn  had
    considered the appellant's mental health at page 6 paragraph  50  where
    she noted that she scored maximum points on the PTSD scale.   This  had
    been addressed by the judge.

14.  With regard to the country guidance, it was relevant to note  that  the
    judge had had a very detailed 19 page skeleton argument before  him  in
    which the case law had been gone through.  It was necessary to  proceed
    on the basis of the accepted facts of the appellant  being  beaten  and
    detained post-war and if returned depending on her release  on  payment
    of a bribe having been recorded it could be that she would be on a stop
    list and detained at the airport or on a watch list as the sister of  a
    person of adverse interest to the authorities  whose  family  home  had
    been used by the LTTE and whose husband was a former  LTTE  member  and
    she had been detained twice.  So clearly she  was  someone  of  adverse
    interest and it was a question of their perception of her.  So from the
    accepted facts there was a risk of further detention on return and even
    if it had not been set out by the judge clearly he had been referred to
    GJ and had the full written submissions and he had accepted her on  the
    facts as being within the GJ risk categories.  There  was  no  material
    error in the decision.

15.  By way of reply Ms Holmes argued that it was not just  a  matter  of  a
    misunderstanding.  The judge had found the appellant to be dishonest on
    the point and what was recorded at paragraph 32  of  the  determination
    reflected an active lie.  The grounds did not  criticise  Dr  Goldwyn's
    careful findings.  It did not matter what Dr Goldwyn  had  found  about
    the other scars: he had not factored in the back scar.  The  judge  had
    not given the matter the importance it  deserved  and  failed  to  give
    consideration to whether it was self-inflicted.  This cast doubt on the
    appellant's claim to have been detained.  It did not mean she  was  ill
    for the reasons  she  claimed.   Although  there  may  well  have  been
    detailed written arguments, it was necessary to show that they had been
    considered.

16.  I reserved my determination.

17.  At issue, at this  stage  of  the  decision,  is  whether  there  is  a
    material error of law or are material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  The first ground comes  down  largely  to  the  question  of
    whether the judge  erred  in  the  way  in  which  he  dealt  with  the
    consequences of his conclusion that the appellant had  lied  about  her
    back injury, on the evidence as a whole.  The appellant attributed  the
    injury to a beating whereas the judge's conclusion  was  that  she  had
    incurred it as a consequence of being hit  by  shrapnel.   This  is  of
    clear relevance to the appellant's claim to have been ill-treated.  The
    judge considered the back injury did not affect the  conclusions  about
    the origin of other scars.  As noted above, Dr Goldwyn  considered  the
    possibility of the back injury being caused by shrapnel but  discounted
    that because of the appellant's evidence that  she  was  not  with  her
    husband when he was struck by a shell and killed.  She considered  that
    the scar was highly consistent with  the  appellant's  account  of  her
    maltreatment and noted that it would not have been possible for her  to
    self-harm on her back in this way.  It is  relevant  to  note  that  Dr
    Goldwyn was of the view  that  the  cigarette  burns  scars  were  most
    unlikely to be due to self-harm.

18.  It is right to argue as Ms  Holmes  does  that  the  judge  engaged  in
    speculation when stating that he did  not  think  it  likely  that  the
    medical evidence from either doctor would be any different if they were
    told that the back injury was caused by shelling not torture  and  that
    the appellant had been untruthful about it.  It is also  right  to  say
    that this particular possibility had not been taken into account by  Dr
    Persaud who in stating that it was highly unlikely that the core  parts
    of the account were fabricated or exaggerated was simply, as Ms  Holmes
    argued, expressing a view based on the fact that there was  nothing  to
    say that the appellant was doing other than telling the truth.   We  do
    not know what view either doctor would have taken had  they  been  told
    that the back injury did not occur as it was described.  Logically that
    must place the judge's finding in some difficulty.  I do not think that
    it was right to segregate that matter from the rest of the evidence  as
    the judge did.  Certainly the judge looked at matters in the round,  as
    Ms Allen has argued, but the significant failure in this aspect of  the
    determination is the failure to engage properly with  the  consequences
    of Dr Goldwyn in particular having been told an untruth, on the judge's
    findings, about the origins of the back injury.

19.  I am also concerned that the findings about risk on return in light  of
    the judge's conclusions were not properly open to him on the basis that
    he did not set out how the facts as  he  found  them  fell  within  the
    guidance in GJ.  He was provided with detailed submissions, as Ms Allen
    has argued, but equally, as Ms Holmes has argued, he needed to say what
    he made of those submissions rather  than  coming  to  the  very  terse
    conclusion to which he came, in effect at paragraphs 54 and 55  of  the
    determination.  These matters needed proper reasoning  and  tying  into
    the risk factors identified in GJ.

20.  Accordingly I considered the  judge  erred  materially  and  given  the
    nature of the errors I consider that the matter is  most  appropriately
    dealt with by being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing
    de novo.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

