
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/02073/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 4 July 2013                                |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                   C N A K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Webb of Duncan Moghal Solicitors & Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 1 December 1948.
     He arrived in the UK  on  24  November  2012  and  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival.  He claimed to fear persecution because of his Ahmadi faith if
    returned to Pakistan.  On 21 February  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's claim for  asylum  and  refused  him  leave  to
    enter.   The  appellant  appealed  that  decision  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a determination dated 7 April  2013,  Judge  R  A  Powell
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  On 30  April  2013,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Nightingale) granted the appellant permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 3. Judge Powell accepted some of the appellant's account but not all.   He
    accepted that the appellant was Ahmadi.  Further, he accepted that  the
    appellant had been attacked on two occasions in 2011.  In  relation  to
    those  attacks  the  judge  found  as  follows  at  para  30   of   his
    determination:

         "30. It is undoubtedly the case that members of the ordinary Ahmadi
             community face harassment and discrimination in Pakistan.   It
             would not be surprising if this antipathy manifested itself in
             low-level and occasional attacks such as the ones described by
             the appellant.  However, his own evidence at  the  hearing  is
             that the attacks were not serious or dangerous  and  left  him
             with no injuries.  There is very little, if any evidence, from
             his account, that the attacks were  linked  in  terms  of  the
             perpetrators or their organisation.   Such  attacks  may  have
             been triggered locally because he was identified  as  part  of
             the Ahmadi community by virtue of  his  work-based  activities
             but that is not a finding that  he  had  a  high  personal  or
             business profile which would follow him across Pakistan."

 4. The appellant also claimed to have been attacked in October 2012 by the
    Khatam-e-Nabuwat (KN).  As regards that, the judge did not accept  that
    the appellant had been attacked by the KN.  He said this at para 32:

         "32. No cogent case has been put forward as to how  KN  would  have
             become  interested  in  the  appellant  after  his  return  to
             Pakistan   in   September/October   2012.    The   appellant's
             identification  of  those  who  attacked  him  on  the   third
             occasions as  members  of  KN  is  speculative  and  seemingly
             derived from their garb.  Although on one hand he claims  that
             KN has a countrywide reach and  present  a  very  serious  and
             probably deadly threat to him, the description he gave  of  KN
             assailants running away from a few passers-by  who  intervened
             to stop him from being beaten - an attack which left him  with
             no injuries - does not,  in  my  judgment,  accord  with  that
             description.  As such, I am not satisfied that  the  appellant
             was genuinely attacked by KN."

 5. At para 33, the judge repeated his finding that he did not accept  that
    the third attack had taken place but, if it  did,  the  judge  did  not
    accept that it had been carried out by the KN.  As  a  consequence,  he
    was not satisfied, as the  appellant  had  claimed,  that  the  KN  had
    visited his home and left threats with his son subsequently.  At  paras
    34-37, the judge set out his reasons for concluding that the  appellant
    was not at risk from the KN as follows:

         "34. However, if such an attack took place, it is likely that local
             protagonists, aware of the appellant's faith and taking  steps
             to visit hurt upon him, carried it out.  In this case, a local
             incident is not indicative of a national risk.   I  take  into
             account that the appellant's family  was  not  harmed  in  the
             incident.  They were not detained pending the  return  of  the
             appellant.  The attack was badly timed; the appellant was  not
             there.  No attempts were made to track him  down  even  though
             the appellant's son was apparently able  to  call  him  almost
             immediately.  The appellant's whereabouts were not  discovered
             as he made the unexpected journey of  some  350km  to  Lahore.
             Even if his wife's family in Lahore hid him, KN did not try to
             find him and it is reasonable to believe that if  KN  has  the
             reach the appellant suggests it has, it would be able to trace
             the appellant's family including his wife's family.

         35.  Since the appellant left Lahore, there is no evidence that  KN
             have been looking for him.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
             appellant's wife or son have been harmed or threatened  by  KN
             or that KN knows of their whereabouts.  Although the appellant
             claimed in evidence that he had lost contact with his wife for
             the last two months, he attributed her  disappearance  to  her
             brother deciding he was no longer able or willing  to  provide
             for her, and not to some sinister act of KN.   However,  I  am
             not satisfied that the appellant has told the truth about this
             aspect of his case.  He made no mention of it in  his  witness
             statements, dated at  the  end  of  March  and  did  not  give
             evidence in chief about it.  I reject his explanation that his
             solicitors did not ask him so he did not tell him.

         36.  There is no evidence that  KN  visited  the  appellant's  wife
             while she was living with her own family after  the  appellant
             left.  There is no evidence that his adult son has experienced
             any problems from KN.  In my judgment, if there  were  genuine
             interest in the appellant KN would have tired to ascertain his
             whereabouts from his wife and  son.   KN  has  not  done  this
             either because the appellant is of  no  interest  to  them  or
             because their reach, that is to say the  reach  of  those  who
             threatened the appellant and then his son if that happened, is
             just not as countrywide as the appellant claims.

         37.  I also take into account the  decision  of  the  appellant  to
             resign from his employment in Pakistan.  He gave a  letter  of
             resignation to his son before he left Lahore.  I do  not  find
             this a credible thing for a man fleeing  from  persecution  to
             have done.  It is inconsistent with the need to  flee  and  is
             indicative of a man methodically sorting out his affairs."

 6. At para 38, the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  an  "ordinary
    Ahmadi".  He found that he had not  preached  and  did  not  intend  to
    preach if he returned to Pakistan.  He concluded that the appellant did
    not fall within any risk category set out  in  MN  (Ahmadis  -  country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).   At  para  39,
    the judge did not accept that the appellant had suffered persecution or
    serious ill-treatment.  The judge said this:

         "39. To the extent that he  has  experienced  attacks  in  Pakistan
             which he does not himself regard as serious or  dangerous  and
             left him with no serious injuries, I find that  the  appellant
             has experienced low level  harassment  but  not  something  of
             sufficient gravity to be regarded as  persecution  or  serious
             ill-treatment.  Such adverse interest has been shown to him in
             connection with his employment activities and are localised."

 7. At para 40 the judge found that the appellant had not established  that
    he was at risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment on return to his
    home area in Pakistan but, if he were, it would be both reasonable  and
    not unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to another part of  Pakistan
    where his wife, sons, and her family lived.  The judge concluded  that:
    "There he can maintain his faith and act in the way he has done in  the
    local Ahmadi  community  without  being  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution."



The Submissions

 8. Both in the grounds and in his oral submissions,  Mr  Webb  raised  two
    challenges to the judge's decision.

 9. First, and principally, Mr Webb submitted that the judge  had  accepted
    that the first two attacks had occurred.  However, in  concluding  that
    they did not amount to persecution, the judge had failed to  take  into
    account the absence of state protection even if the appellant had  not,
    himself, considered them to  be  "serious"  or  "dangerous".   Mr  Webb
    relied upon the case of Horvath  v  SSHD  [2000]  INLR  239.   Mr  Webb
    submitted that the religious motivation for the  attacks  enhanced  the
    seriousness  and  therefore  brought  the  attacks  to  the  level   of
    persecution.

10. Secondly, Mr Webb submitted that the judge in finding  that  the  third
    attack had not taken place, had wrongly failed  to  take  into  account
    that the appellant had twice come to the UK prior to  that  attack  but
    had not claimed asylum.  Mr Webb submitted that  was  relevant  as  the
    appellant had two opportunities to make  a  claim  (following  the  two
    attacks) if he wished to manufacture one.

11. Mr Hibbs accepted that the seriousness of  the  attacks  needed  to  be
    balanced against the protection that could be expected from the  state.
    He accepted that the argument based upon Horvath was good in  principle
    but, he submitted, it had not been made out in this case.  He submitted
    that the level of those attacks, as perceived by the  appellant,  could
    not amount to persecution.  As regards Mr Webb's second submission,  Mr
    Hibbs submitted that the evidence concerning the appellant's two visits
    to the UK after the initial attacks but before the  third  attack,  did
    not support the appellant's credibility but rather undermined it.

Discussion and Analysis

12. Although Mr Webb based his submission upon Horvath, he did not refer me
    to the text of the speeches in that case.  I did not,  therefore,  have
    the benefit of any submissions directed to those speeches.  Horvath was
    relied upon simply for the proposition that "discrimination can  amount
    to  persecution  if  the  State  is  unwilling  or  unable  to  provide
    protection".  The case concerned discrimination directed  against  Roma
    by non-State agents.  A majority of the  House  of  Lords  (Lord  Lloyd
    dissenting) accepted that a refugee claim could succeed where the  risk
    emanated from a non-State agent where the state was unable or unwilling
    to provide protection.  The House of Lords  recognised  the  "surrogacy
    principle" underlying the need for international protection only  arose
    in those circumstances.  Lord Hope (at page 248D-E) stated:

         "To sum up therefore on this issue, I consider that the  obligation
         to afford refugee status arises only if the person's own  State  is
         unable or unwilling to discharge its own duty to  protect  its  own
         nationals.  I think that it follows that, in order to  satisfy  the
         fear test in a non-State agent  case,  the  applicant  for  refugee
         status must show that the persecution which he  fears  consists  of
         acts of violence or ill-treatment against which the State is unable
         or unwilling to provide protection.  The applicant may have a well-
         founded fear of threats to his life due to famine or civil  war  or
         of isolated acts of violence  or  ill-treatment  for  a  Convention
         reason which may be perpetrated against him.  But the risk, however
         severe, and the fear, however well-founded, do not entitle  him  to
         the status of  a  refugee.   The  Convention  has  a  more  limited
         objective, the limits of  which  are  identified  by  the  list  of
         Convention reasons and by the principle of surrogacy."

13. At page 249E-F, Lord Hope, under the heading "conclusion", stated that:

         "Where the allegation  is  persecution  by  non-State  agents,  the
         sufficiency of State protection  is  relevant  to  a  consideration
         whether  each  of  the  two  tests  -  the  'fear'  test  and   the
         'protection' test - is satisfied.  The proper starting point,  once
         the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant has a genuine and well-
         founded fear of serious violence or ill-treatment for a  Convention
         reason, is to consider  whether  what  he  fears  is  'persecution'
         within the meaning of the Convention.  At that stage  the  question
         whether the State is able and willing to afford protection  is  put
         directly in issue by a holistic approach to the definition which is
         based on the principle of surrogacy."

14. Lord Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Hobhouse agreed with Lord Hope.

15. Lord Clyde delivered a concurring speech.  He also  accepted  that,  in
    non-State agent cases, at page 263D:

         "It seems to me  inevitable  that  the  persecution  to  which  the
         Convention refers is a  persecution  which  takes  account  of  the
         protection available."

16. Lord Clyde cited with approval the statement of Lord Hoffman in Islam v
    SSHD [2009] 2 AC 629 that, in a case concerned with personal threats of
    violence by the husband of a claimant, the "inability or  unwillingness
    of the State to protect"  the  claimant  was  a  necessary  element  of
    persecution.  Lord Clyde cited Lord Hoffman's adoption of  the  concise
    formula,  "Persecution  =  Serious  Harm  +  The   Failure   of   State
    Protection".

17. As this latter quotation makes clear, the  real  point  being  made  in
    Horvath is that where the State is not  itself  the  "persecutor",  the
    Refugee  Convention  is  only  engaged   if   the   non-State   actor's
    "persecution" of the claimant occurs because the claimant's  own  State
    is unable or unwilling to provide a sufficiency  of  protection.   Only
    then  is  the  need  for  surrogate  international  protection,   which
    underlies the Convention's protective mechanisms, engaged.

18. In my judgment, the House of  Lords  was  concerned  with  that  latter
    issue.  It should not be  understood  as  suggesting  that  conduct  or
    consequences which, in themselves, are not sufficiently  severe  to  be
    considered as "persecution" can be transmuted into "persecution" merely
    by  the  fact  that  the  State  does  not  provide  a  sufficiency  of
    protection.  The House of Lords was, in truth, concerned to resolve the
    issue of whether where an allegation of persecution  was  made  against
    non-State agents it was enough to demonstrate  that  the  ill-treatment
    was sufficiently severe to amount to "persecution" or, if it were such,
    it was necessary also to show that the  State  had  failed  to  provide
    sufficient or adequate protection.  That is again  made  clear  in  the
    speech of Lord Hope at page 242H where he identifies the issues  to  be
    determined in the appeal,  namely  where  there  is  an  allegation  of
    persecution by non-State agents:

         "(1) Does the word 'persecution' denote merely sufficiently  severe
             ill-treatment, or does  it  denote  sufficiently  severe  ill-
             treatment  against   which   the   State   fails   to   afford
             protection?".

19. It was, in answering that question, that the House of  Lords  concluded
    that not only must a claimant show "sufficiently severe  ill-treatment"
    but also the claimant must show that the State has failed to provide  a
    sufficiency of protection against that risk of ill-treatment.

20. That is also the scheme of the EU  Qualification  Directive  (Directive
    2004/83/EC).  Art 9 defines "acts of persecution" as follows:

         "1.  Acts of persecution within the meaning of Article  1A  of  the
             Geneva Convention must:

             (a)  be sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition  as
                  to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in
                  particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made
                  under Article 15(2) of the  European  Convention  for  the
                  Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

             (b)   be  an  accumulation  of  various  measures  in   common
                  including violation of human rights which is  sufficiently
                  severe as to affect an individual in a similar  manner  as
                  mentioned in (a)."

21.  Article  9(2)  goes  on  to  amplify  the  form  that  such  "acts  of
    persecution" may take.

22. Article 9(1) defines  "acts  of  persecution"  by  reference  to  their
    severity and seriousness.  There is no reference to whether  the  State
    provides a sufficiency of protection as being relevant  in  determining
    whether there is an "act of persecution".  That is dealt with elsewhere
    in the Directive.

23. In dealing with non-State actors,  Art  6  provides  that,  "actors  of
    persecution" include, for example, the State, and:

         "(c) Non-State actors, if it can be demonstrated  that  the  actors
             mentioned   in   (a)   and   (b),   including    international
             organisations, are unable or unwilling to  provide  protection
             against persecution or serious harm as defined in Article 7."

24. Article 7 goes on to  define  "actors  of  protection"  and  that  such
    protection may be provided by "the State" and in Art 7.2 provides that:



         "Protection is generally provided  when,  for  example,  the  State
         takes 'reasonable steps' to prevent the persecution or suffering of
         serious harm, inter alia, by operating an  effective  legal  system
         for the detection, prosecution and punishment of acts  constituting
         persecution or serious harm, and the applicant has access  to  such
         protection".

25.  That  scheme  is  repeated  in  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
    International   Protection   (Qualification)   Regulations   2006   (SI
    2006/2525) transposing the Directive into UK law.

26. The scheme set out in the Directive defines separately (1)  persecution
    and (2) the need to establish an absence of sufficiency  of  protection
    where that persecution emanates from  a  non-State  actor.   I  do  not
    understand that scheme in the Directive was intended to depart from the
    essential structure of the law as set out by  the  House  of  Lords  in
    Horvath interpreting the Refugee Convention.

27. In this appeal, therefore, the appellant in order  to  succeed  had  to
    establish (1) that on his return to Pakistan there was a real risk that
    he would be persecuted for a Convention reason (namely  his  religion);
    and (2) as that risk was said to emanate from non-State actors  (namely
    KN), that the Pakistan State would be unable or unwilling to provide  a
    sufficiency of protection to him.

28. As regards the first two attacks, the appellant's own evidence was that
    he did not regard them as "serious" or "dangerous" and he was left with
    no injuries.  The judge did not accept that the third attack had  taken
    place.  On the basis of that evidence, the judge was fully entitled  to
    find that in the past the appellant had not been  "persecuted"  in  the
    sense of subject to sufficiently serious and  severe  ill-treatment  to
    amount to persecution.  Of course, the principal issue that  the  judge
    had to decide was not whether the appellant had been persecuted in  the
    past, but whether there was a real risk that he would be persecuted  on
    return.  However, whether he had been persecuted in  the  past  was  "a
    serious indication" of whether his fear of persecution was well-founded
    in the future (see para 339K of the Immigration Rules).

29. For the reasons the judge gave, noting and  taking  into  account  that
    these attacks may have been triggered locally because of  his  work  in
    the Ahmadi community, the judge did not err in law in finding that they
    did not amount to persecution and to find that he had not established a
    real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment if he returned.  That
    found, 'sufficiency of protection' did not arise.

30. However, as Mr Hibbs pointed out in his  submissions,  the  judge  also
    found that even if the appellant were at risk in his home area, it  was
    safe and reasonable for him to internally relocate to where his  wife's
    family live.  That finding is not challenged in the grounds and was not
    challenged by Mr Webb  in  his  submissions.   On  the  basis  of  that
    finding, the appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    human rights grounds was correctly dismissed.

31. I turn now briefly  to  Mr  Webb's  second  submission.   It  seeks  to
    undermine the judge's adverse credibility  finding,  in  particular  in
    relation to the claimed third attack, on the basis that the judge erred
    in law by failing to take into account that the appellant had  come  to
    the UK on two occasions prior to that third attack and had not  claimed
    asylum.  That, Mr Webb submitted, showed that he was a  genuine  person
    as he had had two opportunities to bring a claim and had not done so.

32. With respect, this argument takes the appellant's case nowhere.  On his
    own evidence, he did not consider the first  two  attacks  as  serious.
    That, presumably, is why he did not claim asylum.  That does  not  cast
    any light on whether a subsequent claim for asylum based upon a further
    claimed incident demonstrates that that incident did occur.  It is,  in
    effect, a mere quibble with the judge's adverse credibility finding for
    which he gave cogent reasons at paras  32-37.   Even  if  relevant,  it
    cannot, in my judgment, undermine the weight of reasons  given  by  the
    judge and his adverse conclusion on the appellant's credibility.

Decision

33. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

34. The First-tier Tribunal's decision stands and the appellant's appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
