
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02374/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester               |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 2nd December, 2014             |On 18th December 2014             |
|Signed 16th December, 2014        |                                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JING SONG XUE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Johnson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, a representative of Greater Manchester
Immigration Aid Unit


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the
    appellant, but to avoid  confusion  I  shall  refer  to  her  as,  "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of the People's Republic of China, who  was
    born on 24th March, 1981.

Immigration History

3.   The respondent claims that with the assistance  of  an  agent  he  left
    China in 2002, by  coach  and  travelled  overland  to  Western  Europe
    through various unknown countries.  He arrived at  Bristol  Airport  on
    20th March, 2012, on a flight from  Amsterdam  and  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival following which he was granted temporary admission.

4.   On 1st February, 2013, the claimant issued to the respondent  a  notice
    of immigration decision refusing to grant leave to the  respondent  and
    indicating her  proposal  to  issue  directions  for  the  respondent's
    removal to China following the refusal of his asylum and  human  rights
    claims.

Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Levin  on  30th  July,  2013,  in
    Manchester.  The judge dismissed  the  respondent's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds  and  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  human  rights
    grounds.  However, the judge believed that the claimant's decision  was
    not in accordance with  the  law  and  purported  to  direct  that  the
    claimant reconsiders the  respondent's  case,  "having  regard  to  her
    policy set out in chapter 53 of her EIG".

6.   At paragraph 68 of his determination the judge found that the  claimant
    in her Reasons for Refusal Letter made no reference to chapter 53 or to
    her policy upon legacy cases.  He said:-

         "It is therefore necessary for me to consider and determine whether
         the [respondent's] case falls within the category of being a legacy
         case. In considering this issue I have had regard to  the  judgment
         of Mr Justice Burton in the case of Hakemi and Others  v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2012] EWHC 1967 (Admin) and which
         concerns so-called 'Legacy cases'."

7.   The judge noted that the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  written  by  the
    claimant dated 17th September, 2012, is stated to have been written  by
    the Case Assurance and Audit Unit having regard to the  fact  that  the
    respondent's asylum application was almost ten years old at that  time.
    The judge found that the respondent's case fell within the category  of
    being a "legacy case" and also found that the claimant  had  failed  to
    consider and have regard to chapter 53 of the Enforcement  Instructions
    and Guidance before reaching  a  decision  in  the  respondent's  case.
    This, the judge said, was not a  formality  in  the  respondent's  case
    given that he had been  in the United Kingdom for ten years, was  in  a
    relationship with Ms C akin to marriage and that the  couple  have  two
    children  born  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The   judge   allowed   the
    respondent's appeal to the limited extent that it was otherwise not  in
    accordance with the law and directed that the claimant reconsiders  the
    respondent's claim having regard to chapter 53 of EIG.

8.   The claimant has challenged the determination of Judge Levin,  pointing
    out that he had  failed  to  consider  AZ  (Asylum  -  "legacy"  cases)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00270 (IAC) where it was found  that  where  an
    applicant in an asylum appeal has previously  been  informed  that  his
    case is being considered as a "legacy case" but no decision  under  the
    process had been made, a subsequent immigration  decision  following  a
    rejection by the Secretary of State of his asylum claim is not rendered
    unlawful by reason of a failure to make a  decision  under  the  legacy
    process.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  following  which   the
    respondent's representatives submitted a lengthy response.

9.   I need not refer to the response because I  was  advised  by  Mr  Singh
    that he was not relying on it.

10.  Mrs Johnson told me that the judge was correct to deal with the  asylum
    and human rights appeals, but he should not have gone on to  allow  the
    appeal on the basis that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    law. because he failed to have regard to AZ.  She pointed out that  the
    judge had allowed the appeal because the Home Office had not considered
    the legacy and chapter 53.

11.  For the respondent, Mr Singh told me that AZ did not deal with  chapter
    53.  He relied on the decision in Mohammed. He took me to paragraphs 76
    and 78 of Mohammed and suggested that where chapter 53 guidance was not
    taken into account and in particular  what  he  said  there  about  the
    length of residence, then that amounts to a failure to  apply  relevant
    policy and a failure to take account of relevant consideration  renders
    the decision Wednesbury unreasonable and otherwise  unfair.   Mr  Singh
    submitted that since chapter  53  had  not  been  referred  to  in  the
    Secretary of State's letter, the appellant's length of residence in the
    United Kingdom has not been considered and for  the  reasons  given  in
    Mohammed that amounted to an error of law.

 12. Responding briefly, Mrs Johnson pointed out that  at  paragraph  26  of
    the Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal Letter of 17th  September,
    2012  the  Secretary  of  State  has   expressly   pointed   out   that
    consideration had been given as to whether or not the respondent should
    benefit from the grant of leave to remain based on the  length  of  his
    residence, but for reasons indicated had concluded  that  it  did  not.
    She submitted that the  factors  set  out  in  paragraph  53  had  been
    considered but the decision in Mohammed was not on all fours  with  the
    decision in this appeal.  In this case the respondent's claim  was  not
    resolved until the decision of the Secretary of State in 2013 to refuse
    asylum. It is asserted that the Secretary of State's decision  in  this
    appeal is unlawful because the Secretary of State  had  not  considered
    the factors under chapter 53,  but  in  fact  those  factors  had  been
    considered.  The  judge  erred  by  failing  at  paragraph  68  of  his
    determination to recognise that those matters had been dealt with.

13.  I reserved my decision.

14.  Chapter 53.1.1 of the Secretary  of  State's  Enforcement  Instructions
    and Guidance set out the relevant factors but make it  clear  that  the
    list is not exhaustive.  It says:-

         "53.1.1 Exceptional Circumstances


         Relevant Factors
         Relevant factors are set out below, but this list is not
         exhaustive.
         The consideration of relevant factors needs to be taken as a whole
         rather than individually
         .
         When determining whether or not exceptional circumstances exist,
         consideration of the relevant factors in 353B needs to be taken as
         a whole. Discretion not to remove on the basis of exceptional
         circumstances will not be exercised on the basis of one factor
         alone.


         (i)  Character, conduct and associations including any previous
         criminal record and the nature of any offence of which the
         applicant has been convicted


         When considering an individual"s character and conduct, regard must
         be given to whether;
         There is evidence of criminality that meets the Criminal Casework
         Directorate (CCD) threshold; or The individual has been convicted
         of a particularly serious crime (below the CCD threshold) involving
         violence, a sexual offence, offences against children or a serious
         drug offence; or There are serious reasons for considering that the
         individual falls within the asylum exclusion clauses; or It is
         considered undesirable to permit the individual to remain in the UK
         in light of exceptional circumstances, or in light of their
         character, conduct or associations, or the fact that they represent
         a threat to national security.
         Evidence of criminality or conduct meeting the criteria above will
         normally mean that an individual cannot benefit from exceptional
         circumstances
         .
         (ii) Compliance with any conditions attached to any previous grant
         of leave to enter or remain and compliance with any conditions of
         temporary admission or immigration bail where applicable


         Where there is evidence of an attempt by the individual to delay or
         frustrate the decision making process, frustrate removal, or
         otherwise not comply with any requirements imposed upon them, then
         this will weigh against the individual
         .
         Caseworkers must also take account of Evidence of deception
         practised at any stage in the process;
         Failure to attend interviews as requested;
         Failure to supply information as requested (e.g. for re-
         documentation)         ;
         Failure to comply with reporting conditions;
         Whether they have worked illegally;
         Any other type of fraud or deception, such as benefit fraud or NHS
         debt;
         An individual's lawful employment history and how they have
         supported themselves and/or their family;
         A sustained history of compliance with every requirement the Home
         Office has made of them, including providing full information in
         their application, attending, interviews, compliance with reporting
         requirements
         Case workers must assess all evidence of compliance and non-
         compliance in the round, but repeated non-compliance and/or lengthy
         periods of absconding will generally mean that an individual cannot
         benefit from exceptional circumstances, unless there are strong
         countervailing reasons in their favour.


    iii) Length of time in the United Kingdom accrued for reasons beyond the
         migrant's control after their human rights or asylum claim has been
         submitted or refused;


         The length of residence in the UK is a factor to be considered
         where residence has been accrued by an unreasonable delay which is
         not attributable to the migrant. Periods of residence which are
         caused by actions of non-compliance attributable to the migrant
         will not count in the migrant's favour.  More weight should be
         attached to the length of time a child has spent in the UK compared
         to an adult. Provided that the factors outlined in "Character" or
         "Compliance" do not weigh against the individual, then case workers
         should also consider where there has been significant delay by the
         Home Office, not attributable to the migrant, in deciding a valid
         application for leave to remain on asylum or human rights grounds
         or where there are reasons beyond the individual's control why they
         could not leave the UK after their application was refused. For
         example: Family" cases where delay by the Home Office, or factors
         preventing departure, have contributed to a significant period of
         residence (for the purposes of this guidance, "family" cases means
         parent as defined in the Immigration Rules and children who are
         emotionally and financially dependent on the parent, and under the
         age of 18 at the date of the decision). Following an individual
         assessment of the prospect of enforcing removal, and where the
         factors outlined in "Character" and "Compliance" do not weight
         against the individual, family cases may be also be considered
         exceptionally on grounds of delay where the dependent child has
         lived in the UK for more than 3 years or more whilst under the age
         of 18. Any other case where the length of delay by the Home Office
         in deciding the application, or where there were factors preventing
         departure, the case worker following an individual assessment of
         the prospect of enforcing removal and where the factors outlined in
         "Character" and "Compliance" do not weight against the individual,
         concludes that the person will have been in the UK for more than 6
         years.


         (iv) Any representations received on the persons behalf;


         These must always be considered and given due weight. Individuals
         may raise other relevant factors not listed above. These should be
         fully considered on a case-by-case basis."


15.  Paragraph 53.1.2 makes it clear that if, having considered the  factors
    set out in 53.1.1 above, removal is no  longer  considered  appropriate
    then discretionary leave to remain should be granted.

16.  Paragraphs 26 and 27 of the Secretary of State's  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter of 17th September, 2012, say this:-


    "26.     Consideration has been given to  whether  you  should  benefit
         from a grant of leave to remain based on your length  of  residence
         in the  United  Kingdom  but  it  is  not  considered  that  it  is
         sufficiently compelling to grant you leave and it is noted that you
         absconded for seven years and as such you should not benefit from a
         grant of leave to remain.  Your ties to the UK have been considered
         but they are not considered extensive or strong enough  to  suggest
         that you should benefit from a grant of leave. It is noted that you
         state that you supported yourself in the United Kingdom by  selling
         DVDs (AIR Q111).  It is to be noted that, for the past nine  years,
         you have not had permission to work and thus  any  employment  that
         has been taken up has been done so illegally.  It  is  also  to  be
         noted that anyone employing you is guilty of an offence  and  could
         face prosecution.  Illegal working deprives the tax system and thus
         the British economy  of  vast  amounts  of  money  each  year.   In
         addition, there are skilled people within the employment  pool  who
         have been deprived of income because of illegal working,  therefore
         it is not accepted that you should benefit from the grant of leave.


    27.  In the light of all the evidence available, it has been  concluded
         that you have not established a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         and that you do not  qualify  for  asylum.  Your  asylum  claim  is
         therefore refused under paragraph 336 of HC 359 (as  amended).   It
         has  been  concluded  that  you  have  not  shown  that  there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that you  face  a  real  risk  of
         serious harm on return from the UK and that you do not qualify  for
         humanitarian  protection.   Therefore  your  application  has  been
         refused under  paragraph  339F  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Your
         application has been recorded as determined on 13/9/12."


17.  It is not, of course, suggested that the  appellant  has  any  criminal
    record or has been convicted of any  criminal  offence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

18.  In AZ the Tribunal found that where an appellant in  an  asylum  appeal
    had previously been informed that his case was being  considered  as  a
    "legacy case", but no decision under  the  process  had  been  made,  a
    subsequent immigration decision following rejection by the Secretary of
    State of his asylum claim is not rendered unlawful  by  reason  of  the
    failure to make a decision under the legacy process. It also  makes  it
    clear that there is no obligation on a Tribunal to adjourn an appeal so
    as to allow for the decision to be made under the legacy process.

19.  In the case of this appellant the Secretary  of  State  had  considered
    the matters  required  to  be  considered  by  chapter  53.1.1  of  the
    Enforcement  Instructions  and   Guidance.    Paragraph   26   of   the
    respondent's letter of 17 September, 2012 deals specifically  with  the
    appellant's length of residence and whether or not he should be granted
    leave to remain on the basis of it.  Paragraph (ii) makes it clear that
    where there is evidence of an attempt by  an  individual  to  delay  or
    frustrate the decision making  process  this  will  weigh  against  the
    individual and in this instance  the  appellant  had  absconded  for  a
    period of seven years. That was  taken  into  account  as  required  by
    Enforcement Instructions and Guidance.

20.  For all these reasons I have concluded that the making of the  decision
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin that the respondent's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law involved the making of  an  error  on  a
    point of law.  There was no error on the part of the respondent,  since
    she had already  considered  the  appellant's  case  having  regard  to
    chapter 53 of the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance.

21.  To that extent the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred.   However,  the
    judge's  decision  in  respect  of  the  appellant's   asylum   appeal,
    humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  appeal  have   not   been
    challenged and shall stand.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
