
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02142/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 June 2014                               |On 13 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                Shiwan Salih
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C M Fielden, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for, and do not make, any order restricting reporting of
    this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen  of  Iraq  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    It is  his  case  that  he  is  a  refugee  or  otherwise  entitled  to
    international protection.

 3. The case came before the First-tier Tribunal as long ago  as  May  2011
    and his appeal was dismissed on grounds  raising  both  entitlement  to
    protection of the Refugee Convention  and  human  rights  grounds  with
    reference to Article 8 and humanitarian protection grounds.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought and refused by Senior Immigration Judge
    MCKee sitting as a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  MCKee
    described the determination as the result of a thorough  assessment  of
    the  evidence  including  evidence  from  a   psychologist   that   the
    appellant's judgement was impaired.

 5. Nevertheless, on 13 August 2011 Senior Immigration  Judge  Storey  gave
    permission to appeal. We give his reasons below.  He said:

         "Whilst I find the Immigration Judge's  assessment  of  credibility
         cogent and careful it is not apparent that when he came to consider
         Article 15(c) he took sufficiently into account the fact  that  the
         appellant's  home  area  was  accepted  as  Mosul  and   that   the
         appellant's   particular   characteristics    included    cognitive
         difficulties and facial disfigurement.  Bearing  in  mind  as  well
         that HM (Iraq) is to be considered by the Court of Appeal  in  late
         November, I am persuaded that grounds disclose an arguable error of
         law."

 6. It is now a matter of record  that  the  decision  referred  to  as  HM
    (Iraq), and more fully as HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2010]
    UKUT 331 (IAC), was  a  country  guidance  decision  of  this  Tribunal
    dealing particularly with the DSE risk in Iraq and in very broad  terms
    deciding that generally it was not a problem.

 7. Following the decision of the Court of Appeal in HM  (Iraq)  &  Anor  v
    SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1536  the  issue  was  looked  at  again  and  the
    guidance on article 15(c) was affirmed in HM and others (Article 15(c))
    Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409(IAC).

 8. It follows  therefore  that  Judge  Storey's  main  reason  for  giving
    permission to appeal was anticipation of guidance  from  the  Court  of
    Appeal which may have upset the decision complained of but that is  not
    what happened.

 9. Today we were considerably assisted by the appellant's  representative,
    Miss Fielden of Counsel, who began with disarming frankness  by  saying
    that she was inadequately instructed because there had  been  a  recent
    change  of  representation  and  the  solicitors  who  had   previously
    represented the appellant appeared to have tried to transfer the papers
    electronically but they had done it badly and nothing intelligible  had
    arrived.

10. Miss Fielden is very experienced in working  with  this  Tribunal.   We
    were able to give her the file and copy papers and time to consider the
    position and we are satisfied that she had all the time she  needed  to
    assist us on our primary function today which was to determine  whether
    or not the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.

11. Essentially the grounds took two  points.   They  complained  that  the
    decision that the appellant did not need "15(c) protection"  was  wrong
    in the light of the background material and for that reason should  not
    stand and they particularly and separately complained that the decision
    was wrong because it did not have  proper  regard  to  the  significant
    impairment to the appellant's understanding as a  result  of  his  head
    injury causing the deficiencies that had been indicated.

12. The first point is clearly unrunnable now in the light of the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in HM.

13. The second point, concerning this appellant's  specific  circumstances,
    does need a little more consideration.  It was an essential part of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning that the appellant could only  be
    expected to cope in Iraq in Mosul because he can continue to  have  the
    help of his uncle.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that  the  appellant  does  have
    difficulties but found,  rationally  on  the  evidence  before  him  in
    findings that have not been criticised, that he was able to cope in the
    United Kingdom with a degree of support from the  local  authority  and
    the judge concluded that this sort of support would be available to him
    from his uncle as it had been in the past.

15. The judge was aware of the fact that it was the appellant's  case  that
    he no longer had contact with his uncle but the judge did  not  believe
    that claim.  He had given several reasons for finding  the  appellant's
    evidence unreliable  and  was  perfectly  entitled  to  disbelieve  the
    appellant's evidence that he had lost contact with his uncle.  It  was,
    in  the  judge's  mind,  a  further  example  of  the  appellant,   not
    necessarily through reasons that were his own fault,  being  unable  to
    tell the truth.

16. The grounds complain that the point  was  never  actually  put  to  the
    appellant that he was not truthful in that regard  but  we  think  that
    nothing turns on that because it was perfectly plain from  the  refusal
    letter that the Home Office did not accept that the appellant had  lost
    contact with his uncle.  It was perfectly plain from the whole  conduct
    of the litigation that the Home Office did not accept  the  appellant's
    version of events, and whilst  it  is  never  wrong  to  put  the  case
    specifically we cannot see it as an error of law for Tribunal to take a
    point not specifically put by the Presenting Officer  when  it  was  so
    obviously in issue.

17. Rather we find the judge's finding wholly consistent with the  evidence
    before him.  The judge offered a reason for his findings.  It  was  not
    just a case of disbelieving the appellant. The judge commented  on  the
    closeness of the support that had come from the uncle and he just could
    not accept that the uncle would  have  allowed  himself  to  have  lost
    contact with the appellant.  We find that decision was open to him,  is
    rational and is impossible to criticise in law.

18. It follows therefore that the only surviving  point  of  contention  is
    something we have to resolve in favour of the Secretary of State.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was faced  with  evidence  that  he  did  not
    believe and made a decision that was rational in accordance with  those
    findings.

19. There have been developments  since  which  have  muddied  the  waters.
    Certainly there is evidence from Hampshire County Council in  a  letter
    dated 1 June 2011 indicating that there were difficulties  getting  the
    cooperation of the Red Cross  to  trace  the  uncle  and  certainly  no
    evidence had emerged that the uncle was contactable.  This is something
    which might very well be investigated with profit  by  the  appellant's
    present representatives and might form the basis of a  further,  fresh,
    application.

20. It is also a matter of public record that there  is  a  great  deal  of
    evidence, presently in rather vague and undeveloped form,  of  enormous
    changes in Iraq in the week before the hearing because of  insurgencies
    or activities by a political military group known as Isis.  This may or
    may not have bearing on the returnability of the appellant but  it  has
    no bearing whatsoever on the quality of the decision that was  made  in
    2011 which decision, we find, is free of error of law and we  therefore
    dismiss the appeal of the appellant against that decision.

21. Since the hearing we  have  received  a  letter  from  the  appellant's
    representatives asserting that he is no entitled to indefinite leave to
    remain because of the length of his stay in the United Kingdom.

22. That is not a matter for us and is not something on which we intend  to
    a make a decision but we draw it to the attention of the respondent.

23. We do record our gratitude to Miss Fielden who we appreciate has  taken
    on the case at short notice and has conducted herself  very  diligently
    on the part of the appellant.  It is  no  criticism  of  her  that  the
    outstanding issue has to be resolved in  favour  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

24. We therefore dismiss the appeal.  We of course make it  plain  that  it
    may well be that a  further  application  will  be  made  and  this  is
    something the Secretary of State needs to bear in  mind  before  making
    any further decision in the case.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 February 2015               |

