
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03997/2014
                                                               AA/04093/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 11 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

|MR KEYVAN YAZDANI                        |First Appellant |
|MR POUYAN YAZDANI                        |Second Appellant|


                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D. Bazini of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are both citizens of  Iran.   The  first  Appellant  was
    born on 3 July 1995.  The second Appellant is his elder brother and was
    born on 11 September 1985.  They appeal against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Gibbs sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  21  October
    2014.  That decision was to dismiss  the  Appellants'  appeals  against
    decisions of the Respondent dated 2nd June 2014 to refuse their  claims
    for asylum and to remove them from the United Kingdom.

2.   On 16 March 2011 the first Appellant applied for  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Dependent Child visa as a dependant of his  mother,  Forough  Giahchin.
    This was duly issued on 29 March 2011, valid until 24  December  2012.
    The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 May  2011.   A  claim
    was made for asylum as a dependant of his mother, Ms  Giahchin,  on  24
    November 2012 but this was refused. Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Bennett heard the asylum appeal of the Appellants' mother  and  of  the
    second Appellant on 14 February 2013 and  dismissed  the  appeals.  The
    Appellants'  mother  became  appeal  rights  exhausted  and  the  first
    Appellant made a claim for asylum in his own right on 15  August  2013,
    the refusal of which has given rise to the present proceedings  in  his
    case.

3.   The second Appellant applied for a Tier 4 Student visa on 22 June  2012
    which was issued on 28 June 2012.  He entered  the  United  Kingdom  on
    this visa on 26 September 2012 with a validity until 6 April 2014.   He
    claimed asylum on 5 December 2012 but it was refused by the Respondent
    on 4 January 2013. Judge Bennett dismissed his appeal  against  refusal
    but subsequent to the lodging of an application for Judicial Review the
    2nd Appellant was granted a further right of appeal culminating in  the
    refusal which has also given rise to the present proceedings.

The Asylum Claims

4.   The Appellants' claims were based on two main reasons.  The  first  was
    what had happened to their father when he returned to Iran from a visit
    to his family in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellants'  father  was
    detained at the airport  in  Iran  and  was  searched  and  anti-regime
    political leaflets were found in his luggage.  As a result of  this  he
    was detained in prison for five months, during which time he  was  ill-
    treated.  He was then transferred to another prison because of  a  debt
    owed to a business partner and  ultimately  released  on  condition  of
    paying the outstanding debt in full.  The second  reason  was  that  in
    June 2013 the family started to attend a Christian church.  The  second
    Appellant had been interested in  Christianity  in  Iran  and  had  not
    practised Islam since he left Iran.  Their brother died in this country
    and was given a church funeral ceremony which relatives in Iran  became
    aware of and advised the authorities in Iran.   The  Appellants  stated
    they intend to proselytise Christianity if returned which  would  bring
    them to the adverse attention of the authorities in Iran.

The Decision at First Instance

5.   The Judge did not find either Appellant to be a  credible  witness  and
    expressed her concern about what she described as a pattern  of  family
    migration to the United  Kingdom  starting  in  2010  with  the  second
    Appellant's arrival here.  Another aspect of the claims which gave  her
    concern was the variety of reasons given by the Appellants  as  to  why
    they would be at risk upon return  to  Iran.   These  ranged  from  the
    father's  arrest  carrying  political  leaflets,  to   their   mother's
    involvement  in  an  illegal   abortion,   to   their   conversion   to
    Christianity,  to  their  online  activities  and  that   the   Iranian
    Government might be aware of both their conversion to Christianity  and
    asylum claim in the United Kingdom.  The Judge found  the  very  number
    and timing of these claims to  raise  concerns  about  the  Appellants'
    credibility.

6.   There was no evidence before her that the family had  been  politically
    active in Iran.  There  were  discrepancies  about  which  of  the  two
    Appellants had given the offending leaflets to their  father.   It  was
    not plausible that either Appellant would have put their father at risk
    in this way.  This issue had  been  canvassed  at  the  earlier  asylum
    appeal of the Appellants' mother before Judge Bennett.   Judge  Bennett
    had dismissed those appeals, again not finding  the  Appellants  to  be
    credible.  An expert, Dr Fatah, had said that the  explanations  relied
    on by the Appellants as to why their father was stopped on  arrival  in
    Iran were unlikely.  Judge Bennett found the Appellants' explanation as
    to why they gave their father the leaflets (that  they  did  not  think
    there was any risk) to lack credibility.

7.   The position thereafter was complicated by  reason  of  the  fact  that
    when the first Appellant came to claim asylum in his own right and  had
    his claim refused the Respondent accepted that it was reasonably likely
    that the  Appellants'  father  had  been  detained,  although  no  such
    concession was made in a letter refusing the second Appellant's  claim.
    The Respondent's position before Judge  Gibbs  was  that  the  father's
    detention occurred because of the outstanding debt.  The Judge,  having
    regard to the medical evidence  before  her,  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellants' father had been detained and ill-treated  whilst  detained.
    That was consistent with detention for the debt  problem.   Dr Fatah's
    report highlighted that ill-treatment of detainees was  a  longstanding
    problem in Iran and  the  Judge  was  satisfied  that  mistreatment  in
    Iranian prisons was reasonably likely per se.  The Judge  rejected  the
    Appellants' claim that they would be at risk  upon  return  because  of
    their father's detention for possession of anti-government leaflets  as
    she did not find to the lower standard that that was what had happened.

8.   Dealing  with  the  conversion  to  Christianity  the  Judge  found  it
    significant that neither Appellant had raised the claim  of  conversion
    to Christianity prior to the appeal hearing.  The first  Appellant  had
    said in August 2013 that he was an agnostic despite his  evidence  that
    he had been attending church for the  two  months  prior  to  that.   A
    witness statement dated 18  September  2013  had  made  no  mention  of
    Christianity despite the first Appellant's later evidence that  it  was
    in that month that he had decided to convert.  The issue was not raised
    in his grounds of appeal.  The second Appellant, whose first claim  for
    asylum had been rejected by Judge Bennett, made a fresh application for
    asylum on the basis of  conversion  to  Christianity.   The  Appellants
    claimed that their new faith, Christianity, required  them  to  preach.
    The Judge rejected this on the basis that the Appellants were attending
    the Church of England which did not require that  from  its  adherents.
    The conclusion was that, "The Appellants are  focusing  on  this  issue
    because they believe it will bolster their appeals.  I find  that  this
    undermines the credibility of their claimed conversions."

9.   The Appellants had obtained no  evidence  from  the  Iranian  Christian
    Fellowship where they claimed they had first started  to  attend.   The
    conversions were not reasonably likely  to  be  genuine.   It  was  not
    credible that the Appellants would have sent photographs of a Christian
    burial to Iran showing the  conversion  to  Christianity.  The  Iranian
    authorities would not be aware that the family had  claimed  asylum  in
    the United Kingdom. It was implausible that a third party, Mr  Jaffari,
    would have taken papers from the family relating to the  asylum  claim.
    There was no  evidence  (beyond  his  own  assertion)  that  the  first
    Appellant had set up a website regarding the release of his father from
    detention. A Facebook page created by the first Appellant  as  evidence
    of the conversion to Christianity was not accepted by the  Judge.   She
    also rejected the claim under Article 8 (there  is  no  appeal  against
    that part of her decision).

The Onward Appeal

10.  The Appellants appealed against the dismissal of  their  asylum  claims
    in grounds settled by Counsel who had  appeared  before  the  Judge  at
    first instance and who appeared before me.  The first  point  was  that
    the Judge had placed weight on the lack of  evidence  that  any  family
    members have engaged in their planned studies in  the  United  Kingdom.
    That had not been put by the Respondent or  by  the  Judge  during  the
    hearing.  It was unfair to take such a  point  against  the  Appellants
    without giving them  an  opportunity  to  deal  with  it.   There  were
    numerous certificates for the  first  Appellant  in  the  bundle  which
    confirmed his studies in the United Kingdom (noticeably the grounds did
    not refer to any studies by the second Appellant).

11.  The second point was that it was not uncommon for a  family  or  person
    seeking asylum to put forward a number of different reasons  for  their
    fears.  That was not in itself a reason to doubt their credibility.

12.  The third point was that there was no background  material  or  country
    guidance which suggested that  mistreatment  amounting  to  torture  in
    Iranian prisons was so commonplace that it was  reasonably  likely  per
    se.  If the Judge was wrong in concluding that it was then it was  very
    likely that the Appellants' father was not tortured  in  prison  merely
    for a debt issue but for a Convention related  reason.   The  issue  of
    mistreatment per se was so important it might be suitable for a country
    guidance case.

13.  The Judge had reversed the standard of proof by finding  it  reasonably
    likely  that  the  Appellants'  father  had   been   released   without
    restriction.  The correct approach would have been to consider  whether
    the claim that he was released with conditions was reasonably likely to
    be true.

14.  If the Appellants' conversion to Christianity was not genuine  and  had
    been manufactured for the purposes of supporting  their  asylum  claim,
    the grounds argued that the Appellants would have made sure  that  this
    was mentioned at their asylum interview.  In fact  there  was  evidence
    from the Appellants and third parties  that  the  family  had  involved
    itself in the church long before the asylum interview.  The  Appellants
    belonged to two churches, one of which was Iranian and evangelical.  It
    was accepted by the Judge that conversion from  Islam  to  Christianity
    was sufficient to put an individual at  risk  and  there  was  no  need
    therefore for the Appellants to embellish their claim  as  it  did  not
    advance it.  Whether conversion to Christianity would put an  Appellant
    at risk per se was again something which might be suitable for  country
    guidance.

15.  The Judge in concluding  that  the  Appellants  had  not  obtained  any
    evidence from the Iranian Christian Fellowship had ignored two relevant
    letters from the Iranian Christian Fellowship Church which were in  the
    Appellants' bundle at pages 558 and 567 and dated 18 May and  20  April
    2014 respectively. I note here that the former document referred to the
    2nd Appellant, the latter document referred to the Appellants'  mother.
    The grounds continued that the Judge had failed to make proper findings
    on the evidence of the church warden who had  observed  the  Appellants
    and it was clear to him that they were committed and sincere  in  their
    beliefs.

16.  The family had sent photographs of their father's death  and  Christian
    burial as the family wished to have a record of it.   The  family  were
    not to know that their relatives in Iran would act in  such  a  hostile
    manner upon receipt of the photographs.   As  to  Mr Jaffari,  he  had
    simply taken the documents and there was nothing that  the  Appellants'
    mother and her young sons could do to stop him.  The Judge had erred in
    finding that the family had no political  affiliation  when  there  was
    evidence to show the second Appellant demonstrating against the Iranian
    regime in Malaysia as long ago as 2009.  There was  a  whole  range  of
    evidence in relation to websites and other documents.

The Grant of Permission

17.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes.   In  granting  permission  to
    appeal Judge Landes wrote on 5 December 2014 that:

          "I consider there is force in the argument that the Judge did  not
         give adequate reasons  for  her  conclusion  that  mistreatment  in
         Iranian prisons was reasonably likely per se and that she  reversed
         the burden of proof  in  finding  it  reasonably  likely  that  the
         Appellants' father was released without conditions.   These  points
         are arguably material as they are central to the credibility of the
         Appellants' claim.

         In addition I consider it arguable that the Judge  failed  to  take
         account  of  the  written  evidence  from  the  Iranian   Christian
         Fellowship.  It may be that the Judge meant that the  evidence  was
         not detailed and was not oral evidence or related  specifically  to
         the second Appellant only but this is not the reason  she  gave  as
         she referred to the Appellants not  having  obtained  any  evidence
         from the Fellowship.  Given that there was such evidence and  given
         that she considered the absence of such evidence to be relevant  to
         the conversion claim, the point is arguably a material one.

         A number of other points are raised in the grounds.  Although  some
         of the grounds such as paragraph 15 ['what would be  the  point  of
         manufacturing a claim and then not raise it'] appear to  amount  to
         mere argument with the  Judge's  conclusion  I  do  not  intend  to
         restrict the grounds which may be argued."

18.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by  letter  dated  22
    December  2014.   The  Judge  had  made  detailed  adverse  credibility
    findings in respect of the Appellants and had  provided  reasoning  for
    each.  Findings began at paragraph 29 stating a lack of  evidence  that
    the family was politically active and went on to note discrepancies and
    the implausibility of the  Appellants  asking  their  father  to  carry
    political leaflets that  would  place  him  at  risk.   The  Judge  had
    referred to Dr Fatah's report in explanation of her  finding  that  the
    evidence did not support the submission that the Appellant's father was
    detained due to political activism.  She supported  her  finding  about
    his release with the observation that he was able to leave the  country
    using  his  own  passport.   The  grounds  of  appeal  amounted  to   a
    disagreement with the Judge's findings.

The Hearing before Me

19.  In oral submissions Counsel relied on his  grounds  of  onward  appeal.
    The Judge's starting point in finding that there was little evidence of
    studies was fundamentally flawed.  That  the  Appellants  had  given  a
    number of different reasons for their claim meant that the Judge had to
    look at each and every reason.  It was a bold assertion of the Judge to
    say that mistreatment in Iranian prisons was reasonably likely per  se.
    There was no country guidance to say  that  everyone  was  at  risk  of
    Article 3 treatment in detention, where everyone  would  include  those
    who were not politically involved.  If  that  was  right,  any  Iranian
    arriving in the United Kingdom who could show that they were wanted for
    a criminal matter would be  entitled  to  protection  under  the  Human
    Rights Convention.

20.  The letter dated 18th May 2014 stated that the  2nd  Appellant  was  no
    longer at the Iranian Christian Fellowship and made no reference to the
    1st Appellant. Counsel accepted  that  it  did  not  give  all  of  the
    information that one might want but the Judge had  said  there  was  no
    evidence from the Iranian Christian Fellowship and that was inaccurate.
     It was known that the Appellants did  attend.   These  were  the  main
    grounds but reliance was also placed on the remaining paragraphs of the
    grounds (summarised at paragraphs 15 and 16 above).  There  were  plain
    material errors of law and the appeal should be remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier to be reheard.

21.  For the Respondent the Presenting Officer argued  that  there  were  no
    material errors of law in the determination.  Small  peripheral  points
    had been taken by the Appellants to be made into errors of law.   There
    was no misdirection.  The Judge had taken into account the  immigration
    history of the  Appellants  overall.   There  were  findings  by  Judge
    Bennett (sitting at Hatton Cross on 14 February 2013) which  overlapped
    with the present appeal proceedings.  Although there  was  evidence  of
    certificates in the Appellants' bundle, this  was  a  very  substantial
    bundle running to some 711 pages and the index had not specified  where
    those documents were.

22.  The Judge was not  required  to  enter  the  arena;  sometimes  matters
    became clearer after the  hearing.  The  Judge  was  referring  to  the
    absence of any supporting evidence to show that the family had  engaged
    in studying and all that there  was,  were  the  certificates  obtained
    between 2011 and 2013. The most that the first Appellant could say  was
    that there was some evidence of studies.  The certificates did not show
    the substance of what was being studied.  Otherwise  the  evidence  was
    merely  assertions  in  a   witness   statement   and   a   letter   of
    representations.  Bearing in mind the size of the  bundle  it  was  not
    surprising that the Judge might have missed this.  In any event it  did
    not go to the question of whether the religious conversion was  genuine
    or the position of the Appellants' father.

23.  It was important to note that the Judge had referred  in  paragraph  28
    of her determination to both the  number  and  timing  of  the  claims.
    Judge Bennett had dismissed the claim that  the  family  were  at  risk
    because of illicit  material  sent  back  to  Iran.   Having  made  one
    unsuccessful claim on that ground the Appellants  had  then  sought  to
    make claims on other grounds.  The Judge had dealt with a complex  case
    with admirable completeness.

24.  The Judge had  found  that  someone  in  an  Iranian  prison  would  be
    tortured not only if they were a human rights activist.   The  evidence
    did not rule out that someone who was a debtor could be mistreated.  In
    short the evidence did not say what the Appellants wanted  it  to  say.
    It had been asserted that there were bail  conditions  imposed  on  the
    father's release from detention, the Judge had found  that  there  were
    not.  That was not an error of law.  There had been no switching of the
    burden.

25.  The Appellants had told  the  Judge  that  they  continued  to  receive
    instruction from the Iranian Christian Fellowship when the evidence  in
    the form of the letter showed that they had  stopped  attending  there.
    The issue was whether the Appellants  had  genuinely  converted.  There
    might be a number of reasons why the Appellants had not mentioned their
    conversion earlier, for example they did not want to be interviewed  on
    the point because they did not have enough evidence  at  that  time  to
    support the claim.  The Appellants were aware of the case law  such  as
    HJ Iran and what might or might not be successful in an  asylum  claim.
    The evidence of the church warden was only one  part  of  the  evidence
    about whether the conversion was genuine.  The Judge had considered the
    overall picture.  She had  not  ignored  the  evidence  of  the  church
    warden. I pause to note  here  that  the  Judge  had  referred  to  the
    evidence of the church warden at paragraph 40.  She  had  expressed  no
    doubt that the evidence was honestly given and the views genuinely held
    but she had not found in the light of  her  other  findings  that  that
    evidence in itself could persuade her that the Appellants'  conversions
    were reasonably likely to be genuine.

26.  In response Counsel argued that what the Respondent was  trying  to  do
    in  submissions  was   to   correct   deficiencies   in   the   Judge's
    determination.  If the issue of the Appellants' education did not go to
    credibility and was, as submitted, a peripheral matter,  the  statement
    of the Judge that she had  that  issue  in  her  mind  meant  that  her
    determination must be materially flawed.  On two  occasions  the  Judge
    had said that she had not been given  "any  evidence"  when  there  was
    evidence not just in the form of supporting evidence but  also  in  the
    form of the certificates.  There was no way round that point.

27.  The difficulty with stating that the findings  of  Judge  Bennett  were
    the starting point for Judge Gibbs under Devaseelan principles was that
    Judge Bennett had not accepted that the father  had  been  detained  or
    tortured so the case before Judge Gibbs was a very different  one.   If
    it was now accepted  that  the  Appellants'  father  was  detained  and
    tortured, something which had been found not to be  credible  by  Judge
    Bennett might well be credible now.  The Judge could  have  probed  the
    letters about the conversion and the reverend  had  confirmed  he  knew
    that the Appellants were training in Farsi.  If there was some evidence
    on the point they should be given the benefit of the doubt.

Findings

28.  The issue before me was whether the Judge had made a material error  or
    errors such that her  determination  fell  to  be  set  aside  and  the
    decision remade.  She was dealing with two main claims.  The first that
    the authorities were aware of the family's anti-regime  stance  because
    of the detention of their father for attempting to smuggle  in  illicit
    material.  The second reason was because the Appellants  had  converted
    to Christianity and that that was known by the authorities and would be
    acted upon.

29.  The  appeals  relied  heavily  on  an  assessment  of  the  Appellants'
    credibility.  The question of the father's  arrest  and  detention  was
    being re-litigated having been  litigated  once  already  before  Judge
    Bennett.  He had not found the evidence given to him to be credible and
    Judge Gibbs did not find the evidence given to her to  be  any  better.
    There were cogent reasons why both Judge Bennett and subsequently Judge
    Gibbs had rejected the claim that illicit material had  been  put  into
    the father's luggage and found by  the  authorities  (see  paragraph  6
    above).

30.  There was a  difficulty  in  the  Respondent's  position  in  that  one
    refusal letter had made the concession that the Appellants' father  had
    been detained and  ill-treated  in  detention  whilst  another  refusal
    letter had not made the same concession.  The Judge  rightly  proceeded
    on the basis of  the  concession  which  was  most  favourable  to  the
    Appellants and  sought  to  examine  why  in  those  circumstances  the
    Appellants'  father  would  have  been  detained  if  it  was   clearly
    implausible that he was detained for possessing illicit material.   The
    Appellants' father himself had said that at least part  of  the  reason
    why he was  detained  was  because  of  the  debt  problem.   In  those
    circumstances the Judge was entitled to draw the  inference  that  that
    was the reason for the detention.  It was open to the Judge to conclude
    that the Appellants' father was then  ill-treated  because  he  was  in
    prison and that is what happens in Iranian prisons. What the Judge  was
    seeking to deal with was whether the father's ill-treatment was  linked
    to political activity or otherwise.  She concluded that it could not be
    because the basis on which it was claimed  that  the  father  had  been
    detained (possessing illicit material) was inherently implausible.   It
    was reasonable therefore for the Judge to conclude that the Appellants'
    father had been ill-treated because he was in detention.  There was  no
    evidence before the Judge to suggest that did not happen. The  evidence
    she received was that whilst ill  treatment  was  mostly  inflicted  on
    those who were politically active it was not solely directed at them.

31.  The second main issue the Judge had to deal with was  the  question  of
    the genuineness of the Appellants'  conversion  to  Christianity.   The
    Judge was entitled to look at the way in which the claim of  conversion
    to Christianity had emerged.  She gave cogent reasons why she found the
    conversion was not genuine.  She  was  particularly  impressed  by  the
    timing of  the  claims.   The  Judge  found  that  if  genuine  it  was
    reasonable to have expected the  Appellants  to  have  mentioned  their
    conversion to Christianity rather earlier than they did (see  paragraph
    8 above).  The Appellants had made  two  claims  in  support  of  their
    applications for asylum already and both had  been  rejected  by  Judge
    Bennett  (these  were  the  smuggling  of  illicit  material   by   the
    Appellants' father  and  involvement  in  an  illegal  abortion).   The
    Appellants had now come up with a third ground.   It  is  correct  that
    each ground for asylum has to be given anxious scrutiny. The mere  fact
    that an Appellant makes more than one ground is not of itself a  reason
    to dismiss all grounds for claiming asylum for  example  on  the  basis
    that one or more  grounds  have  been  found  not  to  have  substance.
    However, the Judge did not proceed on that basis.  She did  not  reject
    the claim of conversion to Christianity  because  it  was  yet  another
    claim but rather because there was no substance to it when  one  looked
    at the evidence.  The Judge was looking at all of the evidence  in  the
    round. It was open to her to draw an adverse inference  from  the  fact
    that the Appellants had a history  of  making  a  number  of  different
    claims for asylum, all without foundation as well as the fact that this
    claim too had little evidential foundation.

32.  The Appellants had claimed  that  their  new  faith  required  them  to
    preach.  In doing so they were evidently unaware that  that  is  not  a
    requirement of the Church of England.  The  Judge  was  aware  of  that
    point and it increased the suspicion in her mind that  the  Appellants,
    with perhaps one eye on  relevant  case  law  such  as  HJ  Iran,  were
    tailoring their claim to what they considered would be successful as an
    asylum claim.  The difficulty  with  the  alternative  explanation  put
    forward by Counsel that the Appellants were involved with  the  Iranian
    Christian  Fellowship  Church  and  that  that   church   did   require
    proselytising, is that the evidence submitted simply  did  not  support
    that the Appellants were still  involved  with  the  Iranian  Christian
    Fellowship. The letter dated 18th May 2014 showed  the  exact  opposite
    (see paragraph above). The 1st Appellant  was  not  mentioned  at  all.
    Whilst it is arguable that  there  was  a  letter  which  talked  about
    involvement in the past by the 2nd Appellant there was no  evidence  to
    show  that  either  Appellant  was  still  involved  with  the  Iranian
    Christian Fellowship, the church which did require proselytising.

33.  The other matters complained of  in  the  determination,  such  as  the
    Judge's finding that it was implausible that the Appellants would  send
    photographs of a Christian burial  to  their  relatives  in  Iran,  are
    simply the expression of a disagreement with the Judge's findings.  The
    Judge's rejection of the claim that Mr Jaffari had  taken  papers  from
    the Appellants was a conclusion open  to  her  on  the  evidence.   The
    grounds of appeal amounted to no more than  a  disagreement  with  that
    finding.

34.  The grounds made a general  complaint  that  the  Judge  had  drawn  an
    adverse conclusion from a perceived but not actual lack of evidence  of
    studying.  As I have indicated, the grounds of appeal  do  not  suggest
    that the second Appellant had been studying in this country even though
    he had arrived with entry clearance as a student on 26 September  2012.
    The evidence of the first  Appellant's  studies  was  slight.   He  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom at the  age  of  15  and  thus  still  of
    compulsory school age.  By the time the case was heard by the Judge the
    first Appellant was 19, a substantial period of time in which the first
    Appellant could have studied. Yet the evidence before the Judge of  the
    first Appellant's studies, a few certificates buried in  a  very  large
    bundle, was sparse to say the least.

35.  The point being made by the Judge was the lack of evidence that any  of
    the family members had engaged in  their  planned  studies.   In  other
    words if the Appellants were genuine students it was reasonable to have
    expected rather more information about their studies than was produced.
     It was not for the Judge to enter the arena, it was for the Appellants
    to prove their case.  Their case was that they had come to  the  United
    Kingdom to study and yet there appears to be no evidence for the second
    Appellant's studies and very  little  evidence  indeed  for  the  first
    Appellant's studies.  The Judge was entitled to draw a conclusion  from
    that.  However, it would be wrong to suggest that the  Judge  had  made
    that her starting point and proceeded from there.   It  is  clear  when
    read as a whole that the Judge took all matters in the round.  She  had
    of necessity to set her conclusions out in some form of order and  give
    some reason why she had concerns  about  the  Appellants'  credibility.
    Seen within that context the Judge's remark at paragraph  27  that  she
    placed weight on the lack of evidence  about  studies  was  not  a  new
    matter being raised for the first time by the Judge  but  was,  in  the
    context of the case, a matter she could properly take note of.

36.  I do not  find  that  detailed  forensic  examination  of  the  Judge's
    determination made by counsel reveals any error of law.  For all  their
    length the grounds of onward appeal are merely a disagreement with  the
    Judge's conclusions and particularly her adverse credibility  findings.
    I dismiss both Appellants' appeals.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellants' appeals.

Appellants' appeals dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.



Signed this 10th day of  February  2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed this 10th day of  February  2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
