

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: AA/03503/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |    Determination Promulgated|
|On 15th  October 2014                         |    On 20th October 2014     |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

                                   MR A M
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr E Tuburu, Solicitor
For the Respondent: Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

     DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Details of the Appellant and Proceedings


  1. The appellant was born on 23rd March 1994 and is a citizen of Iran.  He
     was granted permission on 4th August 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
     P J G White to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Page (the  Judge)  who,  in  a  determination
     promulgated on  14th  July  2014,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
     decision of the respondent made on 9th May 2014 to refuse to  vary  his
     leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom following the refusal of
     his asylum claim. Permission was granted for the following reasons:


         It is arguable that the Judge did not consider the  report  of  the
         Medical Foundation in the round.  The Judge notes at  paragraph  25
         that the report indicated that the appellant suffers from PTSD  but
         then appears not to take that into account as a factor  that  might
         affect the appellant's ability to give  answers  in  interview  and
         evidence at the hearing.


         Rather, the Judge finds  that  the  appellant  has  given  a  false
         account (paragraph 49) and so  concludes  that  the  appellant  has
         deceived the writer of the  report  whose  independence  the  Judge
         doubts (paragraph 50).


         Accordingly I am  satisfied  that  the  grounds  and  determination
         disclose an arguable error of law.


  2. The matter accordingly  came  before  me  for  an  initial  hearing  to
     determine whether the making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal
     involved the making of an error on a point of law.



My Consideration of the Submissions and Issues


  3. In his submissions to me Mr Tuburu relied on the submitted  grounds  of
     appeal for the appellant which are two-fold.  Firstly, it  is  asserted
     that the Judge has failed to give adequate reasons for his findings  on
     material matters and secondly, that he has failed to deal properly with
     the  evidence  from  the  Medical  Foundation.  The  lack  of  adequate
     reasoning is submitted in part to arise from the  Judge's  approach  to
     Article 8 matters and his failure  to  assess  proportionality  in  the
     light of the appellant's relationship with his  partner.   I  asked  Mr
     Tuburu, acting for the appellant, whether he  proposed  to  pursue  the
     Article 8 ground of appeal on which the permission to appeal is silent,
     my provisional view being that  it  is  a  ground  without  merit.   He
     indicated that he did not.


  4. I am satisfied that this ground is not made out in  the  light  of  the
     Judge's  clear  and  sustainable  findings  at  paragraph  54  of   his
     determination as follows:


          54. Having dismissed the appellant's asylum appeal and the  appeal
         under Articles 2 and 3 that stand with it, I do  not  see  how  the
         appellant could possibly remain in the United Kingdom in  a  stand-
         alone claim under Article 8.  The  appellant  could  not  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  under
         Article 8 in  these  circumstances  and  the  appellant's  skeleton
         argument has not drawn my attention to any compelling circumstances
         not sufficiently recognised by the Rules for it to be necessary for
         Article 8 purposes to go on to consider Article 8  outside  of  the
         Rules.  No arguable case has been has been presented under  Article
         8 and the appeal under Article 8 is dismissed for the above reasons
         - and for want of argument.


  5. Mr Tuburu submits, however, that the Judge erred  materially  in  other
     respects  starting  with  the  reference  in  paragraph   47   of   his
     determination to the appellant overstaying  his  visit  in  the  United
     Kingdom.  Mr Tuburu submits  that  this  is  a  significant  and  wrong
     finding from which the Judge's wider adverse credibility findings flow,
     tainting the credibility findings as a whole.  I  do  not  accept  this
     submission.  If the Judge has erred in this respect I find that  it  is
     not a material error. At the outset of his determination, in  paragraph
     1, the Judge accurately sets out  the  background  to  the  appellant's
     claim which is that he came to the United Kingdom from Iran  using  his
     own passport and a valid family visit visa issued in Abu Dhabi on  22nd
     November 2011.  He left Iran on 17th January 2012 and his intention was
     to remain in the United Kingdom for 4 weeks but he remained beyond that
     period in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum in April 2012.


  6. The appellant had therefore not overstayed the period of his  visa,  as
     opposed to the period of time for which he indicated he would remain in
     the United Kingdom. The Judge  may  have  inaccurately  described  this
     position but in my finding it had no consequence in the context of  his
     overall findings. Before he made any reference to overstaying the Judge
     had reached  adverse  credibility  findings  in  his  determination  at
     paragraph  10  because  the  appellant  had  difficulty  in  describing
     conditions inside Evin prison where he claimed to have  been  held.  In
     paragraph 11 the Judge  sets  out  contradictions  in  the  appellant's
     evidence about why he failed to leave  the  United  Kingdom  after  his
     intended 4-week stay.


  7. The Judge sets out, in paragraph 37 of his determination, discrepancies
     in the appellant's evidence about how  he  came  to  be  released  from
     prison in Iran and in paragraphs 36 and 38  of  the  determination  the
     Judge states that the appellant gave vague and rambling  oral  evidence
     before him. In paragraph 46 of the determination  the  Judge  concluded
     that there was no doubt that the  appellant  put  forward  an  invented
     claim and he noted  that  his  family  returned  to  Iran  leaving  the
     appellant behind in the United Kingdom with his aunt  in  circumstances
     where there was no concern felt by them for the appellant's  safety  in
     Iran. In paragraph 49 the Judge found the  appellant's  story  to  have
     been invented taking account of his departure from Iran in no hurry and
     using his own passport; he found that this manner  of  departure  would
     have been impossible if his account events with the authorities in Iran
     was true.


  8. The Judge found in paragraph 49 of the determination that  the  actions
     of  the  appellant  after  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  were
     inconsistent with those of a person genuinely in fear  of  the  Iranian
     authorities. In paragraph 45 of the determination the Judge  found  the
     evidence of the appellant's aunt given orally at the hearing to be self-
     serving and to carry  no  weight.   The  Judge  has  in  my  view  made
     sustainable  credibility  findings  supported  throughout  with   valid
     reasons.


  9.  The  Judge  appropriately  directed  himself  about  credibility;   at
     paragraph 44 he reminded himself of the low standard of proof  and  the
     need to look at matters as a whole, placing  each  and  every  relevant
     factor within the  overall  context  of  the  claim,  giving  each  its
     appropriate  weight.   His  reasoning  throughout   the   determination
     demonstrates that he has done so. In these circumstances I am satisfied
     that the Judge has not materially erred by describing the appellant as,
     or perceiving him to be, an overstayer. For the reasons set  out  above
     nor do I find any merit in the ground of  appeal  that  the  Judge  has
     fallen into any material error in his findings in  paragraph  10  about
     how many people the appellant shared a cell with in Evin prison.


 10. The second ground of appeal relates to  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
     medical evidence in the form of a report from  Dr  Alison  Wickert,  an
     examining doctor with the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of
     Torture. The Judge is submitted to have erred by failing to mention the
     appellant's diagnosis  of  PTSD,  particularly  in  the  light  of  his
     conclusions drawn from how the appellant  gave  his  evidence  both  in
     interview and at the hearing. It is submitted that the judge failed  to
     take account of how PTSD might affect  a  claimant's  ability  to  give
     evidence and its possible impact upon his memory; it is submitted to be
     a factor to explain inconsistent evidence given by the appellant.


 11. It is further submitted for the appellant that the report was compliant
     with the Istanbul Protocol which acknowledges that a report  supporting
     an application for political asylum in a  third  country  need  provide
     only a relatively low level of proof of torture. A Home  Office  policy
     instruction is relied upon stating that:


         "Where an applicant submits a report from  the  Medical  Foundation
         which supports his account of torture, the fact that the  applicant
         has been tortured should be accepted unless there  are  significant
         reasons for rejecting that conclusion at the end of the report."


 12. Having considered all the submissions before  me  and  looking  at  the
     determination in the round I  find  merit  in  the  submissions  by  Mr
     Richards, on behalf of the respondent, that the  Judge  has  done  more
     than is required of him in assessing the medical evidence  and  he  has
     made no error in reaching his conclusions. The Judge did  not  come  to
     any assessment of credibility before considering the expert report  and
     looking at the evidence in the round; his assessment of credibility was
     in the context of all the evidence. I return to the  Judge's  direction
     to himself at paragraph 44 of the determination and find  no  merit  in
     the ground of appeal that the Judge did not consider the report of  the
     Medical Foundation in the round.


 13. I take full account of Mr Tuburu's submissions in relation to the  Home
     Office policy set out above and his submission that a medical doctor is
     better qualified to assess the existence of PTSD than a judge, but this
     does not mean that a medical opinion can be accepted without  question.
     The Judge is bound to assess the evidence before him and to decide  the
     appropriate weight to be accorded to it.  I am satisfied that the Judge
     has, in accordance with the guidance set out in HE (DRC  -  credibility
     and psychiatric reports) Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  [2004]  UKIAT
     dealt with the medical evidence in this case as an integral part of the
     findings on credibility rather  than  as  an  add-on,  which  does  not
     undermine the conclusions to which he would otherwise come.

 14. At paragraph 23 of his determination the Judge states that he is taking
     the medical report as his starting point in assessing  credibility.  He
     took account of the author of  the  report's  status  as  an  examining
     doctor with the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of  Torture;
     he took account of the doctor's experience as set out in her  biography
     and her use of reference material from the Medical Foundation and other
     appropriate sources. The Judge sets  out  a  summary  of  the  relevant
     findings, in particular about the knee injury the appellant claimed  to
     have  received  as  a  result  of  torture.  In  paragraph  25  of  his
     determination the Judge explicitly took account  of  the  diagnosis  of
     PTSD before he found as follows in paragraph 29 of his determination:


         "Her report is not conclusive proof that the appellant has suffered
         the trauma claimed, but does provides support  to  the  appellant's
         case in that her findings  are  consistent  with  the  account  the
         appellant gave. Her diagnosis is based upon her observations during
         the examination of the appellant's knee and the appellant's answers
         to  questions  in  the  questionnaire  used  to  determine  if  the
         appellant is suffering from PTSD".


 15. The Judge in my view took full account of the content  of  the  medical
     evidence and  considered  wider  aspects  of  the  credibility  of  the
     appellant's claim before reaching a well-reasoned  conclusion,  at  the
     end of paragraph 50 of his determination, that whilst the diagnosis  of
     PTSD supports the appellant's case it was "by no  means  conclusive  of
     it". The Judge found significant  reasons  for  rejecting  the  medical
     conclusions, particularly in relation to the knee. He accepted that the
     injury was consistent with the  claimed  cause  but  found  that  other
     possible causes could not be  excluded.   He  questioned  the  doctor's
     conclusion that there was no other evidence to  suggest  another  cause
     and concluded that:

         "What she really means is that  the  appellant  provided  no  other
         explanation to suggest another cause - the evidence in her analysis
         amounting to nothing more than what the  appellant  had  told  her.
         This has caused me to doubt her independence because I  would  have
         expected her to say only that the knee injury was  consistent  with
         the stated cause and that she  could  not  exclude  other  possible
         causes".

 16. This was a conclusion to which the Judge  was  entitled  to  come,  not
     least after his careful consideration in paragraphs 26 and  27  of  the
     doctor's findings. The appellant's knee was recorded by the  doctor  to
     be scarred, painful, tender and lacking full movement because  of  soft
     tissue and connective tissue injury.  In circumstances where the doctor
     accepted the appellant's explanation that there could be no cause other
     than his claimed mistreatment in  detention  the  judge  expressed  his
     surprise at the doctor's conclusion  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
     support an alternative cause.  On the evidence before  the  doctor  the
     Judge stated that he would have expected  her  to  say  that  the  knee
     injury was consistent with the stated cause  but  that  she  could  not
     exclude other possible causes.


 17. The case of HE is authority for the proposition that where an  advocate
     seeks to support credibility findings by reference to a medical report,
     he must identify what about it affords support to what the claimant has
     said and which is not dependent on what the claimant has said. This  is
     very much the point in this case, the Judge having found nothing in the
     report which is not dependent on what the claimant has said. The  Judge
     directed himself properly in reaching this  conclusion  and  throughout
     his determination. I am satisfied that his findings are sound and  well
     supported with reasons. I find that the making of the decision did  not
     involve the making of any material error on  a  point  of  law  and  it
     follows that the Judge's decision stands and this appeal to  the  Upper
     Tribunal is dismissed.


Summary of Decisions

 18. I find that the making of the previous decision  did  not  involve  the
     making of a material error on a point  of  law.  It  follows  that  the
     Judge's decision stands.


 19. This appeal in the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity


    In order to secure  the  anonymity  of  the  appellant  throughout  the
    proceedings a direction made pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  remains  in  force  as
    follows. No report or other publication of  these  proceedings  or  any
    part or parts of them shall name or directly or indirectly identify the
    appellant.  Reference to the appellant may be by use  of  his  initials
    but not by name.  Failure by any person, body  or  institution  whether
    corporate or incorporate, or either party to this appeal to comply with
    this direction may lead to a contempt of court.   The  direction  shall
    continue in force until the Tribunal or a court shall lift or vary it.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date:  17th October 2014


Fee Award

    The position remains that no fee has been paid or is payable and  there
         is accordingly
    no fee award.


Signed:

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 17th October 2014
