
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal number: AA/03093/2015


                              IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 11 August 2015                   |On: 27 August 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                           Ms Sumeer Ghulam Rasool
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffar, counsel (instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 11 December 1975.  She
    appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan who dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum and human
    rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 15 May 2015.

 2. The appellant applied for a Tier 4 visa on 11 May 2012 which was issued
    and valid until 14 October 2013. She left Pakistan, arriving in the  UK
    on 5 June 2012. She applied to extend her visa on 3 October 2013  which
    was granted until 12 October 2015.

 3. On 4 August 2014, she claimed asylum on the basis  of  a  well  founded
    fear of risk of persecution on return to Pakistan  as  a  member  of  a
    particular social group, fearing both her husband and her own family if
    returned to Pakistan as she had an illegitimate child.

 4. The appellant claimed that her marriage to Mr Manzoor Ul Haq  had  been
    arranged and took place on 14 September  1999.  She  lived  "sometimes"
    with her husband and sometimes with her mother [17]. She  claimed  that
    her husband was violent to her from the start. He used to drink. He was
    a gambler and socialised with "indecent  people."  He  would  sometimes
    burn her with cigarettes and tie up her feet and hands.

 5. She gave birth to their first daughter on 7 July 2000. As  her  husband
    wanted a boy, he struck her with a rolling pin, resulting in a scar  in
    the corner of her eye. He burned her with cigarettes while  she  nursed
    the child and she returned to her mother's house.

 6. While staying at her mother's house her husband would demand  money  on
    the basis that she had been taking care of her mother and he should  be
    compensated for this. Her brothers sometimes gave him money.  When  she
    discovered that she was pregnant on the second occasion, she feared she
    would not give birth to a boy. When she was five  months'  pregnant  he
    took her for a scan and it was discovered that she was having  a  girl.
    Her husband then beat her.

 7. After two months her husband attacked her and cut her left wrist with a
    knife. She was taken to the doctor and then went again to stay with her
    mother.

 8. Her second daughter was born on 30 June 2004. After that, she  did  not
    return to her husband's home. Two of  her  brothers  stated  that  they
    would not let her return home and she continued to live with her mother
    until her brothers got married in 2010. She then moved in with  one  of
    her younger brothers, Nehboob.

 9. Her brothers decided at that time they would no longer  give  money  to
    her husband as they were now married and could not afford it.

10. In January 2011,  someone  came  to  her  brother's  home  and  started
    shooting. Her brother was hit in the leg. She does not know  if  anyone
    has been arrested for that  attack  because  straight  after  that  her
    brother had a child and she became busy with that.

11. She believes that her husband was responsible for the attack because he
    continuously threatened her and her family. Her  husband  also  changed
    his address after the attack.

12. In 2012, her brother  had  another  child  and  stated  he  would  make
    arrangements for the appellant to study abroad in order to learn how to
    run a business. She left her children with her brother and came to  the
    UK in June 2012.

13. Whilst studying in the UK she met Mr Shehzad  Ahmad.  She  commenced  a
    relationship with him and became pregnant. She gave birth to a daughter
    on 12 November 2014.

14. She claimed that when she told her brother about her  daughter's  birth
    in the UK he stopped financial support. When she told Mr Ahmad he  hung
    up on her and she has not been able to contact him since.

15. Her husband in Pakistan then found out about the child and came to take
    the children from her brother's home. This was reported to  the  police
    who paid no attention to it  and  no  FIR  was  lodged.  She  has  been
    speaking to her children in the presence of their private tutor.

16. She fears that if returned to Pakistan, her life as well as that of her
    daughter would be at risk from her husband as she is in a  relationship
    with another man and he has fathered her child.

    The Judge's findings

17. In his findings of fact and credibility, the Judge noted that the  core
    of her claim was that her husband was violent with her from  the  first
    day  of  the  marriage  in  1999.  He  set  out  the  history  of  that
    relationship including his attempt to kill her and her unborn child  in
    2004, after which she went with her mother and three brothers, who were
    living with their mother  at  the  time.  When  her  two  brothers  got
    married, Mehboob took her to live with him. There was an attack on  her
    brother's house in January 2011. Her brother was shot in the leg.

18. The Judge noted that she produced an English translation  of  the  FIR.
    The appellant came to the UK in June 2012 as a student and met  a  man,
    Shezad Ahmad. They had an affair for between  three  and  four  months,
    after which she became pregnant and gave birth to a baby daughter.  She
    claimed that the child is illegitimate which is forbidden in  Pakistan.
    Her family and husband would cause her and "her children" harm  if  she
    returns [43].

19. The appellant claimed that after her brother's house  was  attacked  in
    January 2011, he went to the police station but did not give any  names
    to the police. She produced an English translation of the  FIR  stating
    that she was married to Manzoor Ul Haq. Her brother's report  was  that
    he is sure that the appellant's parents in law arranged the  attack  on
    him as he was not sending the appellant to their house.  The  appellant
    however stated in interview, in her written statement and oral evidence
    before the Tribunal that her parents in  law  died  shortly  after  her
    marriage in 1999. The Judge found the  appellant's  explanation  as  to
    this major discrepancy to be vague and evasive [44]. He  did  not  find
    her evidence before him or the documentary evidence in the form of  the
    FIR to be credible or consistent.

20. Judge Khan stated that the appellant's evidence is that she came from a
    very conservative Muslim family and had a religious upbringing. Against
    that background, she claimed that she met a man, Shehzad, in a park  in
    London and had a relationship with him for three to  four  months.  She
    does not know anything about this man, his address, his date of  birth,
    age, or his immigration status or what work he did to support himself.

21. He found that the appellant's evidence about their relationship and her
    getting pregnant "stands totally against her conservative Muslim values
    and her religious upbringing. I do not accept the appellant's  evidence
    of this relationship or the birth of the illegitimate child. I  do  not
    find the appellant's evidence to be credible or consistent." [45]

22. Judge Khan stated at paragraph  46  that  the  appellant  claimed  that
    Shehzad wanted to marry her and she wanted to marry  him.  She  was  in
    agreement with him about marriage.  Judge  Khan  stated  that  this  is
    despite the fact that she claims to be still married to Mansoor Ul  Haq
    in Pakistan. The appellant's explanation  is  that  she  has  not  told
    Shehzad about her marriage in Pakistan [46].

23. He found that evidence puts the status  of  her  marriage  in  Pakistan
    still continuing in serious doubt. If she is still married  to  Mansoor
    Ul Haq, why would she even consider marrying Shehzad. He  again  stated
    that he did not accept the appellant's  evidence  with  regard  to  her
    relationship with Shezad and giving birth to an illegitimate  child  to
    be credible or consistent [46].

24. The Judge noted that the appellant stated  that  her  brother's  friend
    came to visit her to give her some money and clothes. That was when she
    was four months' pregnant. This friend then telephoned her brother  and
    told him about her pregnancy.

25. Judge Khan did not find it plausible or credible that  the  appellant's
    brother's friend would be aware at that stage that  the  appellant  was
    pregnant and that he reported the matter to her brother.

26. In his ultimate conclusion, the Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
    invented her evidence around the case law of Shah and Islam  but  which
    has left many implausible and unexplained  discrepancies.  He  did  not
    find the appellant to be a credible or a consistent  witness.  In  this
    case,  credibility  is  paramount  if  she  is  to  succeed  under  the
    principles of Shah and Islam. He found that the  appellant  is  totally
    unreliable [48].

27. Even  though  he  found  the  appellant's  credibility  to  be  totally
    discredited, he assessed the possibility of risk of persecution on  her
    return. He did not accept the appellant's version of events. He did not
    accept that she would be at risk on return  to  Pakistan.  He  did  not
    accept that the threats from her family in  Pakistan  are  genuine,  or
    that they would be carried out as claimed by the  appellant.  He  found
    that the claimed threats have been generated by the appellant  for  the
    purpose of the asylum claim and have no reality about  them  whatsoever
    [50].

28. Accordingly, he found that the appellant had not established  her  case
    that she is at real risk of persecution on her return to Pakistan.

29. On 12 June 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted the appellant
    permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  Judge  had  not  properly
    considered or made findings on  "many  of  the  points  raised  in  the
    skeleton argument" and had failed adequately  to  address  or  properly
    interpret the objective evidence.

30. Mr Jaffar, who had not represented the appellant before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, adopted the grounds seeking permission. He also produced  the
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal. He submitted that the
    respondent had accepted at the  second  paragraph  52,  which  appeared
    after paragraph 54, at page 7 of the detailed reasons for refusal, that
    it was accepted that the appellant had  experienced  domestic  violence
    from her husband from the beginning of her marriage; that she had given
    birth to a child who is not her husband's  in  the  UK,  and  that  her
    husband had tried to take her children but was unsuccessful.

31. He submitted that the core of the appellant's claim is that  she  fears
    return to Pakistan with her illegitimate  child,  both  of  whom  would
    become subject to degrading  treatment  or  worse.  It  would  be  very
    difficult for her to seek protection from the  enforcement  authorities
    when such authorities could pursue her on possible grounds and  charges
    of adultery. There are  very  strong  non  state  actors  in  Pakistan,
    motivated to harm -  or  worse  -  a  lady  who  "indulged  herself  in
    adultery" and the child who is the result of such "indulgence."

32. He submitted that the Judge in his findings on paragraph 44-48  had  no
    regard to the positive "findings" by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal
    letter at paragraph 52.

33. The reason behind  the  refusal  to  accept  the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding a relationship with a man in the  UK  or  the  birth  of  the
    illegitimate child on the basis that  she  comes  from  a  conservative
    Muslim family and that she has a  religious  upbringing  constitutes  a
    misdirection.

34. He submitted that there is  no  "objective  evidence"  suggesting  that
    girls who come from very conservative Muslim families with a  religious
    upbringing could not have had such a relationship as the appellant had,
    and could not have had a child as she  did.  Even  though  the  Judge's
    contention that her  evidence  of  the  relationship  with  Shezad  and
    getting pregnant stood against her conservative Muslim values  and  her
    religious upbringing, this could not be considered to be impossible.

35. Moreover, the finding at paragraph 46 of  the  determination  regarding
    Shezad wanting to marry her and she wanting to marry  him  was  despite
    the fact that she claimed  still  to  be  married  to  her  husband  in
    Pakistan. Her explanation that she  had  not  told  Shehzad  about  her
    marriage in Pakistan puts the status of her marriage in serious  doubt.
    If she is still married to him, why would she  even  consider  marrying
    Shezad? That was the basis upon which he did not  accept  her  evidence
    with regard to her relationship with Shehzad and  giving  birth  to  an
    illegitimate child to be credible or consistent.

36. Mr Jaffar submitted that there was no evidence  by  way  of  background
    suggesting that a  married  woman  could  not  even  consider  marrying
    another man just because she is married.

37. Moreover, the refusal  to  accept  her  evidence  with  regard  to  the
    relationship and the giving of birth to an illegitimate child does  not
    explain the fact that the child is not from her husband.

38. Accordingly, he submitted that the Judge's finding that  the  appellant
    had invented her evidence to bolster a claim was not properly  reasoned
    and was against the acceptance  of  facts  by  the  respondent  in  the
    refusal letter.

39. It was also submitted in the grounds that the Judge had regard  to  the
    fact that the appellant's child was born on 12 November 2014 and was  a
    Pakistani national who would accompany her mother  to  Pakistan.  Those
    were considered to be the best interests of the child. However,  it  is
    contended that the Judge erred in not considering the  risk  associated
    with the status of the child, who  is  illegitimate  and  born  out  of
    wedlock, returning to a conservative  society  of  Pakistan  where  non
    state actors remain very  strong  and  influential  in  imposing  their
    "writs". This was in contravention of the duty imposed by s.55  of  the
    2009 Act.  There  was  no  careful  examination  of  all  the  relevant
    information and factors.

40. Nor did the Judge consider the country  guidance  decision  in  KA  and
    Others. That authority had been specifically drawn to the attention  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in the skeleton argument at paragraph 18.  Even
    though in general, women  on  return  would  not  face  prosecution  on
    charges of adultery in Pakistan, and would not be at  real  risk  of  a
    flagrant denial of their rights to a fair  trial,  it  will  always  be
    necessary to consider the particular circumstances  of  the  individual
    case.

41. The skeleton argument had referred to the country information  guidance
    relating to Pakistani women, dated 16 July 2014.

42. Mr Jaffar also referred to part B of the appellant's bundle, before the
    First-tier Tribunal, which contained a report  from  the  Human  Rights
    Commission of Pakistan in 2014. This contained 50 pages  of  background
    evidence referring to ill treatment of women in Pakistan.

43. He also referred to paragraph 1.3.9 and 1.3.10  contained  in  the  COI
    report before the Tribunal.

44. He submitted that the Judge has not made a finding as to the "status of
    the child", i.e. whether the child is legitimate or not.

45. He submitted that the respondent accepted that the appellant's claim of
    being a member of a particular social group due  to  her  status  as  a
    Pakistani woman.

46. However, there was no finding by the Judge as to  whether  the  husband
    has carried out violence up until 2011.

47. He submitted that the respondent accepted that part  of  her  claim  of
    domestic violence that she experienced at the hands of her husband.  It
    was also accepted that her husband had tried to take her  children  but
    was unsuccessful (at paragraph 52  of  the  refusal  letter).  He  also
    referred  to  paragraph  57  of  the  reasons  for  refusal  where  the
    respondent had regard to the US  State  Department  Country  Report  on
    human rights practices, 2013. It was  noted  that  there  are  frequent
    failures to punish abusive spouses, which contributed to a  climate  of
    impunity.

48. Mr Jaffar submitted that if the decision  is  set  aside,  this  is  an
    appropriate case for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision
    to be made on all the available evidence.

49.  On  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Melvin  has   produced   written
    submissions. He relied on the Rule 24 response. At paragraph 3,  it  is
    noted that the Judge found that  the  appellant  was  not  credible  or
    consistent, and rejects the claim that the appellant had an affair  and
    as a result became pregnant. The Judge also did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would be at risk from her family and that the threats against
    her are not credible. Given the adverse findings, she  could  not  show
    that she is at risk on return for a Convention reason.

50. He submitted that the Judge gave detailed reasons for the finding  that
    the FIR was not credible or consistent.

51. He submitted that Judge Khan's findings that  it  was  incredible  that
    someone who asserts that she hails from a  conservative  Muslim  family
    and that she herself practised her religion, without  knowing  anything
    about the man, could possibly have a child with Shehzad.  He  submitted
    that the Judge gave clear reasons for not believing this  part  of  the
    claim.

52. He also submitted that it is clear from the decision that the Judge did
    not accept that she is still married to Manzoor Ul Haq in Pakistan [46]
    and that he has given clear reasons for that finding.

53. Given the above evidence, including the fact that her two children  are
    in Pakistan with her family members, the Judge clearly expects that she
    would be returning to the protection of her own family as  set  out  in
    the refusal letter at paragraph  83-84  and  at  paragraph  50  of  the
    determination.

54. He submitted that given the  clear  reasons  for  those  findings,  the
    issues raised in the skeleton argument fall away.

55. It was not accepted that the appellant had given reliable  evidence  on
    the core issues. If those findings are  sustainable,  which  Mr  Melvin
    submitted they are, the Judge was not in material error by  failing  to
    consider all the points raised in the permission application, which are
    based upon the appellant's telling the truth.

56.  He  submitted  that  the  grounds  raised  constitute  in   effect   a
    disagreement with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal and that  she
    has manufactured her  claim  in  order  to  benefit  from  the  Refugee
    Convention. Nor was there evidence that the appellant has been  accused
    of committing adultery.

57. Mr Melvin relied on authorities such  as  MK  (Duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 and Shizad (Sufficiency of Reasons: Set aside)
    [2013] UKUT 85. Although  there  is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the Judge.



58. Although a decision may contain an error of law where the  requirements
    to give adequate reasons are not met,  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  not
    normally set aside a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  where  there
    has been no misdirection of law, the  fact-finding  process  cannot  be
    criticised, and the relevant  country  guidance  has  been  taken  into
    account, unless the conclusions the Judge draws from the  primary  data
    were not reasonably open to him or her.

59. He submitted that there had been no material error.

60. In reply, Mr Jaffar submitted that a core issue related to  the  effect
    of the appellant's having an illegitimate child.  There  was  no  clear
    conclusion drawn by the Judge that the appellant  is  not  married.  At
    most the marriage is not subsisting. These  issues  were  not  properly
    engaged with by the Judge.

61. Nor did the submissions by Mr Melvin engage with the reasons  given  by
    the Judge at paragraphs 46, 45, and 47.

    Assessment

62. The core of the appellant's case is that  she  had  been  subjected  to
    violence by her husband since July 2000 when she gave birth to a  girl.
    When she became pregnant with her second child, shown to be a girl, her
    husband beat her up. Two months after that he attacked her and cut  her
    wrists with a knife. She then went to stay with her mother  again.  The
    child was born in June 2004. After that, she  did  not  return  to  her
    husband's home.

63. The appellant claimed that when her brothers stopped paying her husband
    in 2010, having paid since 2004, there was then  an  incident  in  2011
    when her brother was shot.

64. She claimed that she had an affair in the UK with a man called Shehzad.



65. In the respondent's conclusions in the  reasons  for  refusal,  it  was
    accepted that she had experienced domestic violence  from  her  husband
    from the beginning of her marriage in Pakistan,  although  it  was  not
    accepted what  had  occurred  at  her  brother's  home  as  there  were
    inconsistencies. It was however accepted that she gave birth to a child
    who is not her husband's in the  UK.  It  is  also  accepted  that  her
    husband tried to take her children but was unsuccessful.

66. Notwithstanding the acceptance of those facts, the Judge did not accept
    her evidence of the relationship with  Shehzad  or  the  birth  of  the
    illegitimate child [45]. The  basis  for  that  finding  was  that  the
    appellant claimed to have come from a very conservative  Muslim  family
    and had a religious upbringing. Against that  background,  she  claimed
    she met Shehzad in a London park and had a relationship with  him.  She
    did not know anything about him. Her evidence about  that  relationship
    with him and getting pregnant was found to stand "totally  against  the
    conservative Muslim values and her  religious  upbringing."  The  Judge
    therefore did not accept her evidence of this relationship or the birth
    of the illegitimate child.

67. At paragraph 46, the Judge  stated  that  the  appellant  claimed  that
    Shehzad wanted to marry her and she him. The Judge stated that this was
    despite the fact that she claimed still to be married to her husband in
    Pakistan. Her explanation is that she had not told  Shehzad  about  her
    marriage in Pakistan. That evidence put the status of her  marriage  in
    Pakistan "... has (sic) still continuing in serious doubt."  [46]  Why,
    if she was still married, would she even consider marrying Shehzad? The
    Judge again stated that he did not accept her evidence with  regard  to
    her relationship with Shehzad and the giving birth to  an  illegitimate
    child to be credible or consistent [46].

68. However, at paragraph 54, the Judge noted with regard to the Article  8
    claim, that the appellant's child was born on 12 November 2014 and  was
    just over six months old.

69. The Judge therefore stated on two occasions that he did not accept  her
    evidence of the relationship with Shehzad or the birth of the child. It
    is however accepted by him that her child was born on 12 November 2014.



70. He also stated that her evidence that  she  is  still  married  to  her
    husband in Pakistan and  that  she  had  not  told  Shehzad  about  her
    marriage in Pakistan, puts the status of her marriage in serious doubt.



71. It is not clear what the Judge meant  by  that  statement.  It  is  not
    evident why he did not accept she gave birth to an illegitimate  child.
    In stating that he does not  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be
    credible, it is not clear whether he is  asserting  that  the  marriage
    between the appellant and her husband terminated prior to her  becoming
    pregnant. If that is so, there is no evidence to substantiate that.

72. I find that the Judge's reasoning that because she comes  from  a  very
    conservative Muslim family and has had a religious upbringing, and that
    her relationship with Shehzad and getting pregnant went totally against
    her values, is non sequitur. There was no evidence by way of background
    or otherwise  substantiating  that  assertion.  As  the  Judge  clearly
    accepts that the appellant's child was born on 12 November 2014 in  the
    UK, it is not evident whose child that is. Merely because she was still
    married to her husband  did  not  mean  she  would  not  even  consider
    marrying Shehzad.

73. It was on that basis that the Judge did not accept  her  evidence  with
    regard to that relationship or the giving of birth to  an  illegitimate
    child.

74. I find that those findings  amounted  to  material  misdirections.  The
    result was that the Judge found that  she  had  invented  her  evidence
    around the case law.

75. Although the Judge stated  at  paragraph  50  that  "I  do  accept  the
    appellant's version of events" it appears that he intended to say  that
    he did not accept her version of events. In any event, he  went  on  to
    state that he did not accept that she would be at risk on her return to
    Pakistan and did not accept the threats from her family in Pakistan are
    genuine, or that they would be carried out as claimed. Again, he  found
    that these claimed threats were generated  by  the  appellant  for  the
    purpose of the asylum claim and had no reality about them whatsoever.

76. In rejecting her claim of a relationship in the UK  which  resulted  in
    the birth of an  illegitimate  child  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's risk on return to Pakistan was also affected.

77. Moreover, the Judge has not given consideration to the country guidance
    cases or the background information produced in the appellant's bundle.



78. For these reasons, I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  is
    accordingly set aside and will be re-made.

79. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    regarding the issue of remitting an appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision. In giving effect to that approach, I am satisfied
    that the effect of the error has been to deprive the  appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal of the opportunity to have  her  case  properly
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal. In any event, there  will  be  a
    complete re-hearing with no findings preserved. This is an  appropriate
    case to remit.

80. The appeal is accordingly remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision to be made.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside. It is remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed        Date 24 August 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
