
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03703/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 August 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                           Mrs Iffat Bushra Ahmad

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  15  August  1983.   She
    has been granted  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hanley dismissing her appeal against the decision of the
    respondent made on 12 April 2013 refusing her application for asylum.

2.   The judge also said  that  the  appellant  was  appealing  against  the
    respondent's  decision  to  remove  her  under  Section   47   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  However, at the  hearing
    the HOPO decided to withdraw the Section 47 decision. It turns out from
    the respondent's Rule 24 response to the appellant's grounds of  appeal
    that a Section 47 decision was not made (nor could have been  made)  in
    this case.  It follows that the withdrawal of the Section 47 notice  by
    the HOPO below was made in error.

3.   The appellant was granted a multiple entry visit visa on 19 July  2012,
    valid until 14 July 2014.  She entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor  on  12
    November 2012.  She was treated as having been granted leave  to  enter
    the UK for a limited period beginning at the date of  arrival  for  six
    months, pursuant to the Immigration (Leave to Enter and  Remain)  Order
    2000 paragraph 4, namely until 12 May 2013.  It would appear  from  the
    respondent's reply under Rule 24 that the appellant was served with  an
    IS151A on 14 March 2013 informing her that she  had  entered  illegally
    through verbal deception.  Indeed, paragraph  38  of  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter stated that  the  appellant's  credibility  was  damaged
    under Section 8(2)(a)-(c) of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 as  she  entered  the  UK  illegally  through
    verbal  deception  by  failing  to  disclose   her   claimed   personal
    circumstances to an Immigration Officer upon entry to  the  UK.   As  a
    consequence the jurisdictional point raised by the judge and ground one
    of the appellant's grounds of appeal became  otiose.   Indeed,  Counsel
    accepted that she could not maintain that argument.

4.   As already stated, the appellant entered the UK  as  a  visitor  on  12
    November 2012.  Her evidence is that she met Muhammad  Rehan  Zafar  in
    December 2012.  Mr Zafar is also a Pakistani national.  He is in the UK
    with leave to enter as a Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  until  3
    September 2014.  He practices the Ahmadi faith.  The appellant  and  Mr
    Zafar entered into an Islamic marriage on 17 February 2013.

5.   On 2 March 2013 the appellant applied for asylum.  She had a  screening
    interview on 14 March 2013 and then  had  a  substantive  interview  in
    connection with her asylum claim on 3 April 2013.

6.   She has a paternal aunt in the UK who has settlement and a  sister  who
    has refugee status.  Her father was an executive Vice President of  the
    MCB Bank in Pakistan and is now retired.

7.   The appellant's evidence is that she was born  into  an  Ahmadi  Muslim
    family.  The family lived in Rawalpindi.  She was abused as an  infidel
    at the primary school.  The Khatme-e-Nabuwat attacked the  family  home
    and burned her father's motorbike in around 2003.   As  a  result,  the
    family moved to Islamabad and kept quiet about  their  faith.   At  the
    time of the family's move to Islamabad the appellant was 20 years  old.
    Although living in Islamabad and  maintaining  secrecy  in  respect  of
    their faith, the appellant converted the  family  maid  to  the  Ahmadi
    faith on or around 23 March 2012.

8.   In April 2012 she joined a gym and became  friendly  with  three  other
    women.  In July 2012 there was a general discussion and the girls asked
    the appellant about her faith and she said  she  was  an  Ahmadi.   The
    following day she took pamphlets and books to the gym and gave them  to
    two of the women who became very angry and threatened her and said that
    she  was  liable  to  be  killed.   The  third  girl,  Anam,  was  more
    sympathetic and took a pamphlet.  The following day she went to the gym
    and found that none of the friends had turned up.  On leaving  the  gym
    three men confronted her and one of them said he was the mullah  Imran,
    then leader of the local Khatm-e-Nabuwat, and that he was  the  brother
    of Anam.  He pushed the appellant to the ground and threatened to  kill
    her but passers-by intervened.  That event occurred on  26  July  2012.
    The appellant returned home and told her parents.  That same night  the
    same three men went to the family home, threw stones at the  house  and
    shouted slogans and wrote in red ink "liable to be killed".

9.   The following day the appellant went to the police  station  to  report
    the attack.  The police refused to file an FIR.   She  was  beaten  and
    locked up.  She was kept illegally in detention for one night  and  the
    following morning her father secured her release by payment of a bribe.
     It was then decided that she should go to a maternal uncle's house  in
    Sargodha which she did on 28 July 2012.  A few days later a  number  of
    the mullahs who had previously attacked her found her at the house.  On
    22 August 2012 she went to Rahimyarkhan and remained there safely until
    6 November 2012 when five  mullahs  from  Khatm-e-Nabuwat  entered  the
    house and accused her of blasphemy and trying to  convert  his  sister.
    Mullah  Imran  assaulted  her  and  assaulted  her  uncle.   Neighbours
    intervened, though the appellant and her  uncle  were  injured.    That
    same night her uncle took her to Rabwah, where she  remained  until  11
    November 2012 when she left the country.

10.  There has been one further incident since her arrival in  the  UK.   On
    23 February 2013, the family house in Islamabad was attacked by Khatme-
    e-Nabuwat.  The appellant has been declared an infidel and liable to be
    killed, and that point her father told her to stay in the UK and  claim
    asylum, which she did.

11.  The Ahmadi Association in the UK wrote a letter  dated  29  March  2013
    and that referred to the appellant serving as  a  secretary  of  Islaho
    Irshad, but the respondent found that it was not  consistent  with  her
    claim to have kept her religion private.

12.  The judge did not accept that the events in July 2012, 6  November  and
    the attack on the family on 23 February 2013 occurred.  The grounds  of
    appeal did not challenge the judge's conclusions as to the  credibility
    of the appellant's activities in Pakistan because those  findings  were
    not open to legal challenge.

13.  As the jurisdiction  point  in  the  grounds  was  not  pursued  by  Ms
    McCarthy, the only remaining ground was  ground  2  which  argued  that
    there was a flawed application of HJ (Iran) and  HT  (Cameroon)  [2010]
    UKSC 31. This was in reference to the  judge's  findings  at  paragraph
    110.

14.  The judge found as follows:

         110.  "I find that the appellant, to whatever extent  she  and  her
         family practised their faith, practised in private  having  made  a
         decision in 2003 to relocate to Islamabad and  to  maintain  a  low
         profile, avoiding any discussion of their faith in public.  I  have
         not accepted the account of the incident in  the  gym  and  if  the
         appellant did convert a domestic servant that in itself was also  a
         private act.  I find that the appellant therefore falls within  the
         category of Ahmadi identified in MN at 2(ii) of the summary in  the
         headnote.  I fully take into account that it  is  no  answer  to  a
         claim for protection  that  the  appellant  should  ameliorate  her
         behaviour or religious activities, but I find  that  the  appellant
         and her family were content to practise their religion privately in
         Islamabad.  Whatever the basis of the  appellant's  sister's  claim
         for asylum, that has no bearing on this appeal because there is  no
         evidence from her sister.  In view of the  appellant's  history  of
         practice of her faith I  am  not  persuaded  that  she  intends  to
         practise her religion openly and in public  on  return.   There  is
         little  evidence  in  connection  with  the  appellant's  religious
         activities in the UK, save for her  own  assertions  and  I  attach
         limited weight to the letter from  the  Ahmadi  Muslim  Association
         because it was written just after the asylum claim and because  the
         letter dated 29 March 2013 refers to an activity in  Pakistan  that
         the appellant herself does not even mention.  Furthermore, and more
         importantly, the appellant  and  her  husband  prioritised  getting
         married outside the Ahmadi Association and that tends  to  indicate
         that  their  adherence  to  the  Ahmadi  faith  has  a  degree   of
         flexibility."

15.  Ms McCarthy relied on the submission in the  grounds  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal accepted the appellant's account of relocation  following
    adverse attention from the KN in 2003.  Those events  are  recorded  in
    more detail at paragraph 12  of  the  determination  in  the  following
    manner:

         "(a)     The Khatme-e-Nabuwat attacked the family home  and  burned
             her father's motorbike in  around  2003.   As  a  result,  the
             family moved to Islamabad and kept quiet about their faith."

16.  The argument was that the judge had accepted  that  the  appellant  and
    her family had practised their faith discreetly from 2003, as a  result
    of a religiously-motivated attack.  In concluding therefore,  that  the
    appellant was content to practise her faith privately, the judge  erred
    (i)  in  failing  to  take  into  account  his  own  finding  that  the
    appellant's private  religious  practice  was  motivated  by  religious
    persecution at the hands of the  KN;  and  (ii)  failed  to  apply  the
    requisite test set down by the  Supreme  Court  in  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31, by allowing an appeal  where  an  individual
    has been forced to discreetly manifest their  protected  characteristic
    as a result of a well-founded fear of ill-treatment.

17.  Mr Avery said that he did not interpret paragraph 110 as an  acceptance
    of the attack in 2003.  This is because at paragraph 109 the judge said
    there were other features of the evidence  which  weighed  against  the
    appellant's credibility, including her continued  education  after  the
    family's decision to move to  Islamabad.   Even  if  we  gave  it  that
    interpretation, the evidence  is  that  they  moved  to  Islamabad  and
    maintained a low profile.  There is also the finding that the appellant
    got married in accordance with a more regular Islamic tradition  in  an
    environment where there is no persecution.  This indicates that this is
    how she intends to pursue her religion.

18.  In reply, Ms McCarthy said if I was against her on  the  interpretation
    of paragraph 110, then she would argue that the judge erred in  failing
    to make a clear finding on the family's move  to  Rawalpindi  and  that
    needs to be re-examined.  In reply Mr Avery said that  the  finding  in
    paragraph 109 is a clear indication that the judge did not accept  that
    they moved to Rawalpindi because of the attack on the family.

19.  I find that because the judge accepted that the family made a  decision
    to move to Islamabad in 2003, he must have accepted the  reason  behind
    their decision.  To that extent  I  agree  with  Counsel.   I  do  not,
    however, agree with the submission that because of the judge's  finding
    that   the   appellant   was   content   to    practise    her    faith
    privately/discreetly from 2003 meant that the appellant's appeal should
    have been allowed in light of HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon). At paragraph
    35 the House of Lords laid down the test that should be adopted by fact-
    finding tribunals in this country.  One of the tests is to examine what
    the situation will be on return  of  the  applicant.   The  enquiry  is
    directed to how the applicant will conduct himself/herself if returned.
     The law has developed since the House of Lords' decision in HJ  (Iran)
    in 2010.

20.  The judge relied on MN and  Others  (Ahmadis  -  country  conditions  -
    risk) Pakistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389  (IAC).   The  Tribunal  in  the
    headnote paragraph 1 stated that the guidance is based in part  on  the
    developments in the law including the decisions of the Supreme Court in
    HJ (Iran), RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38  and  the  CJEU  decision  in
    Germany v Y (C-71/11) and Z (C/99-11).

21.  The judge relied on  paragraph  2(ii)  of  the  headnote  of  MN  which
    states:


         "(ii)    It is, and has long been, possible in general for  Ahmadis
             to practise their  faith  on  a  restricted  basis  either  in
             private or in community with other Ahmadis, without infringing
             domestic Pakistan law."

22.  At paragraph 3(i) of the headnote the Tribunal held that if  an  Ahmadi
    is able to demonstrate that it  is  of  particular  importance  to  his
    religious identity  to  practice  and  manifest  his  faith  openly  in
    Pakistan in defiance of the restrictions in  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code
    (PPC) under Sections 298B and 298C, by engaging in behaviour  described
    in paragraph 2(i) above,  he  or  she  is  likely  to  be  in  need  of
    protection, in light of  the  serious  nature  of  the  sanctions  that
    potentially apply as well as the risk of  persecution  under  295C  for
    blasphemy.  The behaviour described in 2(i) is that the legislation not
    only prohibits preaching and other forms of proselytising but  also  in
    practice  restricts  other  elements  of  manifesting  one's  religious
    beliefs, such as  holding  open  discourse  about  religion  with  non-
    Ahmadis, although not amounting  to  proselytising.   The  prohibitions
    include openly referring to one's place of worship as a mosque  and  to
    one's religious leader as  an  imam.   In  addition,  Ahmadis  are  not
    permitted to refer to  the  call  to  prayer  as  aazan,  nor  to  call
    themselves Muslims or to refer to their faith as Islam.

23.  I find that paragraph 5 of the headnote is in line  with  the  approach
    given in HJ (Iran).  It states that the  first  question  the  decision
    maker must ask is (i) whether the  claimant  genuinely  is  an  Ahmadi.
    Evidence likely to be relevant includes confirmation from the UK Ahmadi
    headquarters  regarding  the  activities  relied  on  in  Pakistan  and
    confirmation from the local community in the UK of whether the claimant
    is worshipping.  The next step involves an enquiry into the  claimant's
    intentions or wishes as to his or her faith, if returned  to  Pakistan.
    This is relevant because of the need to  establish  whether  it  is  of
    particular importance to the religious identity of the Ahmadi concerned
    to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour.  The burden is on  the  claimant
    to demonstrate that any intention or  wish  to  practice  and  manifest
    aspects of the faith openly that are  not  permitted  by  the  Pakistan
    Penal Code is genuinely  held  and  of  particular  importance  to  the
    claimant to preserve his or her religious  identity.   Behaviour  since
    arrival in the UK may also be relevant.

24.  In light of MN I find that it is not simply the case that  because  the
    family relocated to Islamabad in order to maintain  a  low  profile  by
    avoiding any discussion of their faith in public  the  appellant's  the
    appeal has to be allowed.  A relevant issue that has to  be  considered
    is the appellant's intentions or wishes as to her faith if returned  to
    Pakistan.

25.   In  this  case  the  judge  did  not  find  credible  the  appellant's
    activities since their move to Islamabad.  He found that  even  if  she
    did convert a domestic servant that was also a  private  act.   I  find
    that his findings at paragraph 110 comply with the test as set  out  in
    HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) and MN.

26.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose an error of law.

27.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

