
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03030/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th March 2015                            |On 31st March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE CRANSTON
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                     e n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision promulgated on 8th January 2015, the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision to remove him from the United Kingdom was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Eban ("the judge").  The appellant's  case
    was advanced on the basis that his removal to Sri Lanka would  put  him
    at real risk of persecution, and of ill-treatment in breach of  Article
    3 of the Human Rights Convention, as a person of  adverse  interest  to
    the authorities there.  He relied upon medical evidence showing that he
    has scarring and suffers from a major depressive illness, diagnosed  as
    post-traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD").   The  judge  disbelieved  the
    appellant's core claims, including his account of the  injuries  giving
    rise to his scars, and found that he would not be at  risk  on  return.
    In giving reasons for the removal  decision,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered whether the appellant's removal would breach his  Article  8
    rights.  Although the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal made
    no mention of Article 8, the judge made an assessment in this  context,
    taking into account the medical and psychiatric evidence before her and
    the extent of the appellant's ties to the United Kingdom,  in  relation
    to  family  and  private  life.   She  concluded  that  removal  was  a
    proportionate response.

2.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred in several respects.  First, in taking  section  8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004  ("the
    2004 Act") as a focal point in assessing the  appellant's  credibility,
    rather than a starting point.  Secondly,  in  failing  to  have  proper
    regard  to  the  medical  evidence   in   assessing   the   appellant's
    credibility.  In this context, the judge fell into the error identified
    by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367, as  her  adverse
    credibility findings were used  as  justification  for  dismissing  the
    medical evidence.  A third ground was not  pursued.   Finally,  it  was
    contended that the  Tribunal's  approach  to  the  appellant's  "health
    claim" and to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the rules was flawed.  The  judge
    had no regard to the diagnoses made by the medical experts  or  to  the
    country guidance case of GJ [2013] UKUT 319  (IAC).   The  private  and
    family life rights of  individuals  with  mental  health  issues  might
    determine appeals in their favour and the appellant's  health  was  not
    considered in the light of the practical absence of  treatment  in  Sri
    Lanka.  In considering paragraph 276ADE(vi), the test  applied  by  the
    judge was whether the appellant had no ties  remaining  in  Sri  Lanka,
    contained in the version of the rules in force before 28th  July  2014.
    She ought to have applied the test  contained  in  the  current  rules:
    whether there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into Sri Lanka following removal.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on 2nd February 2015.  In  a  rule  24
    response from the Secretary of State, the appeal  was  opposed  on  the
    basis that the judge considered all  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    accepted much of the medical  evidence.   The  grounds  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the carefully reasoned outcome.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.   Ms Benfield confirmed that reliance was placed  on  the  first,  second
    and fourth grounds but not the third.  The second ground concerned  the
    medical  evidence  and  the  judge's  approach  to  it.   The  findings
    regarding credibility appeared at paragraphs 20 to 26 of  the  decision
    and the  medical  evidence  was  properly  viewed  as  central  to  the
    assessment.  The decision contained  a  summary  of  that  evidence  at
    paragraphs 11 to 15 and the judge's findings appeared subsequently.  It
    was not clear how the medical evidence interacted with the  credibility
    assessment and the summary was not followed by a clear  application  of
    relevant findings, in the light of the apparent inconsistencies in  the
    appellant's account.  The judge concluded that the appellant's  account
    lacked credibility but there appeared to be  no  consideration  of  the
    diagnoses as part of that assessment.  The  judge's  approach  was  not
    consistent with guidance given in Mibanga.  Also relevant here was  the
    judgment in AM [2012] EWCA Civ 521, in  which  Rix  LJ  held  that,  in
    essence, medical reports amounted to  independent  evidence.   SS  (Sri
    Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 showed that a judge's decision not to accept
    expert or independent evidence might amount an error of law, where  the
    evidence was not approached with appropriate care.   Good  reasons  for
    rejecting medical evidence would be required.  Here, there was a  range
    of medical evidence, broadly consistent with the  appellant's  account.
    The judge gave no proper reasons why the evidence was not accepted,  as
    relevant to the assessment of credibility.

5.   At paragraph 26 of the decision, the judge did  consider  the  scarring
    report but, again, it was not clear that the findings she  made  formed
    part of the credibility assessment.  There was, rather, an  absence  of
    findings.

6.   So far as the human rights assessment was concerned, the  judge  failed
    to properly apply country guidance given in GJ.  Although she found, at
    paragraph 39.9, that it was highly unlikely that  the  appellant  would
    receive adequate psychiatric care in Sri Lanka,  there  was  no  proper
    discussion or assessment regarding his Article 3  case.   Although  the
    judge summarised some of the jurisprudence on Article 8,  there  was  a
    similar failure to consider the health case  in  that  context  and  no
    proper assessment of the appellant's case in relation to  his  physical
    and moral integrity.

7.   Mr Tufan said that the judge considered  all  the  evidence,  including
    the medical evidence, in the round and applied the ratio in Mibanga  at
    paragraph 27 of the decision.  So far as section 8 of the 2004 Act  was
    concerned, the judge again considered the evidence in the round and did
    not err.  She made findings which were open to her.

Conclusion on Error of Law

8.   We announced our decision at the hearing and  gave  a  summary  of  our
    reasons.  We find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
    no material error of law and shall stand.

9.   So far as the first ground is  concerned,  a  careful  reading  of  the
    decision shows that the judge properly took section 8 of the  2004  Act
    into account as a starting point but she did not make it a focal  point
    in assessing credibility.  It is clear from paragraph 21 that the judge
    did no more and no less than take into account the appellant's  failure
    to claim asylum in France or in the United Kingdom before his arrest as
    relevant factors.  It is clear from the remainder of the decision,  and
    particularly  paragraph  25,  which  contains  eighteen  sub-paragraphs
    containing the judge's assessment of the core claims, that she  reached
    her conclusions only  after  carefully  taking  into  account  all  the
    evidence before her.  Nor did the judge  err,  as  the  author  of  the
    grounds contends, in beginning the assessment with mention of section 8
    of the 2004 Act.   She  expressly  stated  at  paragraph  25  that  she
    considered the evidence as a whole and that her reasons were cumulative
    and set out in no particular order, and there is a similar statement by
    the judge at paragraph 27.

10.  So far as ground 2 is concerned, we find that the judge  did  not  fall
    into the trap identified by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga.  There was,
    as  Ms  Benfield  acknowledged,  a  detailed  summary  of  the  medical
    evidence, at paragraphs 11 to 15 of the decision.   That  evidence  has
    clearly been taken into account in the assessment  of  the  appellant's
    core claims.  We do not accept the contention in the grounds  that  the
    judge made adverse findings regarding  credibility  before  considering
    the medical evidence or Ms Benfield's submission to similar effect that
    there was a failure to factor in  the  medical  evidence.   Again,  the
    decision shows that the judge properly assessed all the evidence in the
    round.  She accepted much of the medical evidence,  as  is  clear  from
    paragraphs 26 (where she also noted that the  appellant's  account  was
    internally consistent) and 39.  She properly gave particular  attention
    to the scarring report, at paragraph 26, as this was a salient  feature
    of the appellant's claim to be at risk on return.

11.  So far as the health case is concerned, it  is  readily  apparent  from
    paragraph 32 in particular  that  the  judge  found  that  the  medical
    evidence simply did not show that the Article 3 threshold was  reached.
    In that paragraph, we observe that the judge has recorded that she  was
    told by the appellant's counsel  (not  Ms  Benfield)  that  a  case  on
    Article 3 based on depression and the risk of suicide was not  pursued.
    In any event, the judge's acceptance of the evidence  as  showing  that
    the appellant suffers from a depressive illness and her finding that it
    was highly improbable that he would be able to access psychiatric  help
    in Sri Lanka show that she took proper account of the country  guidance
    in GJ and the Upper Tribunal's conclusion in that case that  there  are
    only very limited psychiatric facilities available in Sri  Lanka.   The
    judge's conclusion that the  Article  3  case  could  not  succeed  was
    manifestly open to her, and entirely  consistent  with  guidance  given
    recently in GS (India) and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ  40.   Indeed,  that
    case bears on the submission  that  the  judge  erred  in  relation  to
    Article 8 in this context.  Having failed in relation to Article 3, the
    extent of the appellant's mental ill health was such that he could  not
    succeed under Article 8.  So far as family and private  life  ties  are
    concerned, it is clear  from  paragraph  38  that  the  judge  had  the
    appellant's case in mind.  Although he lives with his sister, there was
    nothing to show that they enjoy family life together.

12.  The appellant's depression and the extent of the treatment he  receives
    was taken into account by the judge  and  she  went  on  to  weigh  the
    competing interests, taking into account the immigration  rules  in  so
    doing.  So far as ground 4 is concerned, the judge made a finding  that
    the appellant retains social, cultural and family ties to Sri Lanka, at
    paragraph 33.  Even if she did err in applying paragraph 276ADE(vi)  in
    the form it took before 28  July  2014,  that  error  was  plainly  not
    material.  The appellant's parents remain in Sri Lanka and  he  himself
    was last present in the country in 2012, having grown up there.  In the
    light of the judge's findings, there were no prospects  of  success  in
    arguing that the appellant would face very significant obstacles to his
    integration into Sri Lanka,  following  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge's overall conclusion  that  he  could  not  succeed
    under Article 8 was, we find, clearly open to her.

13.  In summary, no material error of law has been shown in the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, which shall stand.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

14.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction  and  we  continue
it.  This direction will remain in force  until  varied  or  lifted  by  the
Upper Tribunal or an appropriate court.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


