
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: aa/03864/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at                             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 27th November 2015               |On: 4th December 2015                |


                                   Before:

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                      Robet SUBH (alias Manjeet Singh)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Amarjit Seehra (counsel instructed by Elthorne)
For the respondent: Mr David Clarke

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Anthony Metzer), sitting at Taylor House on 27 July, to
     a human rights appeal by a citizen of India, born  3  September  1979.
    The appellant  arrived  in  this  country  and  claimed  asylum  on  30
    September 2001, and was given temporary admission  overnight.  However,
    he failed to report back the next day (he says  on  the  advice  of  an
    'agent'), and his claim was refused  on  non-compliance  grounds  on  1
    November. Unsurprisingly, there was no appeal  against  that  decision;
    and the Home Office heard no more of him till  at  least  2010.  On  20
    February 2015 he was refused leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The  statute  law  the  judge  needed  to  apply  is  set  out  in  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as  amended  in  the
    Immigration Act 2014 , s. 117B: in particular

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)    a private life, or

             (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious

         (6) ...

 3. Although the judge referred in passing (at paragraph 18) to  "Paragraph
    [sic] 117A and 177B", and the need for proportionality under article  8
    of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  he  made  no  further
    reference at all  to  the  actual  requirements  of  the  law,  and  in
    particular to s. 117B (4), which on any view applied to this case,  and
    that was why the Home Office  were  given  permission  to  appeal.  The
    presenting officer who appeared  before  him  does  not  seem  to  have
    helped, by apparently agreeing with Miss Seehra that the only issue was
    delay: those outside this field might be surprised to  hear  that  this
    referred to the Home Office's delay in dealing  with  this  appellant's
    claim, rather than his own in making it.

 4. Quite apart from the Home Office's failure to find  this  appellant  or
    take any enforcement action against him,  following  their  refusal  of
    asylum in his absence on 1 November 2001, till he  got  in  touch  with
    them, hoping to benefit from the 'legacy policy', they did  nothing  at
    all about that, despite reminders from his solicitors, till 17 November
    2014, when they sent their first refusal  letter.  After  a  threat  of
    judicial review action, they made their final decision on  23  February
    2015.

 5. This was a dereliction of the Home Office's duty to the public, as well
    as to the appellant, and the judge was entitled to take it into account
    in assessing the case. However, his first duty was  to  apply  the  law
    made by Parliament. Though he alluded to it at various  points  in  his
    decision, as I have noted and Miss Seehra stressed, I  cannot  see  any
    reference to it in his decision paragraphs 18 or 19. The judge  appears
    to have treated the appellant's long residence in this country, and the
    Home Office's delay in dealing with his 2010 application,  as  if  they
    were decisive factors. However, the terms of s. 117B (4) make it  quite
    clear that they could be no such thing, and the judge was clearly wrong
    in law on the basis for his decision.

 6. It follows that the decision will have to be re-made. Both sides agreed
    that there would need to be  further  consideration  on  the  facts  of
    whether or not the appellant could meet  any  of  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules:  Miss  Seehra  very  properly  took  the
    responsibility for not referring the judge to these in the first place,
    and it is clear from the  line  of  decisions  following  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 that the  order  of  consideration  should  be  as
    follows:

      a) Can the appellant satisfy all  the  relevant  requirements  of  the
         Rules? If he is otherwise qualified,  then   paragraph  276ADE  (1)
         (vi), as to whether  "... there would be very significant obstacles
         to the applicant's integration into the country to which  he  would
         have to go if  required  to  leave  the  UK"  may  be  particularly
         relevant.

      b) If not, then would it be disproportionate to the legitimate purpose
         of  not to allow him to remain in this country?  In  this  context,
         the judge will need to bear in mind s.  117B,  in  particular  sub-
         sections (1) and (4). While it is not irrelevant that the appellant
         had got in touch with the Home Office in 2010, the  judge  will  no
         doubt note that, even where someone  has  'precarious'  leave,  and
         this appellant had no leave at all, then little  weight  is  to  be
         given to private life established at such a time.

Home Office appeal : decision set aside

Fresh hearing before First-tier Tribunal, not Judge Metzer




                               [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
