
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa035512015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th June 2016                         |On 10th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     BD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel instructed on behalf of
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Turkey.   In  the  light  of  the
    circumstances of the  Appellant's  claim  I  make  an  anonymity  order
    pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
    Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify him or any members of his family.   The
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  the  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of   court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Tobin) who, in a determination promulgated on 29th
    June 2015 dismissed his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of
    State made on 17th February 2015 to refuse his claim for asylum and  to
    give directions for his removal.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history can be summarised as follows.   The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18th February 2014,  travelling
    by aeroplane to an unknown country, where he boarded another plane  for
    London.  He claimed asylum on arrival in the  United  Kingdom  and  his
    claim for asylum was based upon his fear of persecution on  return  due
    to his ethnicity and on  the  basis  of  actual  or  imputed  political
    opinion; through his own history and that of his family.

 4. The Respondent refused  the  claim  made  by  the  Appellant  and  gave
    detailed reasons for refusal in the letter of 16th February 2015.   The
    Respondent's letter accepted that the Appellant  had  suffered  unequal
    treatment and discrimination on the basis of his ethnicity and religion
    but that such discrimination did not amount to persecution  (paragraphs
    40 - 41 of the refusal letter).

 5. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on  20th  May  2015.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 29th June  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed his appeal on the basis  that  he  failed  to  demonstrate  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that he would be at risk of persecution
    from the state or from non-state actors on  account  of  his  political
    opinion, ethnicity and his religion.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and  on  4th
    September 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted permission  for  the
    reasons set out in her decision.

 7. The matter came before the Upper Tribunal.  It was accepted  on  behalf
    of the Respondent that there were issues, as set out in the grounds and
    the grant of permission, that  the  judge  had  not  considered.   They
    related to findings of fact made relating to  the  position  of  family
    members and also events that had occurred  in  Turkey.   After  hearing
    from both representatives, I informed the parties that  I  had  reached
    the conclusion that the determination did disclose errors  of  law  and
    that the determination should  thereby  be  set  aside.   Both  parties
    submitted that in view of the nature of the errors of  law  identified,
    that the correct course to take would be to remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh and for findings of fact  to  be
    made on the relevant issues.

 8. I therefore set out below the reasons for reaching  the  decision  that
    the determination discloses errors of law.

 9. The first issue relates to the issue of risk on return  on  account  of
    his links to his family. It is plain from reading the witness statement
    at paragraph 23, in addition to the written material in the Appellant's
    bundle at pages 21 to 23 and 17 to 19, that evidence had been  provided
    relevant to this issue.  Whilst the judge made  reference  to  this  at
    [36] there were no findings made upon that evidence or upon that issue.
     Consequently the position  of  the  family  members  relevant  to  the
    assessment of risk upon return was not considered (see paragraph 120 of
    IK (returnees, records IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312).

10. The second issue relates to consideration of relevant country guidance.
     As set out in the grounds, the country guidance decisions of IA HC  RD
    HG (risk guidelines) Turkey CG [2003] UKAIT  0034  and  IK  (returns  -
    records IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312 were the  cases  relevant  to
    the issue on risk on return of  those  suspected  of  membership  of  a
    banned political party.  There is no reference in the determination  to
    the risk factors  set  out  in  those  determinations,  in  particular,
    reference to the individual's history and  what  information  would  be
    known of this Appellant both at the point of  return  or,  if  internal
    relocation was possible through registration in that area.  There  were
    no findings of fact made as to the existence of any records or  whether
    there was evidence relevant to the Appellant in any local records which
    might trigger interest in the Appellant  when  further  enquiries  were
    made.  Whilst the country guidance decisions are both now of some  age,
    they make reference to relevant issues to be  considered  when  looking
    holistically at the issue of risk on return.

11. The grounds also assert that the judge's findings at paragraphs  35  to
    38 are unclear and are not properly reasoned.  It is asserted that  the
    Secretary of State had accepted that the Appellant had suffered unequal
    treatment and discrimination on the basis of his ethnicity and religion
    are set out at paragraph 40 of the refusal letter and  that  the  judge
    made reference to this at paragraphs 18 to 24 but then went behind  the
    Respondent's concession by a finding made at paragraph 35.  Thus it was
    submitted that it was difficult to discern from  the  judge's  findings
    which aspects of the Appellant's historical account had  been  rejected
    and that proper reasons had not been given which were necessary in  the
    light of the concession made in the refusal letter.

12. Failure to follow a concession can amount to a legal error  (see  SS  v
    SSHD [2010] CSIH 72F).  However it is important to look at  whether  or
    not there was a concession made by the Secretary of State  and  if  so,
    the effect of that.  The refusal letter at paragraph  16  set  out  the
    incidents referred to by the Appellant in his interview.  At  paragraph
    17, the Secretary of State found that the Appellant's account of  these
    incidents of discrimination to be "detailed, internally consistent  and
    plausible".  However, the  paragraph  went  on  to  state  it  was  not
    possible to verify the occurrence  of  the  incidents  from  background
    information   therefore   this   aspect   of   the   account   remained
    unsubstantiated but would be considered under paragraph 399L at a later
    stage.  At paragraph 20 after considering paragraph 399L it was  stated
    by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  regarding   those   incidents   of
    discrimination, it had been concluded that the Appellant  had  met  all
    the necessary criteria of paragraph 399L  therefore  the  Secretary  of
    State gave the Appellant the "benefit of the doubt" (see paragraph  21.
    At  paragraph  40  of  the  refusal  letter,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered the assessment of future fear and made  reference  again  to
    the unequal treatment and discrimination from both the  population  and
    the authorities.  She  went  on  to  state  "therefore,  whilst  it  is
    accepted that you have suffered unequal treatment and discrimination on
    the basis of both your ethnicity and your religion, this treatment does
    not reach the level of persecution ...".

13. The determination deals with this issue at paragraphs  34  to  35.   At
    paragraph 34, the judge made reference to the Appellant having raised a
    number of incidents which he contends supported his case and the  judge
    recorded that "it is the Respondent's position that these are, at  most
    instances of discrimination (or less favourable treatment)  on  grounds
    of ethnicity or religion which fall far short of persecution".  However
    at paragraph 35 the judge makes reference to further evidence given  by
    the Appellant at the hearing and reached the conclusion that "the  bulk
    of  these  incidents  occurred  prior  to  the  Appellant's  two   visa
    applications and were not mentioned previously".  The judge went on  to
    state that the Appellant, when he made his claim  rested  primarily  on
    Article 8 and provided very little of the detail set out in his witness
    statement.  The judge went on to state "where the Appellant's statement
    and evidence referred to a matter raised in his recent application this
    has been considerably embellished, which has undermined the credibility
    of his evidence".

14. Having read the determination and  the  refusal  letter  alongside  the
    grounds, it does not  seem  to  me  that  the  judge  went  behind  the
    concession but that what the judge has stated at paragraph 35 was  that
    the new information that had been provided by  the  Appellant  was  not
    credible because of it having been provided at such a late stage. Those
    matters had not been put before the Secretary of State at a  time  when
    the concession was given.  Therefore whilst it was open to the judge to
    make findings on evidence that had not been considered by the Secretary
    of State,  if,  having  formed  a  view  which  was  contrary  to  that
    concession made by the Respondent, it was incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    advise the parties and for them to be given  the  opportunity  to  make
    submissions accordingly.  Furthermore, as the grounds are set  out,  it
    was difficult to discern from those paragraphs, which  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's historical account had been rejected and if it had been, to
    give reasons for reaching that conclusion.

15. In the light of those errors, I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal discloses material errors of law and should be  set
    aside.  As set out earlier it was agreed by consent between the parties
    that the appropriate course was for the decision to be  set  aside  and
    for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  there  to
    be an assessment of all the evidence to be considered including further
    oral evidence and for findings of fact to be made by reference  to  the
    country guidance decisions.  Whilst it is not the ordinary practice  of
    the Tribunal to remit cases  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  are
    reasons why in this case such course  has  been  adopted  having  given
    particular regard to the overriding objective and that there are issues
    of fact that are central to this appeal that require determination.

16. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  the
    case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  in  accordance
    with Section 12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  and
    Practice Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 10th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
