

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03791/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th April 2015                            |On 5th May 2015              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     N T
                           (Anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, counsel, instructed by HK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  direction  applies
       to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.





   2. This appellant was the second appellant in the case of GJ & others Sri
      Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and the second appellant in  the  Court  of
      Appeal case of MP and NT [2014] EWCA Civ  829.  The  Court  of  Appeal
      remitted the appeal of NT for reconsideration by the Upper Tribunal in
      the following terms:



          42. It is not disputed that this appellant's separation from  his
              family in the Chettikulam Camp occurred only two  days  after
              their arrival. Nor is it disputed that he was transferred  by
              the CID to the Anuradhapura Camp where  he  was  interrogated
              under  torture  many  times.  There  was   medical   evidence
              corroborative of his evidence  in  this  respect.  There  is,
              however, one feature of the  determination  of  the  UT  that
              causes me concern. It stated (paragraph 424):

                    "it appears from the evidence  that  [he]  was  not  of
                    sufficient concern in 2009 to  be  one  of  the  11,000
                    active LTTE cadres who were considered to  require  re-
                    education through the 'rehabilitation' programme before
                    being reintroduced into Sri Lankan civil society."


               This inference also played a  part  in  the  UT's  scepticism
              about evidence from his mother that the security  forces  had
              visited  the  family  home  looking  for  the  appellant  and
              describing him as an escapee and "hard core LTTE member". The
              UT (paragraph 422) referred to the appellant not having  been
              put into the rehabilitation programme in 2009 as having  some
              significance and justifying scepticism  in  relation  to  the
              mother's evidence.


          43. The problem with this approach  is  that  the  appellant  was
              released following payment  of  a  "huge"  bribe  only  three
              months after the commencement of his detention. The selection
              process for rehabilitation or prosecution  was  still  taking
              place at least until mid 2010. It seems to  me  that  the  UT
              failed to have regard to this fact when concluding  that  the
              appellant "was not of sufficient concern in 2009 to be one of
              the 11,000 active LTTE cadres who were considered to  require
              re-education through the 'rehabilitation' programme."  It  is
              plain that the authorities knew enough about the appellant to
              move him to Anuradhapura Camp within two days. It is also not
              without significance that his cousin was still  in  detention
              four years after the  end  of  the  civil  war.  The  UT  was
              entitled  to  attach  significance  to  the  fact  that   the
              appellant has not participated in Tamil  separatist  activity
              in  the  United  Kingdom  but  that  is   not   an   absolute
              prerequisite for protection under  the  guidance.   Paragraph
              356(7)(a) is in disjunctive form and embraces the possibility
              of an  applicant  who  has  or  is  perceived  as  having  "a
              significant role in... a renewal of  hostilities  within  Sri
              Lanka", absent  some  diaspora  activity,  even  though  such
              activity will usually  be  the  touchstone.   In  considering
              whether the appellant would be perceived by  the  Sri  Lankan
              authorities as indicating a present risk to the  unitary  Sri
              Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government, it  was  necessary
              for the Upper Tribunal to consider his case  on  the  correct
              factual basis. Whilst his case was not as strong as  that  of
              GJ (whose appeal was allowed),  I  consider  that  it  was  a
              material error of law for the UT to attach significance, both
              in relation to the appellant and  in  its  rejection  of  his
              mother's evidence, to  his  not  having  been  of  sufficient
              concern  to  be  one   of   those   considered   to   require
              rehabilitation. Accordingly, I would  allow  his  appeal  and
              remit his case to the UT for reconsideration.



   3. On 11th September 2014 the Upper Tribunal notified  the  parties  that
      they did not have full copies of evidence sought to be relied upon and
      a Case Management review hearing was listed  for  22nd  October  2014.
      Neither the appellant nor the solicitors then on the record  appeared.
      I made directions in the following terms:


             ....
             2. The basis of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal is to  be
                determined in the light of paragraphs 41 to 43 of the Court
                of Appeal judgment in MP & NT (Sri Lanka) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
                829 and paragraphs 399 to 418, 421, 425, 427 and 432 of  GJ
                and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]
                UKUT 00319 (IAC)


             3. No application having been made by either  party  to  admit
                further  oral  or  documentary  evidence,  none  shall   be
                admitted.


             4. No oral evidence.


             5. Skeleton arguments to be  exchanged  by  both  parties  and
                filed with the Tribunal no later than  28  days  after  the
                date of service of this order.


             6. This appeal to be listed for hearing on the first available
                date 14 days after exchange of skeleton arguments.


             7. At the hearing of this appeal,  oral  submissions  by  both
                parties to be limited to 30 minutes each  with  15  minutes
                reply.


   4. It subsequently  transpired  that  the  appellant  had  withdrawn  his
      instructions from his solicitors and his new (and current)  solicitors
      had not notified the Upper Tribunal they were now acting. The  current
      solicitors wrote to  the  Tribunal  stating  that  the  appellant  had
      further evidence he wished to rely upon and a hearing listed as a full
      hearing on 5th February 2015, at which both parties were  represented,
      was treated by me as a Case Management Hearing. I made  the  following
      directions


                1. The appellant to file and serve a witness statement to
                   stand as evidence in chief together with any additional
                   evidence sought to be relied upon by 4pm on 12th February
                   2015. Copies to be sent to the presenting Officer's Unit
                   marked the attention of Ms J Isherwood.
                2. The Secretary of State to file and serve any documents in
                   response or upon which they seek to rely by 4pm 19th
                   February 2015, if so advised.
                3. Tamil interpreter to be booked by the Tribunal
                4. Both parties to send in representatives' availability by
                   12 noon on 9th February 2015.
                5. The hearing will, if at all possible be scheduled for a
                   morning rather than afternoon court, for 2 � hours.


   5. The applicant did not comply with the directions. I was handed a small
      bundle of documents on the day of  the  hearing  including  a  witness
      statement of the appellant signed on 11th February  2015  and  various
      articles  and  photos  showing  the  applicant  at  demonstrations.  I
      directed that the senior partner furnish  an  explanation  by  4pm  on
      Thursday 30th April for what looked like  a  failure  to  comply  with
      directions.


   6. I admitted the documents together with a last minute  document  of  an
      article showing attendance at a demo.

   7. Mr Spurling sought an assurance, in the light of his  reading  of  the
      respondent's skeleton argument  dated  3rd  December  2014,  that  the
      credibility findings were retained and the findings were preserved.  I
      confirmed my understanding that the hearing would proceed as  set  out
      in my directions made on 11th September 2014 [2] as referred to in the
      remittal by the Court of Appeal. I confirmed that I would look at  the
      evidence in the round in the context of and through the prism  of  the
      findings made and preserved.

   Preserved findings

   8. The following is expressly preserved or was the subject of  undisputed
      findings in GJ:


   i. The appellant was found to be credible as  to  those  aspects  of  his
      account the First-tier Tribunal judge accepted.
  ii. He was rounded up with others  including  his  parents  and  taken  to
      Chettikulam camp. He initially tried to pass himself off as a civilian
      but was rapidly identified as an LTTE cadre and moved to  Anuradhapura
      Camp, where conditions were worse. His parents were not moved and were
      released quickly;
 iii. He was not ill treated at Chettikulam camp; if it was  there  that  he
      signed a Sinhalese document or documents it  was  "probably  a  benign
      document (perhaps a release or transfer to Anuradhapura camp),  not  a
      confession"; "The appellant's evidence that he signed such a  document
      both on his arrival and  after  his  release  indicates...that  it  is
      reasonably likely that this was a form of record keeping of his  entry
      and exit from the camp" (Chettikulam camp);
  iv. He did not sign any confession or  adverse  document  in  Anuradhapura
      detention camp;
   v. He was detained for 3 months and 10 days in Anuradhapura Camp and  ill
      treated;
  vi. He was released informally after payment of a huge bribe to the CID at
      Anuradhapura and left Sri Lanka on a passport  to  which  he  was  not
      entitled;
 vii. His activity as an LTTE cadre had started in September  2008  when  he
      was forcibly taken by  the  LTTE  and  initially  involved  checkpoint
      duties and then bunker digging and transporting wounded;
viii. There is likely to be a record of [his] presence  in  Chettikulam  and
      Anuradhapura camps;
  ix. One of the appellant's brothers  was  a  fighter  with  the  LTTE  and
      disappeared in the closing days of the civil war and is presumed dead;
   x. A cousin (the son of his father's brother whom  he  calls  uncle)  was
      detained and remained detained at the date that  GJ  was  heard  (last
      hearing date 19th April 2013);
  xi. The appellant has been in London for some time, a diaspora hotspot;
 xii. A group of officers, some carrying walkie talkies and some in uniform,
      visited his mother at the family home in Jaffna in September 2010  and
      asked his whereabouts; when she told them he was still  in  the  camps
      they told her there was no-one in the  camps  of  that  name  and  she
      better find him.
xiii. The process  of  obtaining  a  travel  document  will  mean  that  the
      authorities learn all they need to know about  his  background  before
      issuing a travel document.
 xiv. The authorities will know what separatist activities he  undertook  in
      Sri Lanka and what his activities have been in the UK.


   9.  GJ  [432],  having  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant   and
      submissions, referred to the appellant "not taken any part, still less
      a significant  part,  in  Tamil  separatist  activity  in  the  United
      Kingdom".


   Background


  10. The appellant had left Sri Lanka in  mid  September  2009,  about  two
      weeks after "release" from the camp. He arrived  in  the  UK  on  10th
      January 2011 and applied for asylum  on  7th  February  2011.  He  was
      screened on 15th February 2011 and substantively interviewed  on  23rd
      February 2011. His application for asylum was refused for reasons  set
      out in a letter dated 3rd March 2011 and a  removal  decision  served.
      His appeal against that removal decision on asylum grounds  was  heard
      by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  25th  May  2011  and  dismissed.  The
      appellant did not, in his  interviews  with  the  respondent,  or  his
      witness statement submitted in support of his claim for asylum  or  in
      oral evidence to the  First-tier  Tribunal  state  that  he  had  been
      involved in any  "diaspora  activities".  Permission  to  appeal  that
      decision was granted and in a determination dated 4th January 2012 the
      determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  set  aside  with  the
      findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge as  to  credibility  of  the
      claim preserved; the error of law being that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge's conclusion "that  there  was  no  record  of  the  appellant's
      detention was not a conclusion for which he gave  sufficient  reasons.
      Given his positive credibility  findings  he  should  have  considered
      whether or not the issue of the appellant's detention  would  come  to
      the attention of the authorities on his return". The  resumed  hearing
      was joined with the other matters (in what became the reported CG case
      of GJ) that were heard in March and April 2013.

  11. The First-tier Tribunal judge says:

         42. An important part of the appellant's evidence relates  to  the
             report from his mother that in September 2010 seven  or  eight
             people, some in uniform, had come  to  the  family  home  with
             walkie-talkies. According to the appellant his mother had told
             these men that the appellant was in one of the camps.  However
             they had told her there was no one of that name in  the  camps
             and that she had better find him. These  officers,  presumably
             having checked the camp records on their walkie- talkies,  had
             not established that the appellant was in the camps. But  they
             had also significantly  not  identified  any  record  that  he
             appellant was an escapee who was being looked for.


         43.  Furthermore  the  appellant  in  his  witness  statement  had
             concluded that the authorities would now know as a result that
             he was missing. But if that is the case they  clearly  had  no
             previous record that he had absconded from custody.


         44. ....And although that the authorities records  are  considered
             to be sophisticated, it is entirely apparent that he appellant
             in this case  does  not  have  a  record.  He  was  one  of  a
             relatively large  [words  missing]  2010  those  visiting  the
             family home clearly had not been able to establish  that  here
             was any record of him.


         45. I do accept that he was detained for three months and severely
             ill treated, as corroborated by the medical report.  But  that
             does not  mean  that  he  is  presently  of  interest  to  the
             authorities. He was never a significant supporter of the LTTE,
             and  indeed  by  his  own  admission  he  had  been   forcibly
             recruited, like many others, into the organisation  after  the
             ceasefire during the period leading  up  to  the  end  of  the
             conflict.

  12. In oral evidence before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant relied  upon
      a witness statement (the copy of which in my bundle was undated) and a
      supplementary witness statement dated 7th December  2011.  Neither  of
      these witness statements referred at all to "diaspora" activity.


  13. In a witness statement, signed on 11th February 2015,  filed  for  the
      hearing before me,  the  appellant  set  out  his  claimed  "diaspora"
      activity and gave oral evidence of this and the claimed visits by  the
      authorities to his mother.


   Diaspora activity


  14. The appellant claims in his most recent evidence to have been involved
      in diaspora activities since 2011, the first such instance  being  his
      attendance at a Heroes Day demonstration in November 2011. Since  then
      he has attended demonstrations and meetings. His evidence was that  at
      one such event in January 2012 he gave his mobile number to one of the
      organisers and since then, when there is an event, he receives a  text
      and he goes to the event and to meetings dealing with that  event;  is
      given jobs such as marshall, taking  banners  or  water  or  leaflets.
      There are a number of photos of him at the  demonstrations  wearing  a
      reflective jacket and/or with a loud hailer. The  appellant  confirmed
      in oral evidence that he was not involved with the actual planning  of
      events but was someone who regularly  participated  in  them  and  was
      regularly called upon to undertake various tasks associated with large
      scale events.


  15. He said he had not gone to any events prior to his First-tier Tribunal
      hearing (May 2011) because he had only been in the UK a short time.

  16. His explanation for not referring to any diaspora activities prior  to
      the witness statement dated 11th February 2015 was  that  his  lawyers
      had not asked him about any such activities and it had not occurred to
      him to tell his lawyers about them. There was no witness statement  or
      other evidence from the organisations he  claimed  would  ask  him  to
      carry out duties such as marshalling. He said he had  not  known  such
      evidence would be necessary and he had not asked them for a letter  or
      witness statement.

   Visits by the authorities to his former home in Sri Lanka

  17. In his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant said that
      his mother had told him, after he came to London, that the authorities
      had visited the house in Jaffna in September 2010 and asked to see the
      household ration book. They had seen that three of her six  children's
      names had been crossed out and his  mother  had  told  them  that  her
      daughter was abroad, one son was missing and that he,  the  appellant,
      was in the camps. Three children remained  on  the  ration  book  -  2
      daughters and one son.


  18. In his witness statement dated 7th December 2011  the  appellant  says
      that his mother told him that the authorities had come looking for him
      3 times since the hearing in May 2011.  In her  affidavit  dated  30th
      November 2011, his mother says

       .....
       (9) The Sri Lankan state security and  paramilitary  personnel  have
       come Three times so far in search of my son  N...  since  03rd  July
       2011. They accused my son of being an LTTE  member  and  an  escapee
       from detention and is wanted for further questioning.
       (10) The State Security officials who came in search of my son  N...
       On 3rd July 2011 were very abusive and they harassed and  threatened
       Me and kept asking abot  my  son  N...  and  Two  of  them  were  in
       camouflage dresses while the rest were in plan cloths.  few  of  tem
       Were armed and had walkie-talkies.
       (11) on the night of 27th July 2011 again eight men came  in  search
       Of my Son N...   ..........They demanded me to report on  30th  July
       2011 at 10.30am at the neighbouring Army Camp....
       (12) I reported to the sentry guards at the said Army camp  on  30th
       July 2011 at 10.20am after  having  informed  to  the  Grama  Sevaka
       Officer (Village headman) of our area..........One officer spoke  to
       me In fluent Tamil. He was accusing my son N...as a hard  core  LTTE
       Member and a jail breaker..... They demanded that I  Should  somehow
       bring and surrender my son N... to them within a month or  otherwise
       they threatened that they will come and arrest my other children  at
       home.....
       (13) on the following day I again consulted with the  local  village
       headman and an Attorney-at-Law and according  to  their  advise  and
       guidance we shifted from our own house to another place where I live
       now.
       ....
       [sic]



  19. A letter from S H K (LLB) dated 5th December 2011 confirmed  that  the
      appellant's mother had instructed him after she claimed  to  have  had
      several visits from the authorities in search of her son and  that  he
      had been forced to sign a confession statement. He states he had  made
      a few enquiries and could confirm that N was detained by the  security
      forces from May  to  August  2009.  He  states  he  "understands"  the
      security forces are "highly interested" in N. He goes on to  state  "I
      believe that since [N] was not  released  officially  the  authorities
      could have listed him as an 'escapee' from  their  custody  and  might
      have alerted the ports of  entry/exit".  The  balance  of  the  letter
      refers to matters he has been told by the appellant's mother.


  20. A letter from Grama Sevaka Niladhari dated 1st December 2011 describes
      what he has been told by the appellant's mother and  his  advice  that
      she seek the assistance/legal advice from an attorney-at-law. He gives
      her address as she gives it in her affidavit, which is the address she
      says she moved to after the claimed incidents in July  2011.  He  says
      she is a permanent resident in his area, that she  approached  him  in
      July  and  that  he  "will  take  up  the  matter  with  the  relevant
      authorities in [his] capacity  as  a  Grama  Sevaka  Niladhari/village
      Headman of the area". He goes on to state that he took up  the  matter
      with the  authorities  and,  in  addition  to  setting  out  that  the
      appellant surrendered to the army,  was  taken  to  Chettikulam  camp,
      arrested and taken to Anuradhapura camp two days later he  states  the
      following:

             ...is alleged to have made a self confession statement  during
             his investigation which is recorded in Sinhalese language  and
             duly signed by him


             .....went missing from their custody...


             .....is listed as an  'escapee'  and  is  wanted  for  further
             questioning...


             .....[brother] also went missing since  May  2009  from  Vanni
             district at the height of the final war.


  21. There was some confusion in the appellant's oral evidence over  dates.
      He said that he continues to have contact with  his  mother  and  last
      spoke with her on the previous Sunday. His mother had moved after  the
      visits by the security forces in 2011. He said that in addition to the
      incidents his mother refers to in her affidavit, the  security  forces
      had visited her home in 2013 and 2014 looking for him. He said that he
      knew this because the people now living in their old home had told his
      mother and she had told him. He said he had not referred  to  this  in
      his witness statement of  15th  February  2015  because  he  had  been
      concentrating on his activities in the UK. His mother had not produced
      another affidavit because he didn't think it was serious  and  he  had
      already given her statement.


  22. There is no information in any of the affidavits about the conflict in
      address of the mother. The appellant was adamant in his evidence  that
      his mother had moved after the claimed  July  2011  incident  and  the
      address she wrote from and the addresses given by Mr K and  the  Grama
      Sevaka were her 'new' address to which she had moved.


   Discussion on the evidence


  23.  There  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  appellant  has  been  going  on
      demonstrations on a fairly regular basis since his appeal to the First-
      tier Tribunal was dismissed and that he has been photographed  with  a
      loudspeaker. I accept that he was  allocated  tasks  at  some  of  the
      events such as handing out leaflets, taking banners  to  the  demo  or
      bringing water. These were  tasks  that  were  given  to  him  by  the
      organisers of the events. He was asked to do things and he  did  them.
      He did not, on  his  evidence,  participate  in  the  decision  making
      process either in terms of who should do  what  or  whether  an  event
      should be held, how or where or why it should be held. He is  no  more
      than a willing volunteer who essentially did what he was asked to  do.
      He did this for three separate  organisations  and  gave  no  evidence
      whatsoever of his understanding of the different organisations  ideals
      or political ethos. He gave no indication  whatsoever  of  whether  he
      agreed with one or other more or less than another. The only  question
      he was asked about why he did these things was  replied  to  in  vague
      general terms that there are Tamils in Sri Lanka, he is a Tamil and he
      cannot give up  his  feelings  for  the  Tamils.  These  are  not  the
      sentiments of a political activist committed to  Tamil  separatism  or
      working towards the destabilisation of the unitary Sri  Lankan  State.
      Even if photographed by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  (which  it  is
      reasonable to assume he has been)  given  the  extent  of  Sri  Lankan
      intelligence it is inconceivable that it would not  be  known  to  the
      authorities (assuming he is identifiable) that he was no more  than  a
      person who undertook minor tasks in relation to events, when asked  to
      do so. It is inconceivable  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
      consider him to be an activist working  for  Tamil  separatism  merely
      because of these activities. Ms Isherwood took  issue  with  the  late
      disclosure of his activities and that he had only started to take part
      in such activities after his appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      been dismissed. Whilst that is correct and his activities do smack  of
      an attempt to bolster his claim, even at its highest, namely  that  he
      was  asked  to  do  the  various  jobs,  those  activities   are   not
      commensurate with the descriptive role submitted  by  Mr  Spurling  as
      working  for  Tamil  separatism  and  (or  indeed  'or')  seeking   to
      destabilise the State.


  24. Mr Spurling rightly relied  upon  the  passage  of  time  where  there
      appeared  to  be  confusion  and  inconsistency  in  the   appellant's
      evidence. He reiterated that the appellant had never  claimed  he  had
      signed a 'confession' but that he  had  signed  a  document  that  was
      either blank or written in a language he did not  understand.  He  had
      signed this at Chettikulam  (the  first  camp)  and  the  findings  of
      previous determinations had been that if  such  a  document  had  been
      signed it was benign. He was not submitting, and the appellant was not
      claiming, that he had signed a confession  statement  at  Anuradhapura
      camp. I accept this submission. The appellant's evidence on  this  has
      been broadly consistent and  I  see  no  reason  to  differ  from  the
      Tribunal's earlier finding that if such a document were signed it  was
      benign. Although the issue of the document was not a  matter  directly
      referred to by the Court of Appeal in remitting this  appeal  back  to
      the Tribunal, it is of some relevance in determining the assessment of
      the evidence of the appellant's  mother,  the  lawyer  and  the  Grama
      Sevaka Niladhari


  25. The lawyer's letter is, as rightly pointed out by Ms Isherwood,  to  a
      great extent  merely  reciting  what  he  says  he  was  told  by  the
      appellant's mother  that  in  turn  was  what  she  was  told  by  the
      appellant. Although Ms Isherwood made much of  the  reference  to  the
      signed confession which was not in fact the appellant's evidence, I do
      not place weight on this - it is quite possible that the mother having
      been told by her son that he  had  been  forced  to  sign  a  document
      extrapolated that to mean he had been forced to sign a confession  and
      passed that information to the lawyer. Of more  concern  is  that  the
      lawyer states he had made a few enquires but does not state to whom he
      made those enquiries. He does  not  say  whether  he  spoke  with  the
      authorities at the camp(s), the security forces,  the  police  or  the
      courts. His statement that he 'understands' the  security  forces  are
      interested does not give any indication why he 'understands' this.  Is
      it because of what he was told and if so by whom? Is it because he has
      made assumptions? If so on what basis? He  states  that  the  security
      forces are 'highly interested' but does not explain what is  meant  by
      this. Is it because the appellant is being treated as an  escapee  and
      they wish to make further enquires as to how he escaped or because  of
      his previous LTTE connections? He does not say. He does not say why or
      how he 'understands' that, after some two  years,  a  former  forcibly
      recruited LTTE member who was digging bunkers and carrying wounded  in
      the latter stages of the civil war with no previous  involvement  with
      the LTTE other than as an employee when the LTTE were  in  control  of
      the area he lived in,  would  be  someone  the  security  forces  were
      'highly interested' in. This seems strange given that the  appellant's
      brother was 'missing' and there seems to have been no  interest  taken
      in his whereabouts despite him being a fighter for the LTTE.  Although
      he is presumed dead, there has been no  evidence  whether  this  is  a
      presumption by the  family  or  by  the  authorities;  a  minor  point
      however.


  26. Mr K further states that the appellant "could" have been listed as  an
      escapee; not that he was listed as an escapee. If Mr K  had  made  the
      enquiries he claims to have made such that he  is  able  to  draw  the
      conclusion that the security forces  are  "highly  interested"  it  is
      inconceivable that he would not know whether or not the appellant  had
      in fact been listed as an  escapee.  Similarly  he  would  have  known
      whether or not the ports had in fact been alerted.


  27. The letter from the  Grama  Sevaka  Niladhari  was  criticised  by  Ms
      Isherwood on the basis that it was hearsay.  Again  there  is  nothing
      wrong with the Grama Sevaka Niladhari recounting what he has been told
      by the appellant's mother;  he  has  not  spoken  with  the  appellant
      directly and can only relate what he has been told which  is  what  he
      does. He also refers to having taken the matter up with "the  relevant
      authorities". He does not state who they were or  the  status  of  the
      person or persons he spoke to but as a result of  those  conversations
      he confirms the  dates  the  appellant  was  in  the  camp,  that  the
      appellant is alleged to have signed a confession, that he is listed as
      an escapee and wanted for  further  questioning  and  his  brother  is
      missing. The appellant's evidence is not that he signed a  confession.
      The Grama Sevaka is confirming an allegation  that  a  confession  was
      signed. What  does  that  mean  given  he  has  confirmed  this  after
      investigation with un-named relevant authorities? Either the "relevant
      authorities" would confirm that a confession had been signed  or  not;
      or the people he  spoke  to  were  not  in  a  position  to  give  him
      information.  As  to  being  listed  as  an  escapee,   this   is   in
      contradiction to the investigations made by the  lawyer  who  says  he
      'could' have been listed as an escapee. There is no indication whether
      the un-named person the Grama Sevaka spoke  to  had  higher  authority
      than the un-named person the lawyer spoke to or why there is different
      information. There is  no  indication  that  the  missing  brother  (a
      fighter) was being sought.


  28. The Grama Sevaka also describes the mother as a permanent resident  in
      his administrative area. This appears to indicate  that  although  she
      may have moved she did not move out of his administrative area because
      he considered himself responsible for her and able  to  make  relevant
      enquiries.


  29. The appellant in his oral evidence refers to two more visits from  the
      security forces in 2013 and 2014. By the  time  of  these  visits  his
      mother had moved but his evidence was that the present  occupants  had
      told his mother of these visits. There was no  evidence,  despite  his
      mother having been told that she had to produce the appellant within a
      month failing which her other children would be arrested  and  because
      of this she moved, of any visit between July 2011 and a visit in 2013,
      some two years later. Then despite his mother no longer  living  there
      they visited again a year later. And despite the extent of Sri  Lankan
      intelligence and despite the current occupants clearly  knowing  where
      the mother lived and despite the Grama Sevaka knowing where she  lived
      and that he had made enquiries on her behalf (and she appeared  to  be
      living in the same administrative area), the security forces  did  not
      visit her where she is now living. There  was  no  evidence  that  the
      Grama Sevaka had been asked anything.

  30. It is inconceivable that the current occupants would  not  tell  those
      making enquiries where the mother was now living - if  only  to  avoid
      being tainted by possible adverse repercussions if they were living in
      the house of former LTTE activists who were wanted by the authorities.

  31. Dr Gunaratna's evidence to the Upper Tribunal ([273]  of  GS)  to  the
      effect that the GOSL  was  more  selective  now  as  to  who  requires
      rehabilitation was accepted. There had been a  qualitative  change  in
      the purpose of rehabilitation ([318] of GS).  Reference was made in GS
      that the GOSL now looks abroad to the diaspora and its activities  for
      any risk of resurgence or of the conflict resuming  with  the  country
      ([277] of GS). [306] of GS refers to the debriefing  by  the  security
      services of thousands of Tamils at the end of the civil  war,  to  the
      GOSL's access to sophisticated, high quality intelligence that enabled
      it to evaluate and assess risk posed by  particular  individuals  both
      within and without Sri Lanka. [311] and  [349]  of  GS  refer  to  the
      current concerns and that connections with the LTTE are of concern  as
      regards whether the person is a destabilising threat in post  conflict
      Sri Lanka. Rehabilitation applied to all identified cadres at the  end
      of the war but that is not the purpose of rehabilitation now.  Now  it
      is used where a person is considered to be involved  in  the  possible
      resurgence of the LTTE. As stated in [351] of GS:


             "Sri Lankan Tamils returning form the  diaspora  who  did  not
             undergo rehabilitation during 2009 - 2011  are  not  for  that
             reason at risk now, unless they can be shown  to  come  within
             the risk factors presently identified".



  32. Although it is accepted that the appellant's  mother  was  visited  in
      2010, it cannot be concluded on the lower standard, that the visit was
      because he was known to be an escapee. That was not the evidence given
      and had those who visited her thought or had a record that he  was  an
      escapee it is inconceivable that they would not have said  so  to  her
      and would not have said to her that this was why he was being  sought.
      It is inconceivable that had such been said to her that she would  not
      have told the appellant. What was said was that there was  no  one  in
      the camps of that name. If there had been and he had escaped it  would
      have been said to her - harbouring or failing to  produce  an  escapee
      could result in far more serious punishment. It is inconceivable  that
      having not been recorded as an escapee in 2010 (a year  after  he  had
      escaped) he would then be recorded as an escapee the following year.


  33. Mr Spurling submits that transfer to Anuradhapura camp resulted in one
      of two things only - being sent for rehabilitation or prosecution  and
      that there was no third way of release. There was no evidence to  that
      effect. The evidence was that on being identified as  an  LTTE  cadre,
      transfer took  effect.  Background  evidence  indicates  that  release
      through bribery does not mean that a person is recorded as an escapee;
      the person or persons who take the bribe  will  seek  to  cover  their
      tracks.

  34. Taking all of these matters into account and  bearing  fully  in  mind
      that the appellant's account of detention and transfer to Anuradhapura
      camp was accepted and  that  he  was  ill  treated  and  tortured  and
      accepting that if he signed a document it  was  benign  and  accepting
      that his brother is missing and a cousin remains in detention and that
      his mother was visited by the  security  forces  in  2010,  I  am  not
      satisfied to the lower standard of proof, that the appellant's  mother
      was visited by security forces in 2011, 2013 or 2014.

  35. Nor am I  satisfied  that  the  security  forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities  have  recorded  the  appellant   as   an   escapee   from
      Anuradhapura camp. There was, in 2010, no record of him being  in  the
      camp; nor a record of him having escaped.

  36. The finding that the security forces visited the mother  in  2010  was
      preserved and I do not go behind that. But when  considered  with  the
      evidence as a whole I am not satisfied that  the  visit  was  anything
      more than the security forces checking on the whereabouts of  a  young
      man who had been known,  by  his  own  admission,  to  have  had  some
      involvement with the LTTE in the very latter stages of the  war.  Such
      interest as  there  was  was  minimal  because  his  mother  was  not,
      according to her evidence visited again  for  nearly  a  year  in  any
      event, although I am not satisfied that visit took place in any event.

  37. Mr Spurling submits that each  of  the  elements  of  the  appellant's
      accepted account may not, on their own, be  sufficient  to  sustain  a
      finding that the appellant is at risk on return to Sri Lanka but  that
      the combination of his specific circumstances are such that he  is  at
      risk.


  38. [307] and [308] of GS sets out the process of  obtaining  a  Temporary
      Travel Document. Of critical importance is the  underlying  acceptance
      that an individual cannot be expected  to  lie  in  order  to  protect
      himself from the threat of persecution. TTDs are issued from  Colombo;
      it is more likely  than  not  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  can
      distinguish those waging an alternative war  and  those  who  are  not
      involved with attempts to revive the LTTE in the diaspora  (see  [323]
      of GS). From the high level of intelligence the security services have
      of individuals both within Sri Lanka and in the diaspora,  it  can  be
      assumed that the authorities are aware that the appellant was  in  the
      camps and is now in the UK; has  attended  demonstrations  and  handed
      around leaflets and shouted using a loudhailer etc. It can be  assumed
      that the authorities know and have a record of his activities for  the
      LTTE - including manning a checkpoint when  the  LTTE  controlled  the
      area and his forcible recruitment to dig bunkers and help with wounded
      in the closing stages of the war; of his brother's  disappearance  and
      the incarceration of his cousin.


  39. It cannot be concluded that the applicant's activities in the  UK  are
      significant  political  activities  that  would  attract  the  adverse
      attention of the GOSL as being intended to destabilise the State.

  40. Even though the applicant had been in the camps and not  gone  through
      the rehabilitation process, the concern of the GOSL now  is  not  what
      happened then but what an individual might do in the future. As  [351]
      of GS says, Tamils returning  from  the  diaspora  now  who  have  not
      undergone rehabilitation are not for that reason at risk.

  41. The applicant would not have to lie or dissemble as to his  activities
      both in the closing stages of the war, in terms of his sojourn in  the
      UK or his attendance at meetings in the UK. He is, quite  simply,  not
      involved in activities at anything  approaching  a  significant  level
      designed to threaten the  Sri  Lankan  State  and  the  activities  he
      undertook in 2009 are now of little interest to the GOSL.

  42. If, because he is known as a former  LTTE  cadre  returning  from  the
      diaspora, he is placed on a watch list, that is not persecutory. There
      is no credible evidence that anything more than that would  happen  to
      him.

  43. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that the appellant  would  not
      be at real risk of persecution if removed to Sri Lanka. His appeal  is
      dismissed.


          Decision

          I dismiss the appeal

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).








                                    Date 3rd May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
