
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03697/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |       Decision & Reasons        |
|                                           |Promulgated                      |
|On 20th January 2016                       |       On 22nd February 2016     |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Y N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Coleman, Counsel for S Satha & Co, Solicitors,
London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  18th  May  1985.   He
    appealed against the Respondent's decision of 20th May 2014 refusing to
    grant him asylum in the United Kingdom.  His appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Andonian on 16th October 2015.   He  allowed
    the appeal in a decision promulgated on 27th October 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Heynes  on  12th  November
    2015.  The permission refers to the Grounds of application which  state
    that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  the
    Appellant credible and did not follow the  relevant  country  guidance.
    The permission states that whilst the judge  is  not  required  in  his
    decision to deal with every point raised, the refusal letter sets out a
    number of significant credibility issues which have not been  addressed
    beyond dismissing them en bloc  as  being  of  little  substance.   The
    permission states that the decision does not address the  risk  factors
    identified in the country guidance and that these are  arguable  errors
    of law.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that the credibility  issues  in  this
    claim were not properly dealt with at paragraphs 3 to 5 of  the  First-
    tier Judge's decision.  He submitted that the judge  failed  to  follow
    the country guidance case of GJ and Others Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC).

 6. The Presenting Officer referred me to paragraph 9 of the decision which
    states "I find the Respondent's challenges to the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's evidence to be of little substance".  He submitted that the
    refusal  letter  in  this  case  was  extremely  detailed  relating  to
    credibility and the inconsistencies in key  parts  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence.  At paragraph 25 of the refusal letter reference is  made  to
    the Appellant's arrest in 2005 and the inconsistencies in his  evidence
    about this.  Paragraph 26 of the refusal letter refers to  his  release
    after that  arrest.   He  was  arrested  without  charge  and  with  no
    reporting conditions.  The Respondent  considered  this  alongside  the
    background information about those arrested for suspected connection to
    the LTTE and makes mention of the Appellant's lack of information about
    his release, which led to the Respondent coming to the conclusion  that
    this did not happen.

 7. I was referred  to  paragraph  32  of  the  refusal  letter  about  the
    Appellant's detention in 2013 in Colombo after being rounded up and the
    Appellant's explanation of why he was detained.  This paragraph  states
    that his explanation does not correspond to the exit procedures at  Sri
    Lankan airports, when his visit to Thailand in 2010, and his return  to
    Colombo on his own passport is taken into account.  At paragraph 34 the
    refusal letter states that the fact that he was able to leave Sri Lanka
    in 2010 on his own passport is inconsistent with his claim that he  was
    arrested because of his previous activities and that he is a person  of
    interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

 8. At paragraph 35  of  the  refusal  letter  reference  is  made  to  the
    Appellant stating that his name was given to the authorities by  people
    who were caught trying to leave for India in 2011.  When he  was  asked
    why the Sri Lankan authorities waited until 2013 to arrest him he  said
    that his previous evidence was wrong, it was not 2011.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that these are not trivial issues  and
    the judge did not  deal  with  them  adequately  when  considering  the
    Appellant's credibility.

10. The Presenting Officer went on to deal with the case of GJ  and  Others
    submitting that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  only  interested  in
    people who are carrying out activities related to Tamil separatism  and
    who are trying to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  State.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  this
    Appellant was involved in any such activities and even if he  is  found
    to be credible, this would not lead to the conclusion that he might  be
    on a "stop" list at the airport.  He submitted that this  was  only  an
    assertion by the Appellant.

11. I was referred to paragraph 6 of the decision which makes mention of  a
    "stop" list and the categories of  people  who  are  at  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.  The  judge  states
    in this paragraph that only individuals  who  are  perceived  to  be  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state are at risk  and
    then states "The Appellant before  me  is  such  an  individual".   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that there is no reasoning by the judge as
    to how he came to this conclusion and there was no evidence before  the
    judge to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  is  such  an  individual.   He
    submitted that the reasoning in the  decision  is  inadequate  and  the
    decision is therefore unsustainable.

12. Counsel made his submissions on behalf  of  the  Appellant,  submitting
    that the only fair criticism of this decision is that it is very short,
    but he submitted it is not unsafe or unsound and there is  no  material
    error of law therein.

13. He submitted that this Appellant is extremely vulnerable and the  judge
    accepted this and dealt with it.  I was referred to paragraph 1 of  the
    decision which refers to the Appellant being  dazed  and  he  submitted
    that the judge took into account  the  Appellant's  mental  state  when
    considering his risk on return.  He submitted that at  paragraph  2  of
    the decision the judge states that the Appellant's profile goes to  the
    core of the claim.  He refers to the extensive medical evidence and the
    two expert reports, being a psychiatric report by  Dr  Dhumad  and  the
    report on his physical condition and his scars by Professor Lingam.   I
    was referred to paragraph  14  of  the  decision  which  refers  to  Dr
    Dhumad's report and to the appellant having  depressive  episodes  with
    psychotic symptoms and experiencing PTSD.  The report  states  that  in
    the context of deportation, because of the appellant's PTSD,  the  risk
    of suicide is increased.  Dr Dhumad states that the impact of a  return
    to Sri Lanka will affect  the  appellant's  mental  health  badly.   He
    states that the Appellant is mentally unstable  and  Counsel  submitted
    that the appellant was  unable  to  give  evidence  at  the  First-tier
    hearing because of this.

14. I was then referred to the report by Professor Lingam which states that
    the Appellant was incapable of giving  a  consistent  account  and  was
    unable to recollect dates and events.  Counsel submitted that the First-
    tier Judge took all of this into account and also took into account the
    scars on the Appellant's body, which the report states  are  consistent
    with trauma and torture.  The judge also referred to the NHS letters on
    file.

15. Counsel submitted that the refusal is based on inconsistencies and poor
    recollection at his interview.  Because of these his evidence was found
    to lack credibility, but Counsel submitted that  the  judge  considered
    this  in  the  light  of  the  medical  evidence  and  found  that  the
    credibility findings of the Respondent were of little substance because
    of his health issues.

16. Counsel then referred to the evidence from the  Appellant's  cousin  at
    the First-tier hearing.  He submitted that the judge  was  entitled  to
    take this into account  and  reference  is  made  in  the  decision  at
    paragraph 11 to the report of  the  doctor  from  Harley  Street  which
    states that the Appellant is socially isolated and  is  suffering  from
    clinical depression.

17. He submitted that the judge properly assessed the Appellant  and  found
    him, because of these medical issues, to be at risk on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka, particularly if he is interrogated at the airport.

18. With regard to the said case of GJ and Others  Counsel  submitted  that
    the judge refers to this case at  paragraph  3  of  the  decision.   He
    submitted that this is an Appellant who was arrested  post-conflict  in
    2013, which was after the said case of GJ and Others  was  heard.   The
    judge found that because of the Appellant's most recent arrest in  2013
    he will be at risk on  return  and  he  submitted  that  based  on  the
    evidence, including the objective evidence, before the  judge,  he  was
    entitled to make this finding.

19. I was referred to paragraph 4 of the decision in which the judge refers
    to a "stop" list.  I was asked to find that the judge was correct  when
    he stated that because of the Appellant's adverse profile  he  will  be
    arrested and detained on his return to Sri  Lanka  and  will  be  on  a
    "stop" list.  He found this  to  be  foreseeable  and  found  that  the
    authorities will do a background check on the Appellant on  return  and
    he will have to give details of  his  address  in  Sri  Lanka  when  he
    arrives at the airport.  Counsel submitted that at paragraph 5  of  the
    decision the judge clearly understands who is at risk on return to  Sri
    Lanka and has considered all the evidence before him.

20. At paragraph 6 the judge goes through the terms of the said case of  GJ
    and Others. He refers to returnees being stopped  at  the  airport  and
    finds that the Appellant will be perceived to be  a  threat  on  return
    because he assisted in an escape and because of this the Appellant will
    be perceived to be a Tamil activist in the diaspora.  The  judge  finds
    that this Appellant will be perceived to have  a  significant  role  in
    relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a
    renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.  He submitted that there is no
    error in paragraph 6 of the decision.  The Appellant has been  arrested
    three times and  the  judge  has  clearly  considered  the  Appellant's
    situation against the background material.  He submitted that the judge
    has made clear reference to the country guidance case law and has  also
    made findings on the Appellant's mental health and  vulnerability.   He
    submitted that there is no material error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision.  He was entitled to make the findings he did.

21. I put to Counsel that in 2013 the Appellant was merely  arrested  in  a
    round-up and he was later released on  reporting  conditions.   Counsel
    submitted that the judge was aware of  this,  but  believed  that  this
    arrest in 2013 was due to the fact that he had  been  arrested  in  the
    past and had travelled to an LTTE area.  He submitted  that  the  judge
    finds the Appellant to be credible.  I was referred to paragraph 12  of
    the decision and Counsel submitted that the  judge  has  used  the  low
    standard of proof correctly and finds that the Appellant has discharged
    the burden of proof.  Counsel submitted that at paragraph 6  the  judge
    states that persons whose names appear on a computerised  "stop"  list,
    accessible at the airport, comprising a  list  of  those  against  whom
    there is an extant court order or arrest warrant, are also at risk.  He
    finds this applies to this Appellant.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    believes that this Appellant will be seen to be a threat to  the  State
    and will be stopped at the airport and is  likely  to  be  ill-treated.
    Counsel submitted that this Appellant may not be a threat to the single
    state, but the judge finds that on return he will be perceived to be  a
    threat to the single state.  The judge has explained why he finds  this
    and the grounds are merely a disagreement with the judge's decision.

22. The Presenting Officer again referred me to paragraph 6 of the decision
    and the general statement about the said case of  GJ  and  Others.   He
    again submitted that there is no reasoning of the judge's finding  that
    the Appellant will be perceived to be a threat to the integrity of  Sri
    Lanka as a single state.  I was referred to paragraph 8 of the decision
    in which the judge gives weight to the evidence of Professor Gunaratna.
     He submitted that the judge has found the appellant  to  be  credible,
    but he has ignored  the  interview  and  the  credibility  issues.   He
    submitted that the whole decision  is  inadequate  and  the  judge  has
    failed to apply this Appellant's case to the country guidance  case  of
    GJ and Others.

Decision and Reasons

23. I have to decide if there is an error of law in the First-tier  Judge's
    decision.  At the First-tier hearing the  Appellant  was  found  to  be
    unable to give evidence because of his  poor  mental  health.   I  have
    considered his statement of evidence, his screening interview  and  his
    substantive interview.  These took place in April 2014.  The First-tier
    hearing took place on 16th October 2015. In April  2014  the  Appellant
    was able to be interviewed.  He  answered  all  the  questions  he  was
    asked. There were 263 questions and he told the interviewer that he had
    never been a member of  any  pro-Tamil  group  in  Sri  Lanka  at  that
    interview.  The refusal letter dated 20 May  2014  was  based  on  that
    interview.  The inconsistencies by the  Appellant  were  made  at  that
    interview and there is nothing on file to indicate that  the  appellant
    had problems answering the questions he was asked or that he had mental
    health issues at that time.

24. After the refusal letter was issued Professor Lingam made out a  report
    dated 15 October 2014 referring to  the  appellant's  scarring  and  Dr
    Dhumad prepared a psychiatric report dated 25 March 2015.   The  First-
    tier hearing took place on 16 October  2015.   The  appellant's  health
    clearly deteriorated after his interview as it was found he was  unable
    to give evidence at the hearing.

25. The judge found that the Appellant would be at risk on return and I  am
    told by Counsel that this finding is based partly  on  the  Appellant's
    present mental health.  I accept that he is a vulnerable adult and that
    he has mental health issues, but the judge has not given weight to  the
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  when  he  was  interviewed
    when he was mentally able to attend and answer questions.

26. The judge goes through the Appellant's profile at paragraph  2  of  the
    decision.  The Appellant's final arrest was in 2013, after the war  had
    ended and during a round-up.  The appellant stated that he was arrested
    because associates of his had been caught trying to leave Sri Lanka  in
    2011 and they had given the appellant's name to the authorities.   When
    the appellant was asked about the 2 year gap before he was arrested, he
    said the date he gave of 2011 was wrong.  This goes to his  credibility
    but the judge has accepted this without question.  He gave  no  reasons
    for accepting that the Appellant was arrested during a round-up due  to
    the fact that he had been arrested in the past and due  to  his  having
    travelled to an LTTE area.  Round-ups in Sri Lanka at  that  time  were
    common (COI report).  People with little  or  no  political  background
    were often part of round-ups.   This  does  not  mean  that  they  were
    considered to be Tamil activists working for Tamil  separatism.   Based
    on the background evidence this Appellant was probably arrested in 2013
    because he was in the wrong place at the wrong time.   If  indeed  this
    happened, he was later released.

27. At paragraph 6 of the decision the judge states that people whose names
    appear on a "stop" list will be detained from the airport.  There is no
    evidence that this Appellant is likely to be on  a  "stop"  list.   The
    judge states that the current categories of persons  at  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka are individuals  who
    are or are perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a
    single state.  The judge has stated  that  the  Appellant  is  such  an
    individual, but he has given no explanation for this finding.  Based on
    what was before him he was not entitled to reach this conclusion. There
    is nothing to indicate that the appellant might have an arrest  warrant
    against him.  People at risk in Sri Lanka are Tamil  activists  in  the
    diaspora who, while working for Tamil separatism,  aim  to  destabilise
    the unitary Sri Lankan state.  There is  nothing  in  the  evidence  to
    suggest that this Appellant is one of these people.  The judge has  not
    explained why he finds the Appellant falls into this category. He  does
    not seem to have  given  proper  weight  to  the  appellant's  trip  to
    Thailand in 2010 on his own passport.

28. The judge refers to the country guidance case of GJ  and  Others.   The
    case states that the focus of the Sri Lankan Government's  concern  has
    changed since the civil war ended in May 2009 and that the LTTE in  Sri
    Lanka is a spent force.  All the appellant's activities were before the
    war ended.  With regard to his scars it  has  been  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's account up until the war ended is likely to  be  true,  but
    the judge has not explained why he would be  of  any  interest  to  the
    authorities on return now.  The judge has not given  proper  weight  to
    the country guidance case of GJ and Others.

29. The judge  has  given  considerable  weight  to  the  medical  evidence
    produced, as he should have but he has  given  inadequate  reasons  for
    finding he would be in a risk category on return and he has  not  dealt
    satisfactorily with the country guidance case of G J and Others.







Decision

30. I find that there are material errors of law in  the  judge's  decision
    allowing the Appellant's appeal, which decision was promulgated on 27th
    October 2015.

31. The First-tier Judge's decision must be set aside.

32. No findings of the First-tier Tribunal can stand. Under  s.12  (2)  (b)
    (i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of
    judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such
    that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal to reconsider the case are not
    to include Judge Andonian.

33. Anonymity has been directed.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray




