

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03466/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 August 2013                             |On 19 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                              MEHMOOSH KHORSAND

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr Gayle, Elder Rahimi solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Saunders, HOPO


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This is the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Kanagaratnam made following a hearing at  Hatton  Cross
      on the 13 May 2013, dismissing her appeal against the decision of  the
      respondent made on 23 March 2013 to refuse to grant her asylum in  the
      UK.


   2. The appellant challenged the decision on the grounds  that  the  judge
      had erred in making factual errors in his assessment of  the  core  of
      the  appellant's  claim,  namely  the  loss  of  a  USB  memory  stick
      containing material which she feared had got into  the  hands  of  the
      authorities. The  judge  appeared  to  believe  that  the  appellant's
      evidence was that she had lost the USB in the Metro whereas in fact it
      is clear from the interview record that she  said  that  she  believed
      that it had been lost at work. The judge found it implausible that the
      authorities would have taken action against her so quickly  after  the
      loss  but  his  finding  was  predicated  on  a  misstatement  of  the
      appellant's case. There  are  other  errors.  The  judge  appeared  to
      believe that the appellant's colleague was also  of  interest  to  the
      authorities  but  that  was  never  the  appellant's   evidence.   The
      appellant's  daughter  supplying  a  lengthy   statement   which   was
      potentially compelling corroborative evidence of the account  but  was
      not considered by the judge.

   3. Mr Saunders, although the respondent had served a reply defending  the
      determination, acknowledged the deficiencies in it and  said  that  he
      would leave the decision in my hands.

   4. The judge erred in failing to take into account relevant evidence when
      making his decision and is set aside.

   5. This appeal will be heard at Hatton Cross on 8 November 2013 when  the
      decision will be remade by a judge other than Judge Kanagaratnam under
      7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement  dated  25  September
      2012 because of the nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact  finding
      which is necessary in order for the  decision  in  the  appeal  to  be
      remade.




Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
