
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03713/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Emily Chadzamakono
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Warren, instructed by Pickup Scott, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall in this decision refer to the appellant as the  respondent  and
    to the respondent as  the  appellant,  as  they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant, Emily Chadzamakono, was
    born on 4 February 1985 and claims to be  a  citizen  of  Malawi.   She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hindson) against a  decision
    of the respondent to remove her to Malawi having refused her claim  for
    asylum.  The First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR).  The Secretary of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  There is no cross-appeal in respect
    of the asylum/Article 3 ECHR decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant has a child (G) who she claims is the  natural  child  of
    Stephan Tawoum who it is accepted is a German citizen.  The judge found
    that Stephan Tawoum is the biological father of G who appears  to  have
    allowed the appeal on the basis that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant (who is separated from Stephan Tawoum and  is  the
    only carer for G) to be removed from the United Kingdom given  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect G to leave the  European  Union  (see
    Izuazu [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC)).

 3. The grounds of appeal draw attention to the fact  that  the  judge  had
    evidence before him that the German Embassy in the United  Kingdom  had
    not formally recognised G as a German citizen because Stephan  Tawoum's
    name did not appear on G's birth certificate [35].  The grounds  assert
    that it was a misdirection in law to find that the child was  a  German
    national.  I find that  that  ground  has  no  merit.   The  judge  was
    required to consider the question of the  child's  nationality  on  the
    basis of the evidence which was before him; he was not required to seek
    to perfect the evidence of either party.  He observed that  the  Family
    Court had recognised G as the natural child of Stephan  Tawoum  as  had
    Northamptonshire County Council which had also had  dealings  with  the
    child.  The judge correctly recorded at [34] that the standard of proof
    was the balance of probabilities.  He noted the "clear finding" of  the
    Family Court which  had  been  "supported  by  CAFCASS  and  the  local
    authority".   The  judge  concluded  that  "[Stephan  Tawoum]  is   the
    biological father of G".  He also noted that it was not contended  that
    Stephan Tawoum had any active role  in  the  child's  upbringing.   The
    judge has reached the decision which was plainly available  to  him  on
    the evidence and has supported  his  decision  with  clear  and  cogent
    reasoning.  The grounds of appeal are little more than  a  disagreement
    with the judge's  findings.   Further,  it  is  not  suggested  by  the
    Secretary of State that, if Stephan Tawoum is the father of G, it would
    be reasonable to expect the appellant (as G's only carer)  to  separate
    from her child and return to Malawi.  The judge's conclusion may  be  a
    little brusque but, in the light of the contents of  the  remainder  of
    the decision, is adequate.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

