
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03355/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 24th March 2014                            |On 20th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    MR YM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel, instructed by Asylum Aid
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of China born on  4th  September  1986.   He
    first entered the United Kingdom on 11th March 2008  with  leave  as  a
    student.  That leave was further extended until 27th August  2011.   On
    26th August 2011 the appellant applied for asylum and  was  interviewed
    on 7th September 2011, 10th October 2011 and 6th March 2013.

2.   On  21st  March  2013  the  application  for  asylum  was  refused  and
    directions given for his removal to China.  He lodged an appeal against
    that decision.

3.   His appeal was initially heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Meadows  on
    8th May 2013.  That decision was subsequently set aside  for  error  of
    law.  The matter therefore came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Blandy
    on 15th October 2013 for a full rehearing.

4.   The determination is a detailed one  and  culminates  in  the  decision
    dismissing the appellant's appeals in all respects.

5.   Detailed grounds of appeal were  submitted.   Initially  permission  to
    appeal was refused but subsequently permission to appeal  was  granted.
    Thus the matter comes before me to determine the issue of error of law.



6.   There was a substantial bundle  of  documents  and  statements  entered
    before the First-tier Tribunal together with  skeleton  arguments  from
    both parties.

7.   The appellant indicated that he started going to church in  China  when
    he was 18 years  old  in  2004.   He  started  going  to  the  Catholic
    Patriotic Association Church but found the services  long  and  boring.
    He decided to attend the Protestant Church.  He  attended  that  church
    for two years.    He expressed himself in paragraph 12 of his statement
    of 30th April 2013 as not being committed to a religion in China.

8.   He came  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  study  and  began  to  attend  a
    Protestant Church in the United  Kingdom.   In  December  2010  he  was
    robbed and mugged whilst on a train to Norwood Junction.   He  required
    hospital treatment and on return from  hospital  was  befriended  by  a
    woman called Julie and later by her friend Emma. The kindness shown  by
    them and others to him led him to reconsider the Catholic  Church.   In
    August 2011 he began to attend the Catholic Church  in  Norwood.   From
    September 2011 to April 2011 he  attended  a  Christian  Initiation  of
    Adults course.  He was baptised on 7th April 2012.  He claims  that  he
    would be persecuted  as  a  Roman  Catholic  if  retuned  to  China  or
    alternatively that he would be unable to  practise  his  full  Catholic
    faith to the extent that he enjoys doing so in the  United  Kingdom  by
    reason of the restrictions placed upon that  church  by  the  Communist
    Government.

9.   The Judge found there to  be  little  evidence  of  any  real  risk  of
    persecutory ill-treatment of  the  appellant  were  he  to  follow  his
    religious beliefs and worship in accordance with the practices  of  the
    Roman Catholic Church in his home city on return.

10.  The Judge did not find that the appellant would be an activist  or  act
    in such  a  way  as  to  draw  adverse  attention  to  himself  by  the
    authorities.  The Judge concluded that the appellant could  worship  in
    China as he has done in the United Kingdom without fear of  retribution
    and without limiting his religious perspectives.

11.  Grounds 1 and 2 of the grounds of appeal essentially seek to  criticise
    the Judge for  his  approach  to  credibility.   This  is  in  relation
    particularly to paragraphs 33 to 36 of the determination.

12.  The Judge  notes  that  it  was  undermining  to  some  extent  of  the
    appellant's credibility that he  did  not  claim  asylum  when  he  was
    finally baptised in Easter 2012 and only claimed  the  day  before  his
    student visa was  due  to  expire.   The  Judge  comments  that  if  he
    genuinely believed that he would be at risk of serious harm upon return
    because of his conversion to Catholicism that  was  something  that  he
    must have realised as a risk much earlier on.   The  Judge  also  found
    that the appellant had unreasonably delayed claiming asylum  and  found
    such  conduct  damaging  to  his  credibility  having  regard  to   the
    provisions of Section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

13.  At paragraph 35 the Judge notes that the appellant has, in  the  course
    of his claim, significantly changed the grounds of the claim.   In  his
    screening interview he did not indicate that lack of religious  freedom
    was the primary reason for  his  claiming  asylum.   He  said  that  he
    disagreed with the Chinese Government policies and  so  was  afraid  of
    going back.  When asked about those problems he had replied "I  am  the
    second child of the family and if I marry I cannot have more  than  one
    child".  When asked if there any other reasons for his claiming  asylum
    he said that there were not.  It was only  after  he  was  asked  again
    whether there were any reasons for claiming asylum  that  he  mentioned
    that he could not have a religious life freely.  Asked to  explain  why
    he could not return to his  country  he  said  he  was  afraid  of  the
    Government and when asked specifically what serious harm would come  to
    him if returned he replied that  pollution  was  very  heavy.   It  was
    significant in the eyes of the Judge that in  the  screening  interview
    there was little mention of the risk of harm by reason of  a  perceived
    lack of religious freedom.

14.  At the hearing before the Judge the case was seen to  be  placed  on  a
    different basis.  Reference to  the  one  child  policy  was  virtually
    ignored as was the issue of pollution.  Neither of those  matters  were
    mentioned in the skeleton argument advanced on behalf of the appellant.
     The Judge noted that the appellant gave his  evidence  hesitantly  and
    lacked spontaneity.  The Judge found that his evidence as to  precisely
    what he would do  on  return  to  China  to  be  vague,  contrived  and
    unsatisfactory.

15.  The grounds indicate  that  there  was  a  factual  inaccuracy  in  the
    comments made by the Judge as to when it was that the  appellant  first
    claimed asylum.  He first attended the Roman Catholic Church in  August
    2011 and claimed asylum on 26th August 2011 the day before his  student
    visa expired on 27th August 2011.  It was not correct to  say  that  he
    had claimed asylum after he had been baptised in Easter.   It  is  said
    that  that  fundamental  misunderstanding  of  chronology  renders  the
    subsequent findings of the Judge to be unsustainable and that it is  an
    error which has affected the whole approach to credibility.

16.  As to the screening interview such should be viewed  with  caution  and
    should not be treated as a definitive account of an appellant's  asylum
    claim.  Reliance is placed upon YL (Rely on  SEF)  China  [2004]  UKIAT
    00145.  The screening interview is not a record of the exact  questions
    asked and answers given in the same way as the  substantive  interview.
    Moreover  at  the  substantive  interview  on  10th  October  2011  the
    appellant had indicated that his claim was as a religious believer  and
    that he did not agree with the political issues in China.   Miss  Smith
    contended therefore that, contrary to the findings of  the  Judge,  the
    appellant's claim had been consistent throughout the time.

17.  Further it is said that the comments by the Judge  that  the  appellant
    appeared to be tailoring his evidence to the report of the  expert  was
    irrational because the expert report was dated 1st  May  2013  and  the
    appellant gave detailed answers at his interview on 3rd March  2013  to
    the questions asked of him.

18.  Mr Jack, who represents the respondent, invited me  to  find  that  the
    issue of credibility was not so much directed towards the belief of the
    appellant as being a Christian and a Roman Catholic but rather  whether
    the views that he expressed as to the ability to practise his  religion
    in China  were  objectively  well-founded  or  substantively  believed.
    Accepting the error that the claim was made before baptism nevertheless
    it was a claim made the day before the leave to  remain  as  a  student
    expired.  In that connection  paragraph  6  of  the  determination  was
    significant.  The appellant had confirmed that  he  had  not  tried  to
    extend his student visa when  it  expired  because  there  were  health
    problems and secondly for financial reasons because  his  parents  were
    not able to support him anymore.  Mr Jack submits that  the  Judge  was
    perfectly entitled to regard the matter  with  some  concern  that  the
    appellant, who claims to have been a Christian for many  years,  should
    not have raised the concerns much earlier than he did given the  strong
    way in which he puts the matter.  Mr Jack invites me to find  that  the
    simple answer is that the appellant sought to prolong his stay  in  the
    United Kingdom by making a claim which was in substance ill-founded.

19.  It was in  that  connection  that  he  invites  me  to  find  that  the
    screening interview assumes considerable relevance, it being  conducted
    on 7th September 2011 within days of the claim for asylum  being  made.
    If the issue of religious freedom was uppermost  in  the  mind  of  the
    appellant as founding a proper claim for asylum Mr  Jack  submits  that
    should have been reflected at some stage in the screening interview.

20.  It is clear at paragraph 4.1 of the summary of evidence  the  appellant
    was asked:-

         "What was your reason for coming to the  UK?"   "I  applied  for  a
         student visa but my intention was to stay in the UK.   I  disagreed
         with the Chinese Government policies so I am afraid of going back".
          When asked what were the specific  problems  he  said  "I  am  the
         second child in the family and if I marry I cannot have  more  than
         one child".  He was asked whether there were any other reasons  for
         claiming asylum and he said no.  When that  question  was  repeated
         however the appellant said "In China I could not have  a  religious
         life freely I go to church right now at St Chad's in South  Norwood
         I go nearly everyday".

21.  He was then asked why he cannot return and he said "I can  go  back  to
    China but I am really afraid of this  Government.   Pollution  is  very
    heavy very serious I think that is because  the  Government  would  not
    want to make more profit the people have no right to say  no  them  air
    pollution will affect our health".  I was asked to find  that  although
    it cannot be discounted, the religious aspect  was  but  a  very  minor
    aspect of the claim whereas now it essentially the centrepiece  of  it.
    He invites me to find, therefore, that the  comments  about  the  Judge
    were properly open to be made.

22.  Mr Jack invites  my  attention  to  the  interview  conducted  on  10th
    October 2011.  The appellant was asked in that interview  what  it  was
    that he feared on returning to China and he  said  "I  am  a  religious
    believer and I don't agree with the political  issues  in  China".   He
    explained that his parents have their own business they also  work  for
    other people in a shop.  He said that his  religion  was  Catholic  and
    that he had converted "over four years  ago  around  2007.   The  first
    church I went to was a Roman Catholic Church (RC)".

23.  The appellant was asked "What  led  you  to  convert"  answer  "At  the
    beginning because of the Western culture led  me  to  interest  in  the
    religion later went into  it  deeper  I  believed  all  this  religious
    philosophy".

24.  He was asked to describe the difference  between  the  Catholic  Church
    and the Protestant, how the services differ between  the  two  services
    and he indicated that  in  the  Catholic  Church  mass  was  celebrated
    whereas in the other church no mass only singing and praying.

25.  The appellant indicated that he had  been  attending  St  Chad's  Roman
    Catholic Church for some two to three  months,  attends  almost  daily.
    The interview returned to the question of what political  situation  in
    China the appellant disagreed with and he  mentioned  family  planning,
    media freedom.

26.  I was invited to find that contrary to the  later  evidence  which  the
    appellant  seeks  to  give  about  the  subtle   differences   in   the
    denominations and the religious  importance  in  Catholicism  that  was
    altogether lacking in that interview.

27.  It seems to me and I so find that the appeal of  the  appellant  really
    revolves around  two  central  issues.   The  first  issue  is  whether
    practising Roman Catholics who wish to maintain their traditional links
    with Rome and the celebration of the  mass  will  face  persecution  in
    China if they insist upon that practice.

28.  The second and perhaps more nuanced issue is whether, if the  appellant
    is forced to  worship  in  a  CPA  Church,  such  will  compromise  his
    integrity as a believer such as to amount to persecution or  to  offend
    the principles as set out in HJ (Iran).

29.  It is not in dispute, and indeed the Judge made it clear, that much  of
    the appellant's case  was  credible.   The  Judge  did  not  doubt  the
    appellant's account of his  experiences  of  attending  Protestant  and
    Roman Catholic Churches in China and of his  differing  experiences  in
    each of them.  There was no reason to  doubt  the  genuineness  of  his
    dislike of the Chinese Government and its policies generally or of  his
    strength of feeling about pollution.

30.  The Judge had no  reason  to  doubt  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    increasing interest in Christianity and in Catholicism.  The Judge  did
    not doubt that he undertook an induction course  and  was  subsequently
    baptised.  Nor did the Judge  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  Christian
    beliefs or his conversion to Christianity and to Roman Catholicism.

31.  In one sense the first issue as to persecution was  more  a  matter  of
    background evidence than it was  for  the  appellant,  he  having  some
    experience in China but not much.

32.  The issue of credibility, if it bites at all, lies in the area  of  the
    appellant's genuineness  of  concern  for  the  subtle  differences  in
    Catholicism and why it is that he contends that he would not be able to
    worship in a CPA Church.

33.  The starting point for the Judge in the latter matter  was  clearly  to
    consider the experience which the appellant had of the  Roman  Catholic
    Church.  Clearly it was not very much, he having more recently attended
    the Protestant Church.  Accepting the error as to the  time,  when  the
    appellant claimed asylum, it is to be noted it  was  made  on  the  day
    before the current leave expired.  It was  made  on  26th  August  2011
    when, according to the appellant in his later interview,  he  had  been
    attending the church only a month or so before that and  was  attending
    but had not completed an induction  course.   On  one  reading  of  the
    matter, the appellant's experience and knowledge of  Catholic  teaching
    and of the Catholic Church was at the time when he applied  for  asylum
    extremely limited.  It raises the question why the matter  of  religion
    was raised at all at that stage.

34.  Although care  must  of  course  be  taken  in  relation  to  screening
    interviews because they are but a preliminary discussion, it was right,
    as I so find, for the Judge to regard it as  important  that  the  main
    reasons that were advanced for claiming asylum were not as described or
    developed  in  the  later  part  of  the  claim  and   its   subsequent
    proceedings.

35.  It is significant that  in  the  first  interview  conducted  with  the
    appellant in October that only a very basic  knowledge  of  differences
    between  Catholic  and  Protestant  was  outlined.   Once   again   the
    motivation for  claiming  asylum  seems  to  also  revolve  around  the
    political concerns that the appellant has relating to freedom of speech
    and to other matters.  The religious aspect, if I can put it that  way,
    would not seem to be so central to the claim as it  became.   In  those
    circumstances I find that it was properly open to the Judge to make the
    comments as to the development of the claim that were made.

36.  It is correct to note that in the  interview  of  3rd  March  2013  the
    concerns of the appellant as to the religious aspect of his  faith  and
    the subtleties of his religion are more developed, whether that  is  by
    reason of greater knowledge, greater experience  or  external  coaching
    may  be  difficult  to  determine.   It  marks  a  distinct  change  in
    development from how matters had been expressed earlier.  The fact that
    an expert report was prepared later does not  necessarily  exclude  the
    element of coaching in the answers that were given.

37.  Given the extreme  simplicity  of  the  answers  in  the  interview  in
    October  compared  with  some  rather  sophisticated  answers  in   the
    interview in March, the question that does arise, is how  and  why  the
    appellant came to  express  himself  in  that  way.   It  is  therefore
    relevant for the Judge to note the way in which the appellant expresses
    himself at the  hearing  and  whether  that  indicates  the  nature  of
    coaching or of spontaneous  understanding.   Clearly  care  has  to  be
    exercised in determining matters upon demeanour but the Judge, as I  so
    find, has  been  anxious  in  his  comments  to  try  and  examine  the
    development of the appellant's understanding as well as the genuineness
    of his concerns.  A great deal of time has elapsed from the  simplicity
    of the claim expressed in October 2011 and that in March 2013.

38.  The Questions and Answers, particularly at paragraphs 61 to 77  of  the
    interview in October, relate to his understanding of Catholicism in the
    United Kingdom.  It is said at 68 "I  really  don't  know  because  the
    situation of the Chinese Catholics and the Catholic Church in China  is
    very difficult and complicated". The appellant outlines that whilst the
    Pope has the authority to  ordain  someone  as  bishop,  the  Communist
    Government  has  tried  to  take  the  authority  of   appointment   to
    themselves.  To what extent  that  that  is  an  understanding  of  the
    appellant himself or on an understanding that he  has  understood  from
    somewhere else it is far from clear.   The  appellant  in  his  witness
    statement indicates that he was bored with the services in the Catholic
    services and did not really understand much of what was going  on.   In
    these circumstances it is of relevance  for  the  Judge  to  raise  the
    inquiry as to how he comes by the subtlety of the knowledge.  An  issue
    for the Judge, which clearly he seeks to grapple with throughout a very
    detailed determination, is whether the appellant himself has a  genuine
    belief in the truthfulness of what he seeks to claim  and  even  if  he
    does is that concern objectively well-founded.

39.  The grounds of appeal seek to suggest that the appellant gave  detailed
    answers in his interview of 3rd March 2013 to the questions asked about
    the Roman Catholic Church in China.  They are perhaps  of  a  different
    quality to the answers which he sought to give before the Judge at  the
    hearing.  The Judge, having heard the expert evidence, was well  placed
    to compare that with the evidence of the appellant and to  ask  in  the
    light of the history of the appellant's revelation of his claim whether
    the answers came from his own knowledge and belief or from  information
    and priming.

40.  I do not detect an  error  in  the  approach  by  the  Judge  to  these
    difficult matters.  I find the comments made  were  generally  properly
    open to have been made.

41.  The third ground of appeal is to the effect that the  Judge  failed  to
    give any adequate consideration to  the  evidence  which  supports  the
    appellant's claim, including the country expert  report  and  the  COIS
    Report.  Numerous extracts from various reports are cited in support of
    the proposition that there was evidence, particularly from  Dr  Sheehan
    and from other reports, as to persecution of  Catholics  including  the
    increased repression of Catholic house church worshipers in  China  and
    the arrests of ordinary worshipers as well  as  clergy.   For  example,
    paragraph 18.10 of the COIS Reports mentions a continuing crackdown  on
    unregistered religious organisations  including  underground  Christian
    groups.

42.   In  connection  with  the  issue  of  persecution  the   Judge   noted
    specifically  the  evidence  of  Mr  Turner  at  paragraph  21  of  the
    determination.  He did not however have any  experience  of  the  Roman
    Catholic Church in mainland China and he did not know if it had changed
    since he had been there in 1972.  It  was  not  surprising,  therefore,
    that not great weight was  placed  upon  his  evidence  by  the  Judge.
    Perhaps central to the contention of active persecution is  the  report
    by Dr Sheehan, a report in which she seeks to deal with the  status  of
    the Catholic Patriotic Association (the CPA) and its relations with the
    Vatican.  The Judge pays note to  that  report  as  can  be  seen  from
    paragraph 39 and noted that certain Chinese Catholic priests have  been
    subject to  house  arrest  but  he  notes  little  evidence  of  actual
    persecution and  virtually  no  evidence  of  persecution  of  ordinary
    members of the Roman Catholic Church, whether worshippers  at  the  CPA
    Churches or significantly the other house churches.

43.  At paragraph 40 the Judge notes from the report  that  little  is  said
    adversely  to  the  unregistered  Catholic  Churches  in  China   being
    subjected to persecution.  He also notes that the report confirms  that
    some priests within the CPA registered churches are in  communion  with
    Rome.  The Judge does not find the report to be helpful to indicate any
    persecution  of  ordinary  members  of  the  Catholic  Church   whether
    worshippers in a CPA registered church or otherwise.

44.  In paragraph 41 the Judge considers what Dr Sheehan had  to  say  about
    the unregistered Catholic Churches, the house churches.  The Judge puts
    the specific incidents referred to  in  her  report  within  the  wider
    context of life in China and notes in particular a lack of any  mention
    of specific difficulties arising in the appellant's  home  province  of
    Guanghi.

45.  In paragraph 42 the Judge considers that what Dr Sheehan had to say  as
    to  persecution,  was  a  sweeping  statement  not  borne  out  by  the
    paragraphs of her report.  It was noted that there was some pressure on
    house churches to register but little evidence of any real  persecutory
    ill-treatment of the lay members of  any  house  churches.   The  Judge
    further considers matters of Dr Sheehan's report in paragraphs  43  and
    44.

46.  Contrary to the submission, that is now being made, it  is  clear  that
    the Judge gave very careful consideration to the  report  and  came  to
    findings upon it which were properly sustainable.

47.  The Judge at paragraphs 45 to 46 of the determination notes the  volume
    of material that has been presented, particularly the COIS Report which
    is relied upon.  The Judge notes that according to the US International
    Religious Freedom Report of 2011 more than 6,000,000 Catholics  worship
    in sites registered by the CPA and that there are 64 official  Catholic
    bishops, 2,700 priests and over 6,300 churches and meeting places.  The
    numbers of Christians in China are exploding.  The Judge also  goes  on
    to note  various  reports  of  the  unregistered  Catholic  clergy  and
    congregations working together and that  since  2006  the  Vatican  and
    Chinese Government have worked together to select bishops  reversing  a
    previous  trend  of  Government  appointed  bishops   without   Vatican
    approval.

48.  The Judge notes in  paragraph  49  the  lack  of  evidence  as  to  the
    position of the Roman Catholic Church in the appellant's home  city  or
    province.  Many are in communion with Rome  and  the  Judge  notes  the
    flexibility towards religion in that province.

49.  Essentially the Judge does not accept the  first  proposition  advanced
    namely that there is active persecution  to  a  significant  extent  of
    Christians in China let alone  Catholic  Christians  and  secondly  the
    Judge does not accept that to worship in a Catholic Church, whether CPA
    or other, is unduly limiting or restrictive of the expression of faith.



50.  The grounds of appeal seek essentially to remount an  argument  on  the
    interpretation of the material presented.  For example in paragraph  18
    of the grounds it said that the Judge misrepresents the  situation  and
    objective material because paragraph 18 to 35 of the COIS states  there
    are 5,000,000  and  6,000,000  members  who  worship  in  the  official
    sanctioned  church  and  the  underground  church  loyal  to  Rome  has
    10,000,000 followers.  The  Judge  comments  that  "it  is  plain  that
    millions of Catholics are content to follow their beliefs as true Roman
    Catholics in China by worshipping at CPA registered churches"  and  the
    fact that many worship in underground churches or house churches is not
    by itself eloquent of any persecution by the  authorities  particularly
    if there is a lack of direct evidence of that persecution taking place.
     Other than what is argued that there is an oppressive regime in  China
    towards religion, religion is rather on the increase and flourishing in
    state controlled churches as well as house churches.

51.  I find that the Judge has properly analysed the  material  both  as  to
    the issue of persecution to the extent that active persecution  exists.
    The conclusion by him that there is very little and certainly  none  in
    the home province of the appellant is a finding  properly  open  to  be
    made.

52.  The Judge doubts the sincerity  of  the  appellant  as  to  the  subtle
    differences in Catholicism in the CPA Church, and  the  house  churches
    and in any event finds little in reality to that distinction to be seen
    from paragraph 48 of the  determination.   The  Judge  finds  that  the
    appellant as a worshipping and devout Catholic who could freely worship
    if in China.  The Judge did not  find  that  principles  raised  in  HJ
    (Iran) arose in the case of the appellant.  He would not be  forced  to
    be quiet but could conduct his faith freely  and  openly.   The  extent
    that he claims that he would be an activist, is to  be  viewed  in  the
    overall context of the genuineness of his understanding and belief  and
    in the other claims which he made which are not now pursued.

53.  It is not a straightforward case and that is  to  be  recognised.   The
    Judge finds the appellant as a  devoted  Catholic  can  worship  safely
    either in the CPA Church or in a house church in China without fear  of
    persecution.  I find that the Judge, in coming to that conclusion,  has
    looked at the matter  from  a  number  of  perspectives  and  that  the
    findings are properly open to be  made.   He  has  not  overlooked  any
    material evidence nor has he misdirected himself as  to  any  approach.



54.   In  the  circumstances  this  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  shall  be
    upheld, namely that the appeals  in  respect  of  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection  and human rights remain dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
