
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03831/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th July 2016                             |On 15th September 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Miss A O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Faryl (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Davies, promulgated on 10th February 2016, following a  hearing
    at Manchester Piccadilly on 2nd February 2016.  In  the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal to the extent that it is returned  to  the
    Respondent to enable the Competent Authority to follow its own guidance
    given in paragraph 1.7.6 in relation to victims  of  trafficking.   The
    Respondent applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Nigeria, who was born  on  28th
    June 1986.  She appealed the decision of the  Respondent  on  14th  May
    2014 refusing to grant her asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395 and  on
    14th May 2014 a decision to remove her from the United  Kingdom  as  an
    illegal entrant.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on 28th  December  2014.
    She gave birth to one child using a false  form  of  identification  in
    2010.  On 5th July 2011, as a result of her referral to the Northampton
    Social Services by  a  midwife,  due  to  domestic  violence  from  her
    partner, the Appellant came to the  attention  of  the  United  Kingdom
    authorities.  She then claimed asylum on 26th July 2011.

 4. An appeal by the Appellant had initially been allowed by an Immigration
    Judge,  whereupon  it  was  successfully  appealed  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State and the Upper Tribunal  Judge  remitted  the  appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined de novo.

The Judge's Findings

 5. In the remitted appeal hearing before  Judge  Davies,  the  main  issue
    under consideration was the fact that, in coming to the conclusion that
    the Appellant had not actually  been  a  trafficked  person,  the  Home
    Office had to implement and  follow  its  own  document  of  115  pages
    entitled "Victims of Human Trafficking - Competent Authority Guidance",
    in which there was a section under paragraph  17.6  entitled  "evidence
    gathering", which the Appellant alleged had not been properly followed,
    such that the decision could not have been a  lawful  decision  by  the
    relevant Competent Authority.

 6. The judge held that, "it does appear at the very least her evidence has
    been consistent albeit there may be relevant issues to  consider  which
    do indeed damage her credibility" (at paragraphs 17) in relation to the
    evidence of the Appellant given at the  hearing.   The  judge  observed
    that both in her testimony and in the evidence that  she  gave  to  the
    Respondent, the Appellant,

         "Has provided the Respondent with names and addresses of all  those
         she claims were involved in her trafficking and being held  against
         her will in the United Kingdom.  Indeed she makes clear that one of
         those persons was a social worker" (paragraph 17).

 7. The judge also went on to note that the Appellant having made her claim
    for asylum on 26th July 2011, it was not until 14th May 2014, that  the
    Respondent issued a decision to refuse asylum.  There was  therefore  a
    substantial period of time for the Competent Authority  to  follow  its
    own guidance set out at paragraph 17.6 of the guidance.  The judge then
    went on to set out the relevant section in the  guidance  at  paragraph
    17.6, that deals with how every effort  must  be  made  to  secure  all
    available information that could prove useful in  establishing  if  the
    person in question has been trafficked.

 8. The judge went on to conclude that, "after considering the  evidence  I
    conclude that the Competent Authority have not  followed  the  guidance
    given in paragraph 17.6.  They have not made every effort to secure all
    available information that could  provide  useful  in  establishing  if
    there are conclusive grounds" (paragraph 19).

 9. In the circumstances, the judge  decided  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed to  the  limited  extent  that  it  is  returned  back  to  the
    Respondent to enable the Competent Authority to follow its own guidance
    given in paragraph 17.6.

The Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that  in  allowing  the  appeal  to  a
    limited extent that it is submitted back to the Secretary of State, the
    judge erred in law because the decision of the Competent  Authority  is
    not an immigration decision under Section 82(2) of the Nationality  and
    Immigration Act 2002.  The decision of the Competent Authority  is  not
    the decision that can be challenged before a judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  If the Appellant wished to challenge  the  findings  of  the
    competent authority the correct course of action  would  have  been  to
    seek judicial review of that decision.  Accordingly, the judge erred in
    law in paragraphs 19 and 20 in concluding that the appeal could  simply
    be allowed to the limited extent, without determining the entire appeal
    substantively in the Tribunal.

11. On 26th February 2016, permission to appeal was given by the Tribunal.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me Mr Bates,  appearing  as  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer before  me,  submitted  that  the  decision  of  the
    Competent Authority was not an appealable decision under Section 82  of
    the 2002 Act.  The Presenting Officer at  the  hearing  did  make  this
    clear.  Accordingly, the judge had to  simply  determine  substantively
    the entire  appeal  in  the  Tribunal  or  the  Appellant  should  have
    challenged it by way of judicial review.  It was not open to the  judge
    to remit the matter back to the Secretary of State.

13. For her part, Miss  Faryl  handed  up  a  copy  of  MS  (Trafficking  -
    Tribunal's Powers -  Article  4  ECHR)  [2016]  UKUT  00226  where  she
    directed my attention to headnote (v).  This reads that, "Tribunals are
    also empowered to review a trafficking decision on the ground  that  it
    has  been  reached  in  breach  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
    guidance".  I was also directed to look at paragraph 38 in the body  of
    the decision, where it is made clear that the failure by the  Secretary
    of State to apply her own policies is an error of law.

14. In reply, Mr Bates submitted that the judge had jurisdiction and in the
    case of MS [2016] UKUT 00226, the Court of Appeal does set out  Section
    82 of the 2002 Act (see paragraph 34) and this makes it clear that  the
    decision of the Competent Authority is not an appealable decision.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  This is  because  the
    judge did not have jurisdiction to allow  the  appeal  to  the  limited
    extent of requiring the Secretary of State to apply  her  own  guidance
    again, this being  essentially  a  function  of  a  court  of  superior
    jurisdiction exercising judicial review powers, but not the function of
    a First-tier Tribunal, because the decision of the Competent  Authority
    was not a "appealable" decision.  Miss Faryl's reference to headnote  5
    and to paragraph 38 of the judgment in MS [2016] UKUT  00226  does  not
    help because the statement at headnote 5 makes it only too  clear  that
    "Tribunals are also empowered to review a  trafficking  decision",  but
    that is by way of hearing the appeal.  The statement at paragraph 38 of
    the decision recognises that if a policy has not been  applied  by  the
    Respondent then the only remedy is by way of judicial review.  It is  a
    different matter altogether that the court, faced with a  decision  can
    take the decision into account by the Competent Authority,  whether  it
    be a positive decision  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  or  a  negative
    decision  against  the  Appellant,  in  coming  to  its  own  decision.
    Paragraph 39 of the judgment makes it clear that the Tribunal may  take
    into  account  other  recognised  public  law  misdemeanours  such   as
    inclusion of immaterial considerations, leaving  material  evidence  or
    considerations out of account, procedural  unfairness  and  bad  faith.
    That requires a decision  on  substantive  grounds.   Accordingly,  the
    appropriate course of action is for this appeal to be remitted back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be determined substantively de novo  as  had
    been directed by the Upper Tribunal previously.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)  such  that  I  should  set
aside the decision.  I set aside the decision  of  the  original  judge.   I
remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back to the  First-
tier Tribunal under Practice Statement 7.2  to  be  determined  by  a  judge
other than Judge M Davies for a substantive hearing of the issues.

Anonymity

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th September 2016

