
IAC-FH-NL-V4
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03126/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 October 2014                |On 19 December 2014               |
|Prepared 16 October 2014          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   JUDGE of the first-tier tribunal DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     n g
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by CK Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Hewertson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of birth 2 October  1984,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision served  on  2  May  2014  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain on the basis of a claim to be in need of
    international  protection  under  the  Refugee   Convention.    Removal
    directions were also made.


2.    The Appellant claims to be at risk of ill-treatment for  a  Convention
    reason, namely an imputed political opinion supporting the organisation
    once known as the LTTE at the hands of the Sri Lankan  authorities  and
    that there is no effective protection against them as  persecutors  and
    that internal relocation is not a reasonable option.  In addition,  the
    Appellant relies upon risk under Article 3 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.  The  Appellant  does  not  rely  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.


3.    In considering these matters I apply the lower standard  of  proof  as
    set out in Sivakumaran [1996] Imm AR 97 and Ravichandran [1998] Imm  AR
    147 as applied in Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11.


4.    The basis of the Appellant's claim is set out in paragraphs 4  of  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter:


         "4.     Summary of your claim


         The following paragraphs are  a  summary  of  your  statements  and
         evidence in support of your application for asylum and are based on
         your Screening Interview, (SCR) conducted  10  September  2013  and
         your Substantive Asylum Interview (SAI) dated 11 December 2013.


         You have claimed that:


             '(a)     You are a Tamil from Sri Lanka.


             (b) In your Substantive Asylum Interview (SAI) you stated that
                  you voluntarily (SAI Q22-23) provided support to the  LTTE
                  in the form of Mechanical repairs to their boats (SAI Q13-
                  19) over a three year  period  from  2006  to  2009.   You
                  further claim (SAI Q14-16) you did this at your  home  and
                  not at your place of work.  You  further  claim  that  you
                  provided additional support to  the  LTTE  by  buying  and
                  providing Mobile Phone Sim cards for LTTE members.


             (c) You claim that you left Sri Lanka  in  2009  because  your
                  employer was arrested in May 2009  and  his  property  was
                  raided.  The authorities took away engines and Sim  cards.
                  You state in (SAI Q45) that 'I  was  fearful  I  might  be
                  arrested next.  I was in fear they might come, so at  that
                  time I was afraid I moved from Colombo to  Wattala'.   You
                  claim you studied at British College of Applied Studies in
                  Colombo (SAI Q47).  You claim you left Sri Lanka on a  Sri
                  Lankan airlines  flight  using  your  own  passport.   You
                  entered the United Kingdom  using  a  valid  tier  1  post
                  student visa which was  granted  30  December  2013.   You
                  further  claim   you   studied   a   BA   (Hons)   through
                  Wolverhampton University and completed a degree in science
                  software.


             (d) [Date returned to LKA?].  In your  SAI  you  claimed  that
                  after you had visited your sick mother  in  Sri  Lanka  in
                  June 2013 (SAI Q72-74) you were taken to  Kalpitty  Police
                  station [more details on arrest - who  arrested,  date/how
                  long after back in LKA?  How long detained for].


             (e) In your SAI (SAI Q75-77) you claim that you were taken  to
                  an unknown place and detained for 27 days (23 June  to  20
                  July 2013) and tortured.


             (f) In your SAI (SAI Q102, 124-131) you claim you escaped from
                  detention and Sri Lanka with the aid of an agent.


             (g) In your SAI (SAI Q136) you claimed that  you  believe  you
                  are still wanted by the Sri Lankan police.'


         You therefore fear that if you return to Sri Lanka the  authorities
         will detain and torture you because of your support for the LTTE."


5.    The Appellant made a statement which he adopted at the  hearing.   The
    statement more fully particularised his claim as to the events  between
    2006 and 2009 when he had repaired boat engines for  the  LTTE  at  the
    behest of two LTTE members known as Vasanthan (V) and  Prabakaran  (P).
    In this period of about three years the Appellant on one hand  appeared
    to claim in his oral evidence that he  had  repaired  as  many  as  900
    engines between April 2006 and October 2008.  It seemed to me that  the
    evidence that he ultimately gave was that V and P would attend  with  a
    number of engines, possibly ten to fifteen, which some were repaired at
    a garage where the Appellant worked and the majority were  repaired  in
    the garden  or  buildings  of  his  family  home  which  was  some  few
    kilometres away from Kalipittya.


6.    If it took about a week to mend that number of engines, then it  seems
    to me and it was by no means every week the same level of engines being
    produced, that first that 900 is probably an overestimate in any  event
    but also it fails to recognise the extent to which boat engines are  by
    no means of one size and whilst some may  have  been  outboard  motors,
    others were on his  description  more  substantial.   It  hardly  seems
    likely that they were manoeuvrable by one person alone, bearing in mind
    the family home was not on the edge of the sea.


7.    The events are said to have taken place on the western  coast  of  Sri
    Lanka, Kalipittya (Kalipitty) is some 80 kilometres as the  crow  flies
    north of Colombo.  Manar, said to be the source of  many  of  the  boat
    engines, was a further 80 kilometres north of Kalipittya.


8.    In essence the Appellant claims that originally he was  encouraged  to
    help the LTTE by repairing  boat  engines  but  ultimately  because  he
    travelled to  Colombo  to  buy  engine  parts  and  spares  needed  for
    servicing the range of engines, he was also asked to buy medication and
    sim cards.  It would seem that in buying  medication  some  measure  of
    discretion was needed  in  terms  of  the  size  of  purchases  at  any
    particular drug  store  or  chemist.   Similarly  in  relation  to  the
    purchase of the sim cards the identity of the purchaser  was  noted  as
    part of the record of purchase.


9.    The Appellant has said that in part he used the name or  the  identity
    card of his employer, Mr P Evin but at some stage he also used his  own
    identity when purchasing the sim cards.


10.   It is right  to  note  that  in  the  conflict  against  the  Northern
    Territories held at various different times by the LTTE that the use of
    boats by the Tamil Tigers or the Black Tigers was well-known  and  much
    reported upon as being the object of military interest and action.


11.   It also must sensibly be inferred that the sale of sim cards, for  use
    in mobile phones and therefore potentially traceable was  a  matter  of
    interest to the Sri Lankan security forces.  It is I find a  reasonable
    inference that if an identity card was necessary in order  to  purchase
    sim cards, very great care would be taken to avoid the identity of  the
    purchaser being discovered and investigated by the authorities in  case
    the sim card was subsequently found.


12.   In this case it is perhaps surprising if so many engines  were  coming
    and going for repair over a sustained period and yet  no  interest  was
    taken by the security forces in the Appellant's activities at any time.
     It is not said that he concealed his activities or was not to be  seen
    either in the garage or alternatively at home working on boat  engines.
    I find it unlikely that the Appellant was repairing engines at his home
    as claimed.


13.   The Applicant claimed that after he  stopped  working  on  engines  in
    2008. Until he left in 2009 no action was taken against him by the  Sri
    Lankan forces.  The Appellant says that in 2009 he  became  aware  that
    the garage had been searched and sim cards,  medical  drugs  and  other
    material  had  led  to  the  arrest  of  Mr  Evin  for  being  a  Tamil
    sympathiser. However no steps were taken to investigate  the  Appellant
    working there or at home.


14.   The Appellant claimed he moved away to Watala for a period of time  in
    2009.  In the meantime the Appellant had married  but  the  papers  are
    silent on the whole issue of the marriage, the whereabouts of his wife,
    how these matters were conducted, the potential risk to her  posed  and
    indeed the potential risk to his parents from his  claimed  activities.
    The Appellant is an only child and claims that it was  not  until  some
    time later that a third  party  told  his  father  of  the  Appellant's
    involvement in assisting the LTTE.  That was revealed  in  about  2009.
    It is therefore somewhat surprising when  the  Appellant's  father  and
    mother remain in  Sri  Lanka  that  there  is  no  evidence  from  them
    concerning the  activities  of  the  Appellant  in  repairing  numerous
    engines on their property or indeed their lack of knowledge as  to  why
    he was doing it to the extent he was.


15.   Similarly there is no evidence from the Appellant's  father,  assuming
    he was the one  involved  in  securing  the  Appellant's  release  from
    detention in 2013 concerning the steps he took and the arrangements  he
    made.  The Appellant says that his father and mother  knew  nothing  of
    his activities at the material times; secondly his  father  refused  to
    tell him what arrangements had been made for his removal,  instructions
    to the agent given, the costs faced and how his departure  was  secured
    from detention.


16.   I could find no credible reason given as to why it  was  possible  for
    the Appellant to have acted the way he had done over such  a  sustained
    period and yet have done so leaving his mother and father in  ignorance
    of his activities, when engine repairs were taking place in or on their
    own  land.   I  do  not  accept  that  repairing  all  these   engines,
    particularly was credibly explained as part of his apprenticeship.


17.   It is perhaps unsurprising, in one  sense,  no  documentary  or  other
    evidence to prove  that  he  was  detained  other  than  two  documents
    produced:  The first is of a complaint being made  by  the  Appellant's
    father to the police station in Kalipittya to be on 24 June 2013 citing
    events at 4:00pm on 23 June when it was said the  Appellants  had  been
    taken  away  and  his  parents  left  with  no  knowledge  as  to   his
    whereabouts.  This removal was said to have  taken  place  by  persons,
    police officers and civilians who came in a white  van.   It  was  said
    that the Appellant's father knows of these matters as a  result  of  it
    being recounted to  him  by  persons  present.   It  is  plainly  well-
    established that in the aftermath of struggles in Sri Lanka that 'white
    vans' became attributed to disappearances and removals  of  persons  to
    unknown locations by either Sri  Lankan  forces  or  paramilitaries  or
    persons who regarded themselves as agents of the Sri  Lankan  state  or
    criminals seeking ransom payments.


18.   The second document is a letter from an attorney, dated 10 June  2014,
    which said that the Appellant's father  wanted  representations  to  be
    made to the police to stop harassment, particularly of his wife, in his
    absence, allegedly involving and looking  for  the  Appellant  who  had
    "escaped from the custody of the authorities and therefore there is  an
    outstanding warrant for his release (sic).  Hence the  authorities  are
    looking for him".  I have reservations about the  reliability  of  this
    information because the letter concludes with the paragraph:


         "In the light of the information  I  am  in  possession  of  I  can
         confirm that Naresh Gunasekaran is wanted by the authorities in Sri
         Lanka for his affiliation with the LTTE  and  therefore,  his  life
         would  be  in  danger  if  he  is  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.    The
         'rehabilitation program' is just a cover  up  to  keep  anyone  who
         assisted the LTTE in detention."


      This suggests an adverse view of the Government and does  not  explain
    why the Appellant's life would be in danger  let  alone  the  basis  of
    adverse  interest  in  the  Appellant.   Another  reference  to  'grave
    damages' appears to be self-serving.


    He continued:


          "I can confirm that the above statement is true to the best of  my
         knowledge and can be used as evidence in a Court of Law."


    There is evidence of Mr S A Sabri Mohamed being a  Member  of  the  Bar
    Association of Sri Lanka.  I find his letter raises more questions than
    answers of why there would be any or any  continuing  interest  in  the
    Appellant.


19.   Considering the issue of the  correspondence  it  is  noted  that  the
    Respondent has not made any enquiries  into  the  authenticity  of  the
    documents and that might, at least in the case  of  his  father,  be  a
    consequence of the potential risks that such enquiries might pose.   In
    relation to  the  letter  from  the  attorney  I  have  considered  the
    submissions made by Mr Martin with  particular  reference  to  PJ  (Sri
    Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 particularly at [29] to [32].


20.   The Appellant's account of the events when he was detained and in  his
    release is entirely his  alone.   It  seems  to  me  without  requiring
    corroboration the fact of the  matter  is  that  it  was  open  to  the
    Appellant to adduce evidence from friends or his family concerning  his
    arrest, detention and their involvement in securing his release or  the
    steps that they took to get others to do so.  In  the  circumstances  I
    find  there  are  significant   omissions   in   the   evidence   which
    substantially damages his credibility: Whilst it could not be expected,
    if a person had been tortured, to provide documentary evidence of  ill-
    treatment in detention other than medical evidence, on the  other  hand
    the securing of the release arrangements made, evidence of injuries  is
    a different matter and does not fall into the same  kind  of  situation
    where it simply was not possible to find evidence  which  confirms  the
    claimed 'escape'.


21.   I take into account the evidence  which  was  not  disputed  that  the
    process of leaving the country in circumstances where a  person  is  an
    object of interest and wanted and/or  of  continuing  interest  to  the
    authorities. The Appellant was able to leave passing multiple positions
    of checks being made upon his identity by different forces and  he  was
    able to do so without the presence of an agent.  It really,  given  the
    background evidence of the number of checkpoints to go  through,  makes
    no sense to think that the Appellant, through an agent, had  in  effect
    bribed individuals in  advance  of  each  checkpoint.  I  look  at  the
    evidence in the round  and  as  a  whole.   I  have  not  excluded  any
    particular document from the consideration.


22.   I note that there is no evidence either from Sri Lanka or indeed  once
    the Appellant had returned to the UK of any medical  treatment  or  the
    provision of herbal remedies or any explanation of the claimed efficacy
    of the red or green leaves being used or indeed how and where they were
    applied.


23.   Injuries including scarring tends to also leave  skin  discolouration.
    This is evident in many of the cases of medical  evidence  relating  to
    injuries to Sri Lankans.  In this case I have no photographs or medical
    evidence relating to the injuries claimed to  have  been  sustained  or
    possible causes.


24.   I find it  is  material  that  the  Appellant  did  not  seek  medical
    assistance on return to the UK when he was not at any risk.  I  do  not
    accept the claim that he was so disturbed by the episode that he  could
    not bring himself to obtain such assistance.


25.   I note that neither the Appellant's father's statement to  the  police
    nor the lawyer's letter assert detention, torture  or  release  or  the
    basis of adverse interest continuing.


26.   It may be there was some basis, although its reasons are not  provided
    as to why the SLA forces might taken an interest in him and  I  do  not
    speculate upon those matters.  I do not find the  Appellant  has  shown
    that low standard of proof that he was detained for the claimed  period
    of time and ill-treated and tortured. It could be the Appellant was but
    for other reasons detained for a short period of time but  not  in  the
    circumstances  claimed.   I  do  not  further   speculate   upon   that
    possibility.  Rather I find the circumstances do not indicate that  the
    Appellant was perceived as a threat to the integrity of the Sri  Lankan
    single state nor as having  such  a  role  during  or  post  the  Tamil
    conflict.


27.   I do not accept the evidence shows that the  Appellant's  name  is  on
    the computerised stop list.  I find that consistent with the  Appellant
    both being  of  no  interest  when  he  returned  and  of  no  interest
    thereafter.  I do not find Mr  Sabri  Mohamed's  letter  sufficient  to
    support any adverse interest in or risk to the Appellant.


28.   I note also that the Appellant was with friends at  the  time  of  his
    being picked up in 2013 at a tea shop and yet there is no evidence from
    any of them concerning his abduction or removal from their  company  on
    that date in June 2013.


29.   The Appellant's activities in the United Kingdom amount  to  attending
    two, or possibly more demonstrations but there is nothing  to  indicate
    that he did anything that drew himself to  the  attention  of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities or that his actions promoted  his  standing  in  the
    Diaspora.  In the circumstances, mindful of the advice in GJ  &  Others
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) it does not seem to me  that  the  Appellant  has
    come to the attention of the authorities nor is likely to come  to  the
    attention of the authorities as being involved in either the Sri Lankan
    Diaspora  or  indeed  political  opposition  to   the   current   state
    authorities.  Accordingly I do not find the facts  are  established  to
    that low standard of proof that the Appellant is a refugee  sur  place,
    facing real risk of  prescribed  ill-treatment  on  return  because  of
    imputed political opinions.


30.   Similarly on the facts therefore I do  not  find  that  there  is  any
    claim for humanitarian protection from the activities of the Sri Lankan
    authorities.  If I had been wrong in that view then given  that  it  is
    the authorities that are the cause of risk then I would not accept that
    internal relocation would be a reasonable  option  or  that  there  was
    sufficient protection.  However, for the reasons I have given, I do not
    find  that  is  a  real  prospect  or  real  likelihood  on  return  of
    persecution  or  proscribed  ill-treatment  contrary  to  the   Refugee
    Convention or Qualification Directive or Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.


ANONYMITY ORDER


30.   In the circumstances of this case it seems to me appropriate  that  an
    anonymity order should be made given the  Appellant's  anxieties  about
    the risk of his activities in the UK being discovered by the Sri Lankan
    authorities.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

31.   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


31.   The appeal under the Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the  ECHR  is
    dismissed.


32.   The appeal on humanitarian protection grounds is dismissed.




    Signed Date 17 December 2014


    Judge Davey
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

