
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: AA/03572/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination Sent
On 2 October 2014            On 9 October 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                Mehdi Mosawi
                        (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr J Trumpington of Counsel instructed by Howe & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                         DETERMINATION: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  M
      A Khan promulgated on 17 July 2014, dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated 14 May 2014 to remove him from
      the UK following the refusal of his application for asylum.

Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. His age has been a  matter
      of dispute. The Respondent initially treated him as having a  date  of
      birth of 1 August 1993 (see, for example, the  'reasons  for  refusal'
      letter - 'RFRL' - dated  22  June  2012).  However,  subsequently  the
      Respondent has treated the Appellant as having a date of  birth  of  1
      September 1995 (see, for example, RFRL dated  14  May  2014,  and  the
      Notice of Immigration Decision of the same date).

   3. The background  to  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  and  his  claimed
      immigration history are summarised in the RFRL dated 14 May 2014,  and
      are otherwise a matter of record: accordingly I do not  rehearse  such
      details here, but make reference as is incidental for the purposes  of
      this document.

   4. For present  purposes  I  note  in  particular  that  following  being
      encountered by the police at an address in Preston on 14 June 2012 the
      Appellant made an application for asylum. The application was  refused
      for reasons given in the RFRL of 22 June 2012 and a  removal  decision
      was made on the same date.  An  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Chana  sitting  at  Harmondsworth  in  a  determination
      promulgated on 9 July 2012 (ref AA/06106/2012),  but  a  challenge  to
      that decision before the Upper Tribunal was  successful,  following  a
      hearing at Field House before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Frances  on
      19 December 2012. The Appellant's case was relisted before the  First-
      tier Tribunal, but the Respondent withdrew the decision at  a  hearing
      on  6  March  2013  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro.  The
      Respondent then made a new decision on the Appellant's application for
      asylum, refusing it for the reasons set out in  the  RFRL  of  14  May
      2014, and  a  removal  decision  was  made  by  way  of  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision on the same  date.  It  is  against  this  latter
      removal decision that the current appeal was brought.

   5. The  Appellant's  current  appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for reasons set out in the determination  promulgated  on  17
      July 2014.

   6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers  on  7  August
      2014.

Error of Law

   7. In reaching my decision I have had regard to ML (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA
      Civ 844 upon which the  Appellant  placed  particular  reliance.  That
      decision happened to involve the same First-tier Tribunal Judge as the
      instant case, but I do not accord any  weight  to  that  circumstance.
      Further I recognise that there is scope for determinations to  contain
      slips and errors without it inevitably constituting a  material  error
      of law. The significance of any such factual errors is  a  matter  for
      evaluation and judgement on a case specific basis, bearing in mind the
      requirement of 'anxious scrutiny'  imposed  upon  the  Judge  and  the
      entitlement of the parties to a fair hearing.

   8. However, in all of the particular circumstances of this  case  I  find
      that the errors identified below are such that it cannot be  concluded
      that the Appellant received a fair hearing, and that consequently  the
      determination must be set aside for error of law.

   9. The Judge erred in the following respects:

(i) The Judge identified the Appellant's date of  birth  as  1  August  1993
      (determination at paragraph 1). This was to disregard the Respondent's
      reassessment of his age as being 2 years and  1  month  younger.  This
      suggests a lack of anxious scrutiny. It also obfuscates the extent  to
      which the Judge made allowance for the Appellant having been  a  child
      at relevant significant moments in his claimed history,  and  being  a
      minor on his arrival in the UK.

      (ii) The Judge made inconsistent references to the date of  the  RFRL.
      At paragraph 4 he made a passing reference,  correctly,  to  the  RFRL
      being dated 14 May 2014. However,  in  setting  out  the  Respondent's
      case, at paragraph 24, he referred to the RFRL  being  dated  22  June
      2014. There is no RFRL of that date, although there is an  RFRL  dated
      22 June 2012.

      (iii) Further to the above the Judge,  at  paragraph  8,  incompletely
      sets out the history of the  appeal  (as  summarised  at  paragraph  4
      above), and in so doing appears to indicate that he was dealing with a
      remitted appeal consequent upon the setting  aside  of  Judge  Chana's
      determination. This was not the case. However, in combination with the
      confusion over the RFRL and the utilisation of a date  of  birth  that
      arises from the previous (subsequently withdrawn) decision, it is  not
      clear that the Judge focused upon the decision that was at the core of
      the appeal. Again this indicates a lack of anxious scrutiny.

      (iv) The Judge made reference to a "37 page bundle of documents  which
      includes the appellant's written statements  and  his  wife's  written
      statements", which have no bearing to this particular case: (paragraph
      11).

      (v) Similarly at  paragraph  11,  the  Judge  made  reference  to  the
      provision of "background information on Mongolia".

      (vi) The judge also made erroneous reference to "removal  to  Albania"
      (paragraph 23).

      (vii) At paragraph 43 of the determination the Judge  states  that  he
      found the Appellant's evidence concerning  events  which  led  him  to
      leave Afghanistan as not credible because  of  the  answers  given  at
      questions 53 and 54 of the substantive asylum interview. I  am  unable
      to discern from paragraph 43, or elsewhere in the  determination,  the
      nature of the Judge's difficulty with these  particular  answers.  If,
      which  is  not  clear,  the  Judge  is  suggesting  the  answers   are
      discrepant, such a characterisation is wholly  unsustainable.  If,  in
      the alternative, the Judge is suggesting  that  the  notion  that  the
      family's farmland would be taken by another person whilst leaving  the
      family house in their  possession  was  inherently  incredible,  I  am
      unable to discern the reasoning process that lead the Judge to such  a
      conclusion. I do not see how the matters described  by  the  Judge  at
      paragraph 43 are indicative of a lack  of  credibility,  and  to  that
      extent the determination lacks adequate reasoning.

  10. Although there is some coherency  to  other  aspects  of  the  Judge's
      adverse assessment of the Appellant's credibility (as there was in ML)
      - I am not persuaded that it is such that the errors identified can be
      considered to be of insignificant  consequence  and  that  an  adverse
      decision in the appeal is inevitable - albeit, as in ML, the Appellant
      may face "a very difficult run".

  11. It is not necessary to make any specific Directions  for  the  further
      conduct of the appeal. Both parties are at liberty to file any further
      evidence upon which they seek to rely up to 7 days prior  to  the  re-
      listed hearing.

Decision

  12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.

  13. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan or
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     2 October 2014
