
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03538/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15th September 2016                     |On 12th October 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [a a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. For the avoidance of doubt,  in  this  appeal,  the  reference  to  the
    Appellant is as it was in the Tribunal below,  namely,  [AA],  and  the
    reference to the Respondent is as it was in the Tribunal below, namely,
    the Respondent Secretary of State.

 2.  The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  appeals  in  this  matter  with
    permission against a  decision  and  reasons  statement  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A. D. Baker, promulgated on 25th August 2015,  following
    a hearing at Newport on 27th July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of [AA].

 3. [AA] was represented by Ms E Rutherford of Counsel and  the  Respondent
    was represented by  Mrs  H  Aboni,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

 4. The Appellant's present application is on  account  of  fear  that  her
    daughter, who is also a Nigerian citizen like the  Appellant,  and  who
    has lived in the United Kingdom since her birth and  was  then  just  7
    years old, would be forcibly subjected to FGM.  However, as Judge Baker
    noted below, "Neither the Appellant nor her daughter, as identified  in
    a medical report accompanying the application of February 2015, has  as
    yet suffered that" (paragraph 9).  The  judge  below  had  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis that, although a previous immigration determination
    had found the Appellant  to  be  wholly  lacking  in  credibility  with
    respect to her own claim, the present application was  based  upon  the
    risk of FGM to her daughter and,  "The  first  decision-maker  was  not
    concerned with issues in relation to FGM.  The Appellant did not claim,
    then, fear of FGM for  herself"  (paragraph  18).   Judge  Baker  still
    concluded that the Appellant herself lacked credibility with respect to
    her own claim that if she returned back to Nigeria she would be  killed
    but these matters were "Distinct in my judgment from her  claimed  fear
    of FGM, specifically not  only  for  herself  but  in  respect  of  her
    daughter" (paragraph 28).  The judge went on to say that,  "As  to  FGM
    this is a distinct matter and it has arisen since that first  decision"
    (paragraph 20).  Given that the Appellant belonged to the Yoruba  tribe
    where FGM was known to exist, on the basis of the  expert  report,  the
    judge could not rule out the possibility that the Appellant's  daughter
    would be subjected to a risk of FGM, and  on  this  basis  allowed  the
    appeal.

 5. At the hearing before me,  Mrs  H  Aboni  submitted  that  the  judge's
    findings, based upon an approach where it was said that the Appellant's
    claim was one that was "distinct" from that  of  her  daughter  in  the
    present application, was wholly unsustainable,  because  a  credibility
    assessment had to be undertaken in a composite manner as a whole.

 6. Mrs Aboni submitted that the Appellant herself has not  been  subjected
    to FGM, and  this  was  a  matter  that  could  not  be  excluded  from
    consideration, as an issue to going to the credibility of the claim now
    that the Appellant's daughter would be subject  to  FGM.   Second,  the
    Appellant nevertheless continued to maintain that she was also at  risk
    of FGM, and this was part of her claim alongside that of her  daughter,
    even though the Appellant had married, then divorced, and had a  second
    son.  Third, the judge failed to consider that the Appellant,  who  was
    opposed herself to FGM and had not undergone it,  could  have  resisted
    the threat of FGM being visited upon  her  daughter,  in  circumstances
    where she was now divorced from her husband, and would not be returning
    to her husband's family.  Finally, the Appellant made it clear  in  her
    witness statement (paragraph 72) that her husband himself is living  in
    London having divorced the Appellant and would not be in a position  to
    put on any pressure for his daughter to be circumcised.

 7. However, even more importantly, the judge failed to consider that there
    was a real possibility of internal relocation given that this had  been
    held in Austria in the case of Omerodo v Austria  8969/10  [2011]  ECHR
    1538, and so upheld by the European Court on the  basis  that  internal
    relocation existed to avoid FGM.  In that case also, the  Appellant,  a
    member of a tribe which conducted FGM, had avoided being  subjected  to
    it, being educated, and having employment, and also being unmarried, in
    precisely the same circumstances as the Appellant in  this  case.   Mrs
    Aboni urged that I make a finding of an error of  law  and  remake  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal.

 8. For her part, Ms Rutherford  submitted  that  the  judge  had  taken  a
    careful view of the evidence before him.  He had rejected some  of  the
    evidence but accepted other parts of it.  The Appellant's own claim for
    risk of FGM is rejected but the claim of her daughter is allowed.   The
    judge had found that the Appellant's former husband  was  a  relatively
    influential person. At paragraph  51  the  judge  refers  to  the  fact
    sensitive nature of the case.  The Appellant was  at  risk  of  FGM  if
    returned to her own area and she could  not  relocate.   Moreover,  the
    expert report did not accept everything either (at paragraph 42),  such
    that the entire  assessment  was  balanced  and  well  considered.   Ms
    Rutherford submitted that if I were to make a finding of  an  error  of
    law, I should remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to
    be reconsidered again.

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  it.   My
    reasons are twofold.

10. First, it is well established that the assessment of credibility  is  a
    composite matter and the evidence has to be  considered  in  the  round
    before a final decision can be reached as  to  the  credibility  of  an
    allegation or not.  This is a case where the Appellant entered  the  UK
    and failed to make an asylum claim until  she  had  been  detained  and
    denied entry on 19th May 2004.  She claimed asylum in detention on 23rd
    May 2004.  Her appeal was dismissed the first time around on 9th August
    2004.  The Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing.   There  were  no
    representations made on her  behalf.   The  Appellant  failed  to  make
    contact with the Home Office.  She was living with her aunt in the  UK.
    She then met the father of her two children but he also  did  not  have
    legal status in the UK.  The present claim, is now that of the risk  of
    FGM, but the claim is made not just  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    young daughter, but also in relation to  the  Appellant  herself,  even
    though the Appellant has to date not ever been at threat  of  FGM,  has
    not undergone it, has married, then divorced,  and  had  two  children.
    The  judge  does  refer  to  all  these  matters   in   the   extensive
    determination.  However, in the circumstances it is wrong  to  conclude
    that the claim in relation to the daughter is "distinct in my  judgment
    from her  claimed  fear  of  FGM"  (paragraph  28)  because  it  avoids
    consideration of the Appellant's own ability  to  oppose  such  a  risk
    should it exist.

11. Second, internal relocation should have been considered in the light of
    the judgment in Omerodo v Austria 8969/10 [2011] ECHR 1538 where it has
    been held that FGM can be avoided by moving  to  another  part  of  the
    country,  and  given  that  the  Appellant  is  educated,  that  was  a
    possibility that plainly existed in this case.

12. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the following reasons.   First,
    the Appellant's claim is not credible.  She has not been  subjected  to
    FGM.  She is  separated  from  her  husband.   The  submissions  by  Ms
    Rutherford that the child's  father  is  in  a  relatively  influential
    position overlooks the fact that the Appellant is divorced from him and
    that he lives in London.  The claim has not been made previously and  I
    find that it has been made now simply in order to  bolster  an  already
    weak asylum claim.

13. I have had regard to the expert report but what it states is that, "Her
    fears that she will not be safe in any  part  of  Nigeria  may  not  be
    misplaced because  she  is  an  unskilled  woman  with  only  secondary
    education ..." (page A19).  The suggestion  that  she  "may"  does  not
    suggest that she "will".  I conclude that she would not.  The judge had
    concluded that, "She has worked previously and there is  no  reason  to
    think she would not work" (paragraph 41).

14. In these  circumstances,  there  is  a  real  possibility  of  internal
    relocation.  Indeed, the judge concluded that,

         "The expert has failed to take into account that this Appellant has
         worked for two years on her own account, left her previous  husband
         and her previous partner and has managed  to  live  in  the  United
         Kingdom and now supporting herself and her two children as a failed
         asylum seeker of ten years.  She is  a  resourceful  woman  as  her
         history has demonstrated" (paragraph 42).

    In these circumstances, I conclude that the Appellant's appeal must  be
dismissed.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    dismissed.

16. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th October 2016


