
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03211/2013
     AA/03212/2013
     AA/03213/2013
     AA/03214/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 July 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RS
                                AS (a minor)
                                RS (a minor)
                                SS (a minor)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms E. Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Ms L. Turnbull, Counsel instructed by Ali Sinclair
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant in  these  proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they were  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Thus, the first appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  14  May
       1975. The remaining appellants are her children and were born in  30
       August 2007, 21 September 2001 and 24  October  2002,  respectively.
       The first appellant arrived in the UK  on  29  April  2011  and  the
       remaining appellants arrived with her husband in July 2011.

    3. She was a dependant on an  asylum  claim  made  by  her  husband  in
       November 2012 but that claim was certified as manifestly  unfounded.
       The first appellant claimed asylum in her own right on  19  February
       2013. Her claim was based on domestic violence from her husband both
       in the UK and in Pakistan. She claimed that she  would  be  at  risk
       from her husband and his family and would be without the support  of
       her family on return.

    4. The appeals against the decisions  to  remove  the  appellants  were
       allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson, on asylum and  related
       human rights grounds, after a hearing on 7 May 2013.

    5. The Secretary of State appealed against that decision and permission
       to appeal  was  granted  in  relation  to  the  judge's  credibility
       assessment and in relation to the question of internal relocation.

Submissions

    6. Ms Martin relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. She
       submitted that the First-tier judge had decided that  the  appellant
       was credible before considering the evidence. He had not dealt  with
       the credibility issues that were identified in the  refusal  letter,
       to which I was referred. Furthermore, he had not given consideration
       to the submissions that were made to him  in  respect  of  the  FIR,
       during which the point was made that the document provided was  only
       a copy. He was also referred to background evidence in  relation  to
       the production of false documents. He had not made reference to  the
       decision in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 which was also part  of
       the submissions made to him on the FIR. The letter from  the  police
       that the  judge  concluded  supported  the  appellant's  account  of
       domestic violence was limited in detail.

    7. Although the appellant's witness statement referred to  the  matters
       raised in the refusal letter, the judge had not made  an  assessment
       of those responses by the appellant.

    8. There was inadequate  consideration  of  the  question  of  internal
       relocation. To that effect I was referred to  the  decision  of  the
       Court of Appeal in KA and Others (domestic violence) risk on  return
       (Pakistan) CG UKUT 216 (IAC).

    9. Ms Turnbull drew my attention to the determination at [13] where the
       judge specifically stated that he had considered  all  the  evidence
       before  reaching  his  conclusions.  At  [23]  he  stated  that   in
       undertaking the credibility assessment he had taken into account all
       the oral and written evidence, and the documents. He found that  the
       appellant had given a plausible explanation as to how  she  obtained
       the FIR. There is reference in  the  determination  to  the  lengthy
       cross-examination of the appellant.

   10. Consideration had been given to the issue of internal relocation and
       sufficiency  of  protection,  but  also  the  fact   of   widespread
       corruption. There had been adequate consideration of  KA.  The  fact
       that the appellant would be returning without adequate support meant
       that her circumstances were different from what they had been in the
       past.

   11. In reply it was submitted  by  Ms  Martin  that  given  the  judge's
       conclusion at [28x] that the appellant's husband would not  be  able
       to locate her wherever she was in Pakistan, she would not need to go
       to a shelter. Since the children were of school  age  the  appellant
       would be able to work whilst they went to school.

Conclusions

   12. I do not consider that there is any merit in the criticism  made  by
       Ms Martin in terms of the judge having stated at the outset  of  the
       credibility assessment at [23] that he found  the  appellant  to  be
       credible, before then going on to give his reasons with reference to
       the evidence. Plainly he had to start  his  written  elaboration  of
       reasons somewhere and it was legitimate for him  to  have  given  an
       indication at the outset of his  view  of  the  appellant,  provided
       legally satisfactory reasons were then given for that assessment.

   13. The real question arises as to whether the reasons that he gave  are
       legally sufficient so as to be sustainable. At  [24]  Judge  Hindson
       indicated that the appellant had given a consistent account and that
       it was an account that remained consistent during cross-examination.
       Whilst consistency in an account is unlikely to be determinative, it
       is a legitimate matter for a judge to take into account. It is  also
       reasonable to infer  that  Judge  Hindson  was  satisfied  that  the
       appellant had given satisfactory answers to the  questions  she  was
       asked during the course of cross-examination, given his reference to
       the lengthy cross-examination.

   14. At [25] he found that the appellant's account  was  consistent  with
       the background information, another matter  that  was  appropriately
       taken into account.  In  the  same  paragraph  he  referred  to  the
       documentary evidence in support of the account, namely a letter from
       West Yorkshire Police at page 18 and the letter from Pathways Family
       Support Centre at page 21. The letter from the police, as Ms  Martin
       rightly pointed out, does  not  give  any  detail  of  the  domestic
       violence   that   the   appellant   apparently   complained   about.
       Nevertheless, it was open to the judge to find that the  letter  was
       supportive of her account.

   15. So far as the FIR is concerned, Ms Martin read from the typed  notes
       of the Secretary of State's representative who was  present  at  the
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Those notes  however,  as  I
       understood it, were notes of points that were  to  be  made,  rather
       than notes of the submissions that were actually made. Ms Martin did
       also however, refer to annotations on the notes which were  said  to
       be indicative that the points  written  down  had  been  covered  in
       submissions to the judge. I referred  the  parties  to  the  judge's
       manuscript record of proceedings. However, on further examination of
       the record of proceedings, it does appear that submissions were made
       in terms of Tanveer Ahmed. There is also reference to  a  submission
       to the effect that only a copy of the FIR had been  provided.  I  am
       prepared to accept, although this is not clear from  the  record  of
       proceedings, that he was referred to background evidence in relation
       to fraudulent documents in Pakistan.

   16. At [26] the judge stated that the appellant had provided a  copy  of
       an FIR "that supports their account of the attack  on  her  brother"
       (in Pakistan). He went on to state that she had  given  a  plausible
       explanation as to how she had obtained that document. Whilst he  did
       not refer to background evidence as to the prevalence of  fraudulent
       documents in Pakistan, I do not consider that it could realistically
       be argued that he was unaware of the fact that  documents  emanating
       from Pakistan are sometimes, may be even often, fraudulent.  At  the
       very least it is known by immigration judges that in  the  field  of
       immigration and asylum fraudulent or unreliable documents are  often
       relied on by appellants and it is reasonable to conclude that  Judge
       Hindson would have been aware of that fact.  He  evidently  did  not
       take the FIR at face value because he plainly referred to it in  the
       determination as a distinct issue, making a point of stating that he
       found plausible the appellant's explanation as to her obtaining  it.
       Similarly, he evidently was aware that only a copy had been provided
       because he noted that that was the case at [26].

   17. The refusal  letter  does  raise  credibility  issues  in  terms  of
       apparent inconsistency between the  appellant's  husband  apparently
       being controlling of the appellant, yet her being able to study,  go
       out to work, come to the UK for further study,  and  being  able  to
       live apart from her husband in the UK whilst  he  looked  after  the
       children. Judge Hindson did not refer  to  those  potential  adverse
       credibility points in his determination.

   18. However, I note that in the appellant's witness statement  dated  30
       April 2013, responding to the issues raised in the  refusal  letter,
       she does give an explanation for some of the matters raised  in  the
       refusal letter. She refers in another witness statement of the  same
       date to the circumstances of her studying in Manchester.  The  judge
       referred at [10] to the appellant's two witness statements,  and  in
       that  paragraph  and  elsewhere  emphasises  that   all   oral   and
       documentary evidence has been taken into account. It is  not  likely
       that the judge was unaware of what was in  the  appellant's  witness
       statements. Furthermore, at [16] there is at least reference to  the
       appellant  having  said   in   oral   evidence   that   she   worked
       intermittently when her husband allowed her to do so.

   19. It was acknowledged on behalf of the Secretary of  State  before  me
       that it is not necessary for a judge to refer to every aspect of the
       evidence, and to each point made for one side or the other.  On  the
       other hand, it is to be expected that a judge will engage  with  the
       main points in issue.

   20. In this case, I do think that the judge's determination  would  have
       benefited from a clearer  or  more  explicit  demonstration  of  his
       having evaluated the arguments advanced on  behalf  of  both  sides,
       both in the refusal letter and in submissions,  and  to  have  given
       more explicit reasons for the findings that he made. However, having
       considered the determination as  a  whole  in  the  context  of  the
       evidence that was before the First-tier judge, I have concluded that
       the judge's reasons for accepting the credibility of the appellant's
       account are legally sustainable. As I have  indicated,  the  reasons
       could be improved upon, but they are legally adequate.

   21. So far as  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  issue  of  internal
       relocation is concerned,  I  am  satisfied  that  he  gave  adequate
       consideration to that issue with reference to the decision in KA. He
       took into account the availability of shelters for  women,  and  the
       fact that  the  appellant  is  "relatively  well-educated"  and  has
       experience of working as a teacher. However, he also found that  she
       would be living without family support in an area  which  she  would
       not be familiar with, having the care of three  children.  He  found
       that there was a risk that the children, all of whom are  over  five
       years of age, would be taken away from her. In  fact,  according  to
       [241] of KA, that risk only applies to male children and only one of
       the appellant's children, R, is male, aged 11 years. Thus,  although
       the judge overstated the position in terms of a risk  of  separation
       from her children, the point remains a valid one in respect of R.

   22. Ms Martin suggested that  because,  as  the  judge  had  noted,  the
       children are of school age, they  could  attend  school  whilst  the
       appellant went to work. However, I was not referred to any  evidence
       which would indicate how easy it would be for the appellant to enrol
       her children in school in a new area, or indeed what  her  prospects
       for employment would be. In any  event,  as  the  judge  noted,  the
       accommodation available to her in a shelter would be temporary only,
       as explained in KA.

   23. It was also suggested that because the  judge  had  found  that  the
       appellant's husband would not be able to find her wherever she  went
       in Pakistan, she would not have need of  a  shelter.  However,  that
       suggestion fails to take into account the problems that are  evident
       in the background material and in the  decision  in  KA  as  to  the
       difficulties for a lone woman in Pakistan  without  family  support,
       still less a lone woman with three children.

   24. I am satisfied that, brief though it was, the First-tier  judge  did
       conduct  a  fact-sensitive  approach  to  the  issue   of   internal
       relocation, as he was required to do. It is conceivable that another
       judge may have come to a different view on that issue. However, I am
       satisfied  that  his  conclusion  that  the  appellant   could   not
       reasonably available herself of the option  of  internal  relocation
       was one that was open to him.

   25. In conclusion therefore, I am not satisfied that there is any  error
       of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  either  in
       relation  to  the  credibility  assessment,  or  in  terms  of   his
       consideration of the issue of internal relocation

Decision

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to allow the appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds
       therefore stands.



Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and consequently, this determination  identifies
the appellants  by  initials  only.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  may
identify any of the appellants.











Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 15/07/13
