
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03872/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 11th October 2013                            |On 24th October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          MAJID AMOU RAMEZAN-ZADEH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Froom of Counsel, instructed by Chambers
Solicitors (Bradford)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Hillis
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd May 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born  on  23rd  September  1987.  He
    arrived in the UK clandestinely  on  26th  November  2012  and  claimed
    asylum. His application was refused on 4th April 2013.

 3. The Appellant claimed that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Iran
    because, in  2007,  a  friend  of  his  brother's,  a  colonel  in  the
    Revolutionary Guards, got him  a  job  doing  building  maintenance  at
    Kasahan University.  Whilst working there he would talk to two  of  his
    colleagues  about  nuclear  energy  and  the  merits  of  the   current
    government.  Thereafter he met a student, the sister of  his  brother's
    friend, and they began a relationship. Her brother was a colonel in the
    Revolutionary Guard.  He was warned by the security department  of  the
    university not to see her but they continued to meet. In  January  2008
    he was arrested. He was not sure why  but  he  thought  it  was  either
    because he had been talking about politics at work or  because  he  had
    continued to see his girlfriend.  He was taken to an unknown place  and
    detained and beaten so badly that he lost the sight in his  right  eye.
    He remained in hospital for three weeks and was dismissed from his job.
     He never saw his girlfriend again and was  not  arrested  or  detained
    again during the subsequent three years before he left Iran.

 4. He left Iran because he is being sought by the Iranian authorities as a
    consequence of the political activity of his employer.

 5. The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal, finding him  not  credible.
    He did not accept that the Appellant had had a relationship as claimed,
    nor that he had had inappropriate conversations at work.   He  made  no
    findings in respect of the risk in respect of the Appellant's employer.



The  Grounds of Application

 6. The Appellant sought permission on two grounds.  Firstly that the judge
    had erred in law in assuming that the Appellant would have acted  as  a
    reasonable man would be expected to act, which is the  incorrect  test,
    in his assessment of the credibility. Secondly, the judge had failed to
    make any findings  at  all  about  the  trigger  event  which  led  the
    Appellant to leave Iran, namely the claim  that  he  had  come  to  the
    adverse attentions  of  the  authorities  due  to  the  action  of  his
    employer.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hodgkinson in relation to the
    second ground but he granted permission on both.

 8. On 22nd August  2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

 9. Mr Froom relied on his grounds.  Mr Spence acknowledged the  defect  in
    the determination with respect to ground 2 but submitted that otherwise
    the credibility findings were sustainable.



Consideration of Whether there is an Error of Law

10. The judge stated that he inferred that  the  Appellant  would  be  well
    aware of the potential difficulties he could cause for himself in  Iran
    by idle criticisms about the nuclear programme there or the  regime  in
    general.  He did not find it credible that the Appellant would pass any
    adverse comments about the Iranian government with work colleagues.

11. Had that been the only reason for the judge rejecting the  claim,  then
    the criticisms in the grounds might have had more force.   However,  no
    challenge is made in the grounds to the  judge's  primary  findings  in
    relation to the girlfriend,  nor  to  his  assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence.  On his own account the arrest did not take place until eight
    months after  the  conversation  was  supposed  to  have  taken  place.
    Furthermore the Appellant did not leave Iran for a further three  years
    after the claimed conversation with colleagues.  There is no  error  in
    the judge's findings.

12. However, clearly, the fact that the judge failed to make any finding on
    the event which is said to have led to the Appellant's  departure  from
    Iran is a clear error of law and to that extent  the  decision  is  set
    aside.

Further evidence

13. I heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant  who  adopted  his  original
    statement to stand as his evidence-in-chief.  Mr Spence asked him about
    his employer, Hamid. He said they had been class mates towards the last
    two years of high school between the ages of 16 and 18.  The  Appellant
    then got a job with the university but after he was  dismissed  he  did
    not work for four years, staying with his mother.  He had mental health
    issues as a consequence of the detention.

14. The Appellant said that by chance he met his old friend who offered him
    work. He started to work alongside him and  was  paid  roughly  300,000
    tomans every week or two. They worked together for  two  months  before
    Hamid suggested that they register a  company  together  so  that  they
    could bid for bigger projects. He gave Hamid all of  his  documents  to
    register the company and Hamid was then arrested. He  feared  returning
    to Iran because there was no way that he could prove that  he  was  not
    involved in Hamid's political activities.

Further Submissions

15. Mr Spence relied on the reasons for refusal letter and  submitted  that
    there was no reasonable degree of likelihood that the  Appellant  would
    be persecuted upon return to Iran.

16. Mr Froom submitted that the Appellant had not embellished  his  account
    in any way. If anything he had underplayed his claim of  risk  and  the
    logical conclusion was that he was telling the truth.  If  credible  he
    would be at risk.

Findings and Conclusions

17. The starting point for the assessment of this aspect of the Appellant's
    claim is the credibility findings of Judge Hillis.

18. I do not accept that the Appellant's school friend would offer  to  set
    up a company with him.  He had not worked for four years and  had  only
    been reunited with his friend for a couple of months.  It is not at all
    clear what benefit the Appellant would bring to the enterprise.

19. In any event, on the Appellant's own evidence, he   himself  has  never
    carried out any political activities nor has he  attended  any  of  the
    demonstrations  which took place in Iran during the  period  before  he
    left.  There would therefore be no reason for the authorities  to  link
    him with  the  employer's  political  views.  Indeed,  the  Appellant's
    account is that he did not know that his fiend  had  been  a  political
    activist which demonstrates the lack of closeness in the  relationship.



20. There is no real possibility that the Appellant is of any  interest  to
    the Iranian authorities.

Decision

21. The original judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.   It  is
    remade as follows. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

