
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03843/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                 Suman Riaz
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Malik of Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cockrill promulgated on 19  August  2015  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State taken on 16 February 2015 to  remove
    the Appellant from the UK following the rejection  of  her  application
    for asylum.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 September  2014  with
    a visitor's visa and then applied for asylum on 29 September 2014.  She
    was interviewed on 15 October 2014 and her application for  asylum  was
    refused for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter  ('RFRL')
    dated 16 February 2015,  and  the  immigration  decision  that  is  the
    subject of this appeal was then taken in consequence.

3.   The Appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal  dismissed  her  appeal  for  the  reasons  set  out  in   his
    determination.

4.   The Appellant then sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted on 16 September 2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pooler.

Consideration: Error of Law

5.   In support of the Appellant's application for asylum she  submitted  at
    her asylum interview  a  First  Information  Report  ('FIR')  dated  14
    September 2011.  This was a report making allegations  against  members
    of the Appellant's family by individuals who were said to be  militants
    and connected to the Taliban.  The Appellant's case is based on a  fear
    of persecution as an Ahmadi Muslim from, amongst others, other  Muslims
    who promote a different version of Islam and, it is said, seek to visit
    violence upon members of the Ahmadi community whom they consider to  be
    blasphemers or apostates.

6.   Alongside the FIR and its translation, the Appellant also  submitted  a
    letter from a lawyer based in  Lahore  dated  13  December  2011  which
    purported to confirm the authenticity of the FIR  based  upon  a  visit
    that it was said had been made to the issuing police  station  for  the
    very purpose of confirming whether or not the FIR was genuine.  The FIR
    and the lawyers' letter had been used  previously  by  members  of  the
    Appellant's family in successful applications for asylum in the UK.

7.   In the context of the current case it is apparent that  the  Respondent
    sought her own verification of the FIR, and in consequence  a  document
    verification report ('DVR') was produced dated  18  December  2014.   A
    copy of this report is  on  file:  in  summary  it  indicates  that  an
    immigration liaison adviser in the British High Commission at Islamabad
    made a telephone enquiry of the issuing  police  station  and  received
    responses to questions to the effect that there  was  no  record  of  a
    report that matched  the  contents  of  the  report  submitted  by  the
    Appellant, and on that basis the examining officer concluded that he or
    she was satisfied to a high degree of probability that the FIR was  not
    genuine.

8.   Although that DVR is dated 18 December 2014 and the RFRL in  this  case
    is dated 16 February 2015, for reasons that are not apparent  there  is
    no reference to the attempt to verify the Appellant's document  in  the
    RFRL.  The FIR is addressed in the RFRL and  the  Respondent  concluded
    "little weight can be placed on your  FIR  in  support  of  your  claim
    applying Tanveer Ahmed" (see paragraph 30).

9.   The Respondent's conclusion was essentially based on  the  matters  set
    out at paragraph 29 of the RFRL -  extracts  from  a  Canadian  Refugee
    Board document recording various examples  of  false  documents  having
    been produced and the wide availability of  such  documents,  including
    FIRs in Pakistan.  In other words, the RFRL does not say in terms  that
    contact was made with the issuing authority who had confirmed that  the
    document was false, but rather says that because such  false  documents
    are widely available in Pakistan  little  weight  can  be  put  on  the
    particular document that the Appellant produced.

10.  Nor was the DVR included in the Respondent's appeal bundle  filed  with
    the Tribunal and served on the Appellant.  The Respondent's  bundle  is
    on file: in the usual way it sets out a number of annexes of  documents
    and, as I say, the DVR is not included.

11.  On the face of the Tribunal's file it is not immediately apparent  when
    or how the DVR  came  to  be  on  the  Tribunal  file,  and  indeed  no
    particular reference is made to its, as it were, 'provenance'  in  this
    regard in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Ms  Everett  has
    helpfully been able to  tell  me  having  checked  the  minute  of  the
    Presenting Officer who had appeared in front of Judge Cockrill that  it
    would seem that the Presenting Officer became aware of the DVR being on
    the Secretary of State's file on the day before the appeal hearing  and
    made  an  attempt  to  contact  the  relevant  caseworker.   This   was
    unsuccessful.   Nonetheless  authority  was  sought   from   a   Senior
    Presenting Officer and the Presenting Officer was told that she  should
    produce the DVR at the hearing.  It would appear in such  circumstances
    that the DVR was indeed first produced by the Secretary of State on the
    morning of the hearing before Judge Cockrill.

12.  I pause to note that whilst there is no reason to  doubt  that,  and  I
    accept the version advanced by Ms Everett, that the Judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings is absolutely silent on the circumstance of the  DVR  being
    served on the morning of the hearing and, as I have already  indicated,
    his decision otherwise says nothing about the timing of its production.

13.   The  Appellant  has  at  various  stages  in  these  proceedings  been
    represented but  she  was  without  representation  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing itself.  In such circumstances, and bearing  in
    mind that it is not suggested that the  DVR  was  ever  served  on  the
    Appellant or her representatives prior to  the  hearing,  at  best  she
    would have become aware of it on the morning of the  hearing.   In  her
    grounds in support of the application for permission to  appeal  it  is
    asserted that the Appellant had no knowledge of the  DVR  even  at  the
    hearing.  In granting permission to appeal  Judge  Pooler  did  suggest
    that the Appellant might want to consider whether to file  evidence  on
    this issue: however no such evidence has been filed.

14.  Nonetheless I am prepared to accept that at least,  subjectively,  even
    if the DVR were served on the Appellant at the  hearing,  she  did  not
    have any understanding  of  it.  This  would  be  consistent  with  the
    circumstance of her having extremely limited English and not  being  in
    any sense a lawyer. I accept that it is likely that the contents of the
    grounds of appeal are  based  on  the  Appellant's  instructions  which
    reflect her understanding that nothing of significance  was  served  on
    her at the hearing.

15.  In those circumstances it seems to me it is  not  absolutely  necessary
    for me to reach a  firm  conclusion  on  whether  the  DVR  was  handed
    directly to the Appellant or not, but I am satisfied  that  if  it  was
    given to her it is more likely than not that she did not understand  it
    or its implication or have a full and proper opportunity to address  it
    by obtaining further evidence.

16.  I have already commented that the Judge's determination  is  silent  on
    the apparent production of the DVR at the hearing: it seems to me  that
    that silence is unfortunate, and in such circumstances it is not  clear
    whether the Judge turned his mind to the issue of whether it  was  fair
    to proceed with the appeal hearing in circumstances where a lay  person
    with no English was presented on the morning of the hearing (if the DVR
    was indeed given to her) with a  significant  document  challenging  an
    important aspect of her supporting evidence.

17.  Further to that I make the following observations.   The  Judge  refers
    to the DVR for the first time at paragraph 47 of his Decision, where he
    is summarising the evidence that was before  him.   He  says  that  the
    report  "confirmed  that  the  document  analysed  was  not   genuine".
    Although I have had the  benefit  of  seeing  the  DVR  today  and  now
    understand its contents, its contents are not apparent on the  face  of
    the Judge's determination.  I  can  identify  nothing  in  the  Judge's
    determination that sets out the basis of the conclusion of the DVR.

18.  Further  to  this,  although  it  was  apparent  that  there  was  some
    exploration of the contents of the FIR during the appeal hearing -  see
    in particular paragraph 49 of the  decision  where  the  Appellant  was
    asked how she had come into possession of the FIR, and at paragraph  59
    where reference is made to the persons named in  the  FIR  -  there  is
    nothing in  the  Judge's  Decision  that  suggests  that  the  specific
    contents of the DVR were put to the Appellant for comment at all.

19.  In evaluating the Appellant's evidence it is patently  clear  that  the
    Judge was satisfied that the DVR demonstrated that the FIR  was  false:
    see paragraph 73.  Moreover it  is  abundantly  clear  that  the  Judge
    placed very considerable weight on this  circumstance  when  evaluating
    the Appellant's overall credibility.  References are made  to  this  at
    paragraphs 81 and 84 and then at paragraph 86 the Judge says this:

         "I was very troubled to note that the Appellant has relied upon  an
         FIR to try to give weight to her case to show adverse  interest  in
         her on the  part  of  the  authorities.   That  document  has  been
         examined and is found to be other than genuine.   It  seems  to  me
         that evidence is extremely powerful in the context of this case."

20.  The Judge goes on at paragraph 87 to say: "I recognise  that  there  is
    some contrary evidence and that comes from the firm of lawyers  but  in
    the circumstances I strongly prefer the evidence obtained by  the  Home
    Office in the form of the document verification report."  The reference
    to the 'firm of lawyers' is a reference to the letter from  the  Lahore
    advocate dated from 2011.  Whilst in the abstract, and with the benefit
    of having seen both the DVR and the advocate's letter,  the  Judge  may
    well have been entitled to come to a conclusion that the DVR was to  be
    preferred, nonetheless in circumstances where he has not spelt out  the
    contents of the DVR it is not clear on the face of the Decision  itself
    why the DVR was to be strongly preferred: indeed,  as  I  have  already
    observed, no indication was even given by the Judge as to the  contents
    of the DVR.

21.  Be that as it may, the Judge goes on at paragraph 88 to say this:

         "It seems to me that if the Appellant has relied  upon  this  false
         FIR, and I conclude as a matter of fact that she has done so,  that
         strikes at the heart of her case.  It tells me that she is  someone
         who is other than truthful and reliable as a witness.  Indeed I  am
         concerned at the ramifications  for  others  who  have  sought  and
         gained refugee status on the  face  of  it  relying  upon  a  false
         document, at least in part."

22.  At paragraph 92, emphasising yet again the reliance  on  the  DVR,  the
    Judge says: "It seems to me though that what is of critical  importance
    in this appeal is a proper appreciation that the Appellant  has  relied
    upon what I find to be a false document which she has used  to  try  to
    bolster her case."

23.  Finally in his concluding paragraph the Judge says:

         "Finally, I consider that considerable weight needs to be  attached
         to the document verification report concerning this  FIR  and  that
         notwithstanding the support which the Appellant has gained from the
         Ahmadi and Muslim Association in this country and the  observations
         that they have made about her, that in my judgment the  Appellant's
         credibility has been fundamentally affected by presentation of such
         a false FIR."

24.  It is difficult to see that the Judge has not in fact placed  the  very
    greatest amount of reliance upon  the  DVR  and  his  finding  that  in
    consequence the FIR was false as being in itself determinative of  this
    appeal.

25.  In my judgment the approach of the First-tier Tribunal to the  DVR  was
    procedurally unfair.  I am satisfied that the Appellant did not have  a
    proper opportunity to consider the DVR.  I am concerned that the  Judge
    has not explained in his decision the circumstances of  the  production
    of the DVR, and has not overtly given any indication as to  whether  he
    turned his mind to the issue of fairness in proceeding with the  appeal
    without the Appellant, who was unrepresented, having an opportunity  to
    seek advice or consider the contents of the DVR. I  am  also  concerned
    about the lack of clarity in the First-tier Tribunal's decision  as  to
    the contents of the DVR. In total these amount to  material  errors  of
    law in that the Appellant was effectively deprived of a fair hearing of
    her appeal.  That in itself would justify  the  setting  aside  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

26.  A further issue was raised in the grounds seeking permission to  appeal
    in respect of the Judge's approach  to  supporting  evidence  from  the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK.  The Judge has made reference  to  the
    fact of such  documents  being  before  him  at  paragraph  45  of  the
    decision.

27.  There was during the course of the  Appellant's  application  a  letter
    submitted to the Respondent by the Appellant dated 5 October 2014 which
    is in a relatively standard form in which the AMAUK confirms that  they
    have been contacted by the Appellant and that they  are  undertaking  a
    process of verification.  It is not immediately apparent to what extent
    that process was completed and placed before the Respondent's decision-
    maker, but by the time of  the  appeal  there  were  letters  dated  15
    December 2014, 24 February 2015 and 23 July 2015 from the AMAUK.

28.  The Judge has not at any point in the decision set  out  or  given  any
    particular detail as to the  contents  of  those  letters.   I  do  not
    propose to set out in detail the contents now because they will in  any
    event need to be the subject of further consideration in consequence of
    the decision I am making today. Suffice to say that in combination  the
    AMAUK letters detail something of the Appellant's life  and  activities
    whilst in Pakistan.  They provide a level  of  supporting  evidence  in
    respect of persecution of family members, and they also give details of
    the Appellant's  conduct  and  circumstances  in  the  UK  -  including
    specifically involvement with the Ahmadiyya Community  and  involvement
    with activities that might be termed proselytising.

29.  It is not for me, at this stage, to make any  findings  in  respect  of
    those letters, but I note that their contents on the face of it  go  to
    support significant aspects of the Appellant's case.  In particular  it
    may be said irrespective of the issue of the FIR and the DVR that  such
    documents might be germane  to  an  evaluation  of  the  core  question
    identified by the Judge at  paragraph  78  in  these  terms:  "What  is
    central though to a proper appreciation of this case is really  whether
    or not the Appellant was someone who wanted to preach,  to  proselytise
    or whether she was someone who really was quite  content  to  keep  her
    religious faith essentially a private matter."

30.  As I have said, the Judge introduces  the  fact  of  the  existence  of
    these documents at paragraph 45 of his  determination.   Having  simply
    referred  to  the  letters  by  date  he  then  says:  "There  was   no
    representative though from that organisation at Taylor  House  to  give
    any oral evidence."

31.  The next reference to the  documents  is  at  paragraph  61,  which  is
    recounting the Appellant's submissions and evidence.  The Judge records
    that the Appellant made reference to the documents and that she had not
    thought it necessary for an individual to come along from the AMAUK  to
    give evidence in support of her appeal.

32.   Under  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  heading  "My  findings  and
    reasons", I cannot detect any analysis of the contents of  the  letters
    from the AMAUK.  Far less can I identify any  findings  in  respect  of
    those letters.  Whilst the Judge has made reference to  the  supporting
    evidence in the concluding  paragraph  (paragraph  102  already  quoted
    above), he does so, as I say, without  any  actual  analysis  of  those
    letters and essentially  considers  that  they  are  'trumped'  by  the
    circumstance of the DVR.

33.  I am not satisfied that the Judge was entitled simply  to  dismiss  the
    contents of the AMAUK letters without any further analysis on the basis
    that he had concluded adversely in respect of one other document  dated
    from  2011,  and  not  relating  directly  to  the  activities  of  the
    Appellant, and given to the Appellant by family  members.  Any  adverse
    finding in respect of the FIR was not in itself a sufficient  basis  to
    make it  unnecessary  to  descend  to  proper  analysis  of  the  AMAUK
    documents.  In this regard I note the observations of this Tribunal  in
    the cases of MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)
    at paragraph 13 in which comment  is  also  made  on  the  case  of  AB
    (Ahmadiyya Association UK: letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  511(IAC).   I
    am satisfied that the Judge did not properly address the  letters  from
    the AMAUK and that that is a further error of law.

34.  In all those circumstances the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    must be set aside for error of law.

Remaking the decision

35.   It  was  common  ground  between  the  representatives  that  in  such
    circumstances the Appellant had effectively been  deprived  of  a  fair
    hearing of her appeal and it would be necessary for there to be a  full
    rehearing with all issues at large back before the First-tier Tribunal.
     Accordingly this case will be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal  to
    be heard by any Judge other than Judge Cockrill.  It is  not  necessary
    for me to issue any  specific  Directions.   Standard  Directions  will
    apply, but the Appellant is of course now on notice of the  DVR  -  and
    indeed a copy of the DVR has been handed to her  representative  today.
    Necessarily the Appellant will need to turn her mind to how she  wishes
    to address it - but that is  a  matter  between  her  and  her  current
    advisers.

Notice of Decision

36.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.

37.  The decision in the appeal is to be remade  before  any  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill

38.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed   Date: 15 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

