
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03640/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House (Field House)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 10 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                          KHAWAJA IQBAL AHMAD BUTT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Javed, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introductions

1.   The present appeal in the Upper Tribunal is a  result  of  a  grant  of
    permission to appeal given by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer  on  4
    August 2015.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 3 March 1943.   He  came
    to the UK on 15 January 2014 and applied for asylum on 21  March  2014.
    The basis of his application was that he claimed  to  fear  persecution
    from the authorities in Pakistan because he is Ahmadi.  He also  feared
    that the state of Pakistan adequately to control those  who  wished  to
    adopt a hostile attitude to those of the Ahmadi faith.

3.   He completed a  screening  questionnaire  on  21  March  2014  and  was
    interviewed about his application though an interpreter on  16  January
    2015.

4.   Essentially, the appellant's case at the time of those  interviews  and
    now is that he could not openly proclaim his faith in Pakistan  because
    he had suffered persecution in the past and would continue to do so  in
    the future.  His ability to practice his faith  had  been  compromised.
    Since childhood Muslim clerics had agitated against  Ahmadiyya  and  he
    had become an easy target for them.  In May  2010  as  a  result  of  a
    "meticulously  planned  attack"  by  sectarian  terrorists  on   Ahmadi
    worshipers was carried out. Before the appellant left Pakistan  he  was
    forced to leave his job as a lawyer to protect  himself  and  his  wife
    from future attacks.  He did not consider that the Pakistani government
    would help him at  all,  indeed  it  positively  discriminated  against
    Ahmadis.

5.   The respondent  refused  his  application  in  the  light  of  all  the
    evidence available and dismissed the application on the basis that  the
    appellant's protected human rights were  not  engaged;  the  respondent
    noted that the appellant claimed to be  a  retired  district  judge  in
    Pakistan and a prominent member of  the  Ahmadi  community  in  Sialkot
    (question 41 in interview).  He claims to have lived all  his  life  in
    that area, residing with his brother prior to his coming to the UK.  He
    claimed that his eldest brother, Khawaja, was  attacked  in  1988.   He
    also claimed, in reply to question 23 in interview, that he  could  not
    openly practise his faith in Pakistan. However,  the  respondent  noted
    the lack of problems he had experienced as a lawyer with  reference  to
    the answer the appellant gave to question 40 in interview.

6.   The respondent also considered the claim that the  appellant  had  been
    informed by third party sources that, as  a  prominent  member  of  the
    Ahmadi community he would be targeted, was not accepted. However it was
    accepted that  members  of  the  Ahmadi  community  suffered  "problems
    practising their faith only in Pakistan" but not that the appellant had
    provided sufficiently credible evidence as to the alleged  third  party
    sources.   It  was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had   provided
    sufficient detail of the people who were alleged to have caused him  to
    be in danger.  The appellant had not been able to demonstrate that  his
    life was at risk in Pakistan and, the respondent noted, the appellant's
    brother, with whom he resided, had not experienced such problems.

7.   The respondent considered the appellant was not at risk on return.  The
    respondent also considered whether Section 8  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 applied and  decided  that  it
    did.  The appellant had not claimed asylum on entry  into  the  UK  and
    this, the respondent considered, showed that he was a person who feared
    a genuine risk of persecution.  The appellant  had  not  been  actively
    preaching in the UK and she did not consider that he faced  any  threat
    to his well-being as a result of any activities since he  had  been  in
    the UK.

8.   The respondent also considered whether the  appellant  had  established
    any family and private life in the UK but decided  that  he  had  spent
    insufficient time here for paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules to
    apply.  The appellant did not have an automatic right to  choose  where
    to pursue his family or private life  and  there  was  an  insufficient
    basis for him to be allowed to remain in the UK for that reason.

The Appeal Proceedings

9.   The appellant appealed first to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  on  4
    March 2015, stating that the respondent  had  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's right to life under Article 2 of  the  ECHR.   Furthermore,
    the appellant had suffered harassment, threats  and  inhuman  treatment
    which crossed the threshold of Article 3 of the ECHR.

10.  Further, the appellant claimed, the current situation in  Pakistan  was
    unsafe.  Religious extremism was  rife  and  religious  minorities  are
    treated indiscriminately. This would result,  he  said,  in  him  being
    persecuted.

11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew ("the  Immigration  Judge")  dismissed
    the appeal as he considered the evidence to be insufficient.  He  fully
    took account of the oral evidence from the appellant and his son (Noman
    Ahmad).  The Immigration  Judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  could
    discreetly practise his faith in Pakistan and furthermore  he  had  not
    left that country in fear of persecution.  The  Immigration  Judge  was
    satisfied having considered  all  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
    appellant would be able to practise his faith in  Pakistan  as  he  had
    done before he came to the UK.  The Immigration Judge was satisfied  as
    well that some deception had been  used  to  the  ECO  in  response  to
    question  87  in  the  interview.   This   affected   the   appellant's
    credibility.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

12.  The appellant's claim in his grounds that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    failed to assess the evidence in the light  of  the  country  guidance,
    failed  to  take  account  of  objective  evidence  that   the   Ahmadi
    Association is highly organised and any activities in the UK were to be
    monitored by Pakistan. It was necessary for the appellant to  be  given
    international protection because  he  was  a  devoted  Ahmadi  and  his
    religious identity would become known.  There was insufficient evidence
    that the appellant could practise his faith  discreetly.  The  evidence
    pointed to the appellant continuing well established links and devotion
    to the Ahmadi faith.  These matters should be taken into account by the
    Upper Tribunal.

13.  Upper Tribunal Judge Archer considered the grounds to be  arguable  and
    gave permission to appeal.

14.  Subsequently, the respondent considered her Rule 24 response.  In  that
    document the respondent reiterates that the appellant had been able  to
    practice his faith discreetly in the  UK  and  there  was  no  fear  of
    persecution on return  to  Pakistan.   There  was  no  reason  why  the
    appellant should be at risk on return.

15.  At the hearing I heard submissions by both  representatives.   All  the
    grounds of appeal were relied on.  Next, the  case  of  MN  (a  country
    guidance case) was relied on.  That case  suggests  that  a  "holistic"
    explanation  for  an  Ahmadi's  identity  is  required.   Engaging   in
    discussions and preaching are normally part of this.  The appellant was
    an influential Ahmadi who would bring  himself  within  a  category  of
    being at risk.  I was referred to page 27 of the appellant's bundle and
    it was suggested  that  much  of  the  information  in  this  case  was
    consistent with the MN decision.  Paragraphs  3-5  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal set out the guidance in MN.   The  Ahmadiyya  Association  is  a
    highly organised one capable of providing sophisticated information  on
    members.  It  was  capable  of  providing  confirmation  regarding  the
    activities relied on in Pakistan.  The evidence  as  to  the  Ahmadiyya
    Association would have been given relevant weight  by  the  Immigration
    Judge.  The evidence suggested the appellant had a devoted attitude  to
    this religion which is  indicative  of  the  fact  that  he  could  not
    practice his faith "discretely".  Having openly declared himself to  be
    an Ahmadi this went to the heart of his case.

16.  The grounds also allege the Immigration Judge failed to apply the  case
    of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  It was submitted he should have asked why
    the appellant was acting discretely in the practice of his  faith.   It
    was an error of law to treat the appellant  as  a  discrete  worshipper
    when this was in fact  not  the  case.  Also,  the  fact-findings  were
    inadequate.  In the event that I was with the appellant in his  appeal,
    it would be possible to remake  the  decision  based  on  the  evidence
    before the FTT subject to updating that evidence  in  relation  to  any
    activities carried on in the UK since the hearing before the FTT.

17.   The  respondent  pointed  out  that  the  appellant's  claim  was  not
    identical to the claim put forward in the letter at pages 23  -  25  of
    the bundle.  The first-hand evidence at the hearing did  not  show  the
    appellant in quite the same light.  It was submitted that the questions
    the Tribunal needed to ask itself were:

    (i)  is the appellant an Ahmadi?

    (ii) It is reasonable for him to return to Pakistan?

    (iii)    Were he to do so would  he  be  able  to  practise  his  faith
    discreetly?

18.  The Immigration Judge looked at the evidence and concluded  that  there
    would be no such risk.  No error of law had been identified but,  if  I
    was against the respondent on this point, I was invited to re-make  the
    decision on the evidence that had been given before the Tribunal below.

19.  There were no further submissions by the appellant  but  I  noted  that
    both parties agreed that if an  error  of  law  were  found  a  further
    hearing would be needed to update matters.

20.  I reserved my decision as to whether or not there was an error  of  law
    and if so what steps should be taken to rectify matters.

Discussion

21.  The appellant relies on a letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim  Association
    of the UK (AMA).  That letter suggests that the appellant was a "devout
    preacher" who "regularly participated in  preaching  activities".   The
    appellant's brother, according to the letter, was the  district  deputy
    president for the Armir area.  He  had  another  brother  who  was  "an
    advocate" for the Ahmadiyya "community".  According  to  the  documents
    annexed to that letter there is  a  growing  level  of  persecution  of
    Ahmadis within Pakistan. Indeed, their persecution is now enshrined  in
    law.

22.  During the course of argument I was referred to the  case  of  MN.   In
    that case a three judge Upper Tribunal confirmed (see  paragraph  2(ii)
    of the head note) that it has, for some time, been possible for Ahmadis
    to practise their  faith  on  a  restricted  basis  without  infringing
    Pakistan law.  The burden rests on an appellant to show that it is  "of
    particular importance to  his  identity  as  an  Ahmadi  to  engage  in
    behaviour 'in defiance of the legislation'" before he will be  regarded
    as likely to be in need of international protection.  In such a case it
    would be appropriate to enquire of the appellant his intentions  as  to
    his faith. Each case will require careful evidential "analysis".

23.  The respondent did not accept the appellant's claimed activities as  an
    Ahmadi in Pakistan (see paragraph 12 of the  refusal  letter  dated  20
    February 2015).  Nor did the respondent accept that the  appellant  was
    at risk on return.  At paragraph 16 of her refusal the respondent noted
    that his brother had not experienced problems.  The letter from the AMA
    was considered by the respondent as part of the evidence  in  the  case
    but she noted it did not state how  the  appellant  had  practised  his
    faith, and at paragraph 18 of her refusal the  respondent  pointed  out
    that she would not give the evidence concerned much weight. The claimed
    activities, for example attending Friday prayers,  did  not  amount  to
    very much and were insufficient to place that appellant within an  "at-
    risk" category.  It was the respondent's view that  the  appellant  was
    not a genuine refugee or person  in  need  of  humanitarian  protection
    having delayed significantly in advancing his claim  and  having  first
    come to the UK for reasons  unconnected  with  his  Ahmadi  faith.   In
    particular, he stated in answer to question 87  in  interview  that  he
    wanted to "see his son".  Having arrived on a visa the  appellant  then
    decided to make an opportunistic claim for asylum. In any  event  there
    was no substantial evidence to support  his  alleged  practice  of  the
    faith in Pakistan.

24.  The respondent rejected the appellant's  case  in  its  entirety.   The
    Immigration Judge pointed out in paragraph 13 of her decision that  she
    had considered the evidence as a whole, but nevertheless had to make an
    assessment of the reliability of  the  appellant's  account.  She  also
    pointed out more than once in her decision that she needed to  make  an
    evaluation of all the evidence and ask herself whether it  demonstrated
    an intention on the part of the appellant to practise his faith openly.
     Having accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  well-known  Ahmadi  the
    Immigration Judge went on to reject the  evidence  that  the  appellant
    preached to any others. Thus he only preached to his relatives or those
    he knew. Any "chalking" was not directed at  the  appellant  personally
    but aimed at those of the  Ahmadi  faith  generally.   The  Immigration
    Judge shared the concern expressed by the respondent as to  the  timing
    and opportunistic  nature  of  the  appellant's  claim  which,  by  the
    appellant's own admission in interview, was motivated by  a  desire  to
    stay in the UK to maintain contact with his son.  The Immigration Judge
    also expressed a degree of scepticism over the threats  allegedly  made
    to the appellant and having considered the letter from  the  AMA  found
    that the appellant had not left Pakistan because  he  was  in  fear  of
    persecution but for other reasons.  His activities in the UK  were  not
    as significant as had been claimed.

Conclusion

25.  The Immigration Judge was entitled to make her  own  assessment  as  to
    the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account.  She  heard  both  the
    appellant and his son give evidence.  She fully weighed the letter from
    the AMA into the balance but  in  the  end  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had come to the UK for genuine reasons.  His  activities  sur
    place were considered (for example at paragraph 25 of her decision) but
    she found them to be "limited".  The appellant was not thought to  have
    given a wholly credible account of his activities in Pakistan. The fact
    that he had apparently used deception to the Entry Clearance Officer on
    his admission to the UK, by claiming to be coming here for a visit when
    in fact  he  was  coming  here  to  settle,  damaged  his  credibility.
    Overall, these were findings that the Immigration Judge was entitled to
    make on the evidence. Her decision was one she was entitled to come to,
    therefore. The present challenge to  that  decision  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal amounts to a disagreement with the conclusions reached by  the
    FTT but I am unable to identify any material error of law.

Decision

26.  For these reasons I find there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Accordingly, that decision stands.



27.  It follows that the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain in the UK remains.

28.  No anonymity direction was made by the FTT and this Tribunal  makes  no
    such direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
