
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03623/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th October 2016                     |On 17th November 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                H Z J (China)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Sane, Counsel, instructed by Jackson & Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant appealed with leave against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in Liverpool on  12  April  2010  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  him  refugee  status  or
    subsidiary protection on the basis that he is a  North  Korean  citizen
    who was brought up in China from the age of two.  On  16  October  2009
    the Secretary of State gave directions for his removal  either  to  the
    People's Republic of China or to the Democratic Republic  of  Korea  or
    the Republic of Korea, that is North Korea or South Korea.

 2. Since the decision in this appeal in 2010,  the  country  guidance  has
    changed significantly.  The Upper Tribunal has considered the  risk  to
    parents of unregistered  children  in  China  in  AX  (family  planning
    scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 97  (IAC),   and  the  position  of  North
    Korean  migrants  if  returned  to  South  Korea  in  KK   and   others
    (Nationality: North Korea) Korea CG [2011]  UKUT  92  (IAC)  and  GP  &
    Others (South Korean citizenship) North Korea CG [2014] UKUT 391 (IAC).
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not take  any  account  of
    the guidance in those decisions because of course it was not  available
    to the judge in the First-tier.

 3. The appellant grew up in the People's  Republic  of  China  and  has  a
    Chinese citizen wife, and a child born in China in 2009, whom the First-
    tier Tribunal treated as a Chinese citizen.   The  citizenship  of  the
    appellant remains unclear, because  the  First-tier  made  no  decision
    thereon.   The possibilities are that he is actually a Chinese citizen,
    or that he is a citizen of both North Korea and South Korea, in  common
    with all those originating  on  the  Korean  Peninsula,  wherever  they
    originate on the Peninsula.

 4. For the respondent, Mr  Lindsay  confirmed  at  the  hearing  that  the
    respondent accepts that if  the  appellant  is  originally  from  North
    Korea,  he  cannot  be  returned  safely  to  North  Korea,  since  the
    respondent does not dispute that those who have left North Korea are at
    risk of persecution if returned there.

 5. It is also accepted on behalf of the respondent that there is in  place
    a  China-North  Korea  bilateral  return  agreement  which  effectively
    suspends the operation of the  Refugee  Convention  between  China  and
    North Korea, such that a person who may be at risk on return  to  North
    Korea has no protection in China from refoulement to North Korea.

    First-tier Tribunal decision

 6. At paragraph 22 of its decision the First-tier Judge concluded:

         "The appellant, his wife and child would be  removed  as  a  family
         unit.  The wife and child are entitled,  as  Chinese  citizens,  to
         accompany him to China, and there is no evidence adduced that  they
         could not, as family members, accompany him to  South  Korea.   The
         decision does not therefore engage Article 8."

 7. The challenge to the First-tier decision was the subject  of  an  Upper
    Tribunal decision which was subsequently set  aside  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal, which remitted the appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis of
    the risk of refoulement from  China  to  North  Korea  by  the  Chinese
    authorities that was considered in GP (South  Korea).   The  effect  of
    that decision is that the Upper Tribunal  now  has  the  error  of  law
    decision to make again.

    Discussion

 8. There  are  four  possible  scenarios,  depending  on  the  appellant's
    nationality and history, which is a question of fact on which  findings
    still need to be made:

 a) If the appellant's account of his circumstances is true, and  he  is  a
    North Korean who has been ordinarily resident in China for  almost  all
    his life before coming to the United Kingdom, the appellant  cannot  be
    returned to North Korea, nor to China,  because  it  is  accepted  that
    return to China would expose him to a real risk of refoulement to North
    Korea, and to persecution there.

 b) If he is a Chinese citizen with  a  Chinese  wife  and  child,  further
    factual findings will need to be made concerning the risk on return for
    him, his wife and child, applying the AX guidance.

 c) If he is a South Korean citizen claiming to be from North  Korea,  then
    the appellant can be lawfully returned to South Korea,  but  there  has
    been no consideration as to whether, in law or in practice, his Chinese
    wife and child will be allowed to go to South Korea and live there with
    him.

 d) If the appellant is originally from North Korea, neither the First-tier
    Tribunal nor the Court of Appeal has had the opportunity of considering
    whether he and his family can return to South Korea  together,  subject
    to the JIC and Hanawon process as set out in GP (South Korea).

 9. If either (c) or (d) is the correct factual matrix, there is a need  to
    examine carefully  the rights of South Koreans to bring with them their
    spouses of another nationality and also of the citizenship of  children
    born to citizens of South Korea, born while they were living in  China,
    or elsewhere outside the Korean Peninsula.

10. There are therefore numerous  factual  issues  which  require  evidence
    before this decision can be remade.  It is now 6 years since  the  last
    hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  there  may  well  be  other
    considerations concerning the best interests of the appellant's  child,
    and the application of part 5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

11. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of
    fact preserved and remit this appeal for consideration  afresh  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.  A Mandarin interpreter will
    be required.  The appeal is to  be  heard  in  the  Manchester  hearing
    centre if possible.



Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision. The decision will  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson       Date: 16 November 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


