
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03881/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly                |Date Sent                    |
|On 06 February 2014                           |On 27 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                             MANIKGAM SOMALIMGAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott (of Counsel), instructed by Broudie
Jackson Canter,   Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

THE IMPUGNED DECISION

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, aged 37 years.  He challenges
    a decision made on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State"), dated 8th April  2013,  refusing
    his applications for refugee international protection.

 2. The Appellant advanced his claim for protection upon his arrival in the
    United Kingdom at Glasgow Airport on 15th March 2013, having  travelled
    from Colombo to Dubai  and  from  there  by  air.  The  claim  involves
    consideration  of,  amongst  other  things,  the  activities   of   the
    "Liberation Tigers of  Tamil  EeLam"  ["LTTE"  in  shorthand]  and  the
    Appellant's interaction with this organisation.  When  interviewed,  he
    formulated his claim for asylum in the following way:

         "I had been working in Sri Lanka for Govt institution from 2000.  I
         was working  in  LTTE  controlled  area.   I  was  living  in  area
         controlled by Sri Lankan army. I was facing trouble. I was asked by
         LTTE to purchase something for them. I was helping them  when  they
         fell to Sri Lankan forces, area Vahara in 2009.  I was taken by Sri
         Lankan intelligence group.  I experienced torture and injuries.   I
         came to claim asylum.  I returned to Sri  Lanka  05  January  2013.
         During the night, 30th January 2013, I was arrested by  an  unknown
         man. I was tied, my hands, blind folded, put in a van  my  face  on
         the floor.  Driven for half an hour. I was accused of  working  for
         LTTE.  Also whilst in the UK they said they  have  evidence  of  my
         involvement in campaign against Sri  Lankan  President  in  London.
         .....


         I attended a Heroes' Day Celebration of Sri Lankan Tamils  here  in
         UK.  Fasting campaign to support Tamils held in Olympic Time."

    The Appellant repeated that he had been coerced  into  assisting  LTTE.
    He first entered the United Kingdom in April 2010, via a student  visa.
    The motive for his return to Sri Lanka in January 2013 was  his  wife's
    ill health.  His apprehension and detention dated from 30th January  to
    13th February 2013, when he was released following  the  payment  of  a
    bribe. He then stayed with relatives in Manampity until  travelling  to
    the United Kingdom a month later.

 3. The refusal decision expressed, inter alia, a rejection of one  of  the
    cornerstones of the Appellant's case, in the following terms:

         "It is considered significant that you cannot  accurately  identify
         the dates of either when you were approached by the  LTTE  or  when
         you actually stopped working for them.   This  is  the  fundamental
         core of your claim as had you never been approached or  worked  for
         the LTTE you would not have the problems you now claim to have  had
         in Sri Lanka."


    The decision maker then addressed the  Appellant's  assertion  that  he
    rejected the initial overtures  from  LTTE  in  either  2005  or  2006.
    Having recited various excerpts from country information sources,  this
    discrete assertion is dismissed in these terms:


         "Given that, especially at that  time,  the  LTTE  were  vigorously
         adhering to a policy of forced recruitment that included  children,
         and even young girls, it is  not  accepted  that  they  would  have
         allowed you to initially turn down their request for  you  to  join
         them.  Therefore, and based on these facts, it is not accepted that
         you were forcibly recruited into the LTTE as you have claimed."

         The immediately succeeding passage is puzzling:


         "Whilst it is acknowledged that this did happen,  it is not,  based
         on the fact that your accounts of your treatment  are  inconsistent
         with country information, accepted that you were involved with  the
         LTTE as you claim."

         It is evident that this "this" can only be a reference to  forcible
recruitment into LTTE.

 4. Next, the decision letter highlighted inconsistent answers given by the
    Appellant in interview relating to places where he had resided  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Referring to a USSD report of 2010, the Appellant's claim  that
    following his release from CID detention in 2009 he  travelled  to  and
    entered Colombo without passing through any military check  points  was
    rejected as not credible. His ability to leave Sri Lanka  from  Colombo
    airport travelling on his personal passport was  considered  indicative
    of the Sri Lankan authorities' lack of interest in him.  This was  also
    considered  to  confound  his  allegation  of  earlier  arrest  by  the
    authorities.  A further identified indicator of lack of credibility was
    his failure to claim asylum having entered the United Kingdom in  April
    2010.  Ditto his voluntary return to Sri Lanka in January 2013, coupled
    with his ability to re-enter without mishap.  It was further considered
    that, based on his answers during interview, his claim to have attended
    an anti-Sri Lankan Government demonstration in the United  Kingdom  was
    not plausible.  This, in term, made his claim of further arrest and ill
    treatment in Sri Lanka in January/February  2013  not  credible.   This
    lack of credibility was considered to be exacerbated by his ability  to
    leave Sri Lanka without  difficulty  in  March  2013,  which  was  also
    considered a further indicator that he is of no  interest  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities. These miscellaneous assessments are encapsulated in
    the following sentence:

         "In conclusion you have, essentially, come and  gone  as  you  have
         pleased from Sri Lanka and it is not accepted that  a  person  with
         the profile you claim to  have  with  the  authorities  would  have
         either been able or allowed to do so."

 5.  The  decision  maker  then  proceeded  to  consider  certain   country
    information sources and, in particular, the FCO report of October 2009,
    concluding:

         "From the information above it  is  not  accepted  that  you  would
         encounter any problems from the Sri Lankan  authorities  on  return
         from the UK as a failed asylum seeker.  This is  due  to  the  fact
         that it is not accepted that  you  satisfy  any  of  the  six  risk
         factors set out in [the FCO report] .....  and you had no  problems
         when returning from the UK in similar circumstances."
    Next, the photographic evidence of injuries to the Appellant's body was
    addressed in the following terms:


         "In the circumstances, it is considered that little weight  can  be
         placed upon these documents and whilst they  indicate  injuries  to
         your person they do not indicate how, or when, you came to  receive
         them."

    This was not considered to be "credible evidence".  The decision  maker
    then considered paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, concluding:


         "In light of the inconsistencies in your account and your delay  in
         claiming, .....  your general credibility has not been established.
          This means the benefit of any doubt is not given to you  regarding
         these  aspects  of  your  claim  for  asylum.   Consequently,   the
         unsubstantiated claims that you were employed by the RDA; that  you
         were arrested in 'I think July 2009' or that you  were  beaten  and
         tortured in detention are not accepted.  It is  not  accepted  that
         you have a well founded reason to fear return to Sri Lanka on  this
         basis."

    The omnibus conclusion was that the Appellant did not qualify  for  the
    grant of refugee status or humanitarian protection and that his removal
    from the United Kingdom would not infringe his rights under  Article  8
    ECHR.

APPEAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 6. Following the making of removal directions dated 11th April  2013,  the
    Appellant appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal [the "FtT"].  The  Notice
    of Appeal, prepared  by  his  solicitors,  was  couched  in  relatively
    formulaic terms.  The determination of the FtT contains  the  following
    identifiable findings and assessments:

    (i)  The Appellant's account of events in Sri  Lanka  was  accepted  as
         truthful.  The Judge found  specifically  that  the  Appellant  had
         assisted  the  LTTE,  while  working  for  the  Sri   Lankan   Road
         Development Authority, as claimed.

      ii) The Judge appeared to find that, related to  (i),  the  Appellant
          was, as asserted, arrested and ill  treated  by  the  Sri  Lankan
          authorities in 2009.


     iii) The Appellant's claim for refugee status was  not  based  on  the
          events concerning the aforementioned detention.  Rather,  it  was
          founded on his  apprehension,  detention  and  ill  treatment  in
          January/February 2013.

      iv)  The  Appellant  had  attended  two  anti  Sri  Lankan  Authority
          demonstrations in  London.  In  consequence,  it  is  "reasonably
          likely" that this will  attract  "adverse  attention"  from  such
          authorities.

       v) (By implication) this is what came to pass,  in  January/February
          2013.

      vi) The Appellant had been ill treated and injured as alleged by  him
          in 2009 and again in 2013.  This constituted persecution and  its
          cause was his perceived support of LTTE.

    Pausing here, it is clear that the Judge accepted the core elements  of
    the Appellant's claim in full.

 7. The Judge then set himself the  task  of  determining  "whether  it  is
    reasonably likely that he will or may be persecuted upon his return  to
    Sri Lanka now."  He referred to the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    GJ (and Others) - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    UKUT 319 (IAC).  He noted that the Civil War in Sri Lanka is  over  and
    that LTTE is now "a spent force".  However, the Sri Lankan  authorities
    "..... have an interest in those who they perceive as  threatening  the
    future security of Sri Lanka".  The Judge then stated  that  those  who
    participated in the  aforementioned  demonstrations  "...   may  be  of
    interest and indeed adverse interest to the  Sri  Lankan  authorities."
    Arrest and detention would entail  "a  substantial  risk  of  treatment
    which clearly amounts  to  persecution.".   The  Judge  then  made  the
    following conclusion:

             "I am able to conclude on the basis of the decision in GJ that
             the Appellant as at the date of my decision is not at risk  of
             treatment that amounts to persecution.  Whilst the Sri  Lankan
             authorities may have had an adverse and  persecutory  interest
             in the Appellant upon his last return to Sri Lanka  I  do  not
             accept that that will or may be the case if he is returned  to
             Sri Lanka again."

    The Judge supported this conclusion by  referring  to  the  Appellant's
    ability to enter (once) and  depart  (twice)  from  Sri  Lanka  without
    mishap and the procurement of his release from the more  recent  period
    of detention by a bribe.  He also described the Appellant as  a  person
    not possessed of "a high profile". He continued:


         "He has carried out no  activities  which  could  be  perceived  as
         threatening to the Sri Lankan state since  his  attendance  at  the
         demonstrations in London."

    Based on this reasoning, the Judge concluded  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to discharge the relevant standard of truth.

8.   The central complaint enshrined in the grounds of appeal  is  that  the
    Judge misdirected himself in relation to the decision in GJ.  Based  on
    the Appellant's very recent persecution in Sri Lanka (as found  by  the
    Judge), linked with his account of being monitored and visited at  home
    between his arrival in Sri  Lanka  and  subsequent  detention  and  ill
    treatment , it was contended by Dr Mynott (and repeated in this  forum)
    that the Appellant belongs to one of the risk categories identified  in
    GJ.  Permission to appeal was granted in terms which acknowledged  that
    the FtT had arguably erred in  law  in  this  respect.   The  grant  of
    permission highlighted  specifically  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    address the "watch list" category of persons at risk identified in GJ.

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

9.   The findings made by the Judge could not  conceivably  have  been  more
    favourable to the Appellant.  Factually, every material  ingredient  of
    his case was accepted by the Judge.   The  resolution  of  this  appeal
    hinges on the application of the decision in GJ to the findings made.

10.  The country guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal in GJ (and  Others)
    was promulgated in July 2013.  The  Tribunal  conducted  an  exhaustive
    enquiry into current conditions in Sri Lanka.  Its decision  is  multi-
    faceted.  For the purposes of this appeal, it suffices to  record  that
    the Upper Tribunal held as follows:

       i) The detention of any person by the Sri Lankan  Security  Services
          generates  a  real  risk  of  ill  treatment  or  harm  requiring
          international protection.


      ii) The Sri Lankan  government  is  now  in  control  of  the  entire
          country.

     iii) One of the categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or
          serious harm on return to Sri Lanka is constituted by  those  who
          are, or are perceived to be, a threat to  the  integrity  of  Sri
          Lanka as a single state because they have, or  are  perceived  to
          have, a significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil
          separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal  of  hostilities
          within Sri Lanka.

      iv) The Sri Lankan authorities operate a  sophisticated  intelligence
          gathering machinery, both at home and  abroad.   They  are  aware
          that many Sri Lanka Tamils travelled abroad as economic  migrants
          and, further, that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some
          level of involvement with the LTTE during the civil war.

       v) In post-conflict Sri Lanka a person's past history is relevant to
          the extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities  as
          indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan State or  the
          Sri Lankan government.

      vi) The Sri Lankan authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence
          led "watch" list.  Those on this list are not  reasonably  likely
          to be detained  at  the  airport  upon  return  to  the  country.
          However,  they  will  be  monitored  by  the  security   services
          thereafter.

    At this juncture, we observe that, as regards the "watch"  list,  there
    is a breakdown of two discrete sub-categories of persons:


    (a)  Those  who,  following  monitoring,  are  not  considered  by  the
         authorities to  be  Tamil  activists  working  to  destabilise  the
         unitary Sri Lankan State or to revive the internal armed conflict.


    (b)  Those who, in contrast, are considered or perceived to be involved
         in such activities.


    The members of group (a) are not reasonably likely to be detained (and,
    hence, ill treated),  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  In  contrast,
    membership of group (b) stimulates  this  very  risk  to  a  degree  of
    probability.   Finally,  in  considering  the  generic   "watch   list"
    category, the Tribunal held that each  case  will  be  fact  sensitive,
    dependent on any diaspora activities of the person concerned.


11.  In our judgment, there is a basic error of law in the determination  of
    the FtT.  This consists of the Judge's failure to recognise that, based
    on hier findings of fact, the effect of the decision in GJ (and others)
    is to place the Appellant in at least one, and  probably  two,  of  the
    recognised categories of persons at risk in contemporary Sri Lanka.  In
    our view, the Judge's findings of  fact  impelled  inexorably  to  this
    conclusion.   They  did  so  on  account  of  her  acceptance  of   the
    Appellant's story in full, the key  elements  whereof  are  his  former
    employment by the Government; his active assistance  to  LTTE  in  such
    capacity; his 2006 arrest, detention and ill treatment on this account;
    his act of fleeing the country  in  consequence;  his  anti-Sri  Lankan
    government activities in one of the diaspora "hot spots";  his  further
    arrest, detention and ill treatment by the Sri Lankan  security  forces
    in January/February 2013; and his ensuing flight from the country.   In
    our view, the error of law in the judgment is clearly demonstrated.  We
    would add that it is underscored by  the  Judge's  evident  failure  to
    attribute any weight to the very recent events involving the  Appellant
    in Sri Lanka and her failure to give effect to the unequivocal  finding
    that the Appellant has been the subject of persecutory treatment on two
    separate occasions and, further, that this was motivated each  time  by
    his perceived support of LTTE and anti-government orientation.

DECISION

12.  Given  the  Judge's  findings,  we  consider  that  the  only  rational
    conclusion available to her was that the Appellant is a person at  risk
    of persecutory treatment in Sri Lanka, having regard to the decision in
    GJ (and Others).  This gives rise to a twofold conclusion:

       i) The decision of the FtT must be set aside.


      ii) We remake the decision by allowing the appeal.

                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 19 February 2014
