

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03101/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 12 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     JOO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells instructed by Jackson & Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).
Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born  on  7  July  1979.
      She came to the UK in June 2009 with  leave  as  a  dependent  of  her
      husband who was a student in the UK and who had leave valid  until  21
      April 2010.  Subsequently, the appellant's leave was extended in  line
      with that of her  husband  until  4  March  2013.   He  unsuccessfully
      applied for further leave and as a consequence both his leave and that
      of the appellant expired.  On 14 February 2013, the appellant  claimed
      asylum.   On  8  March  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
      appellant's claim for asylum and on 12 March 2013 made a  decision  to
      remove her to Nigeria by way of directions.

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 30 May 2013, Judge B Lloyd  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal on asylum  grounds,  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR.  First, he  rejected  the  appellant's  account
      that she was at risk on return to Nigeria because she was a Christian.
       Secondly, he concluded that the appellant could not succeed under the
      Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) under Appendix FM or para 276ADE
      based upon her  family  and  private  life  respectively  in  the  UK.
      Thirdly, the Judge rejected the appellant's claim under Article  8  of
      the ECHR which was based, in large  part,  upon  the  claim  that  her
      (then) three year old son (L) was autistic and that it would not be in
      his best interests to return to Nigeria.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   4. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      principally upon the ground that Judge  Lloyd  had  erred  in  law  by
      failing to grant the appellant an adjournment in order that a  further
      medical appointment scheduled  for  shortly  after  the  date  of  the
      hearing could take place and a  report  assessing  her  son's  claimed
      autism could be obtained.

   5. In a determination promulgated on 7 August 2013, Deputy Upper Tribunal
      Judge Birrell concluded that the refusal to grant an  adjournment  was
      procedurally unfair and the Judge had failed to take into account  the
      objective  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  supporting  the
      appellant's contention that there was discrimination  against  persons
      perceived to be disabled physically or psychologically in Nigeria.  As
      a result, DUTJ Birrell set aside Judge Lloyd's decision in respect  of
      Article 8.  No challenge was brought  to  Judge  Lloyd's  decision  to
      dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds  and  that  decision
      stood.

   6. As a consequence, DUTJ Birrell directed that the  appeal  be  relisted
      for a resumed hearing in order for the Upper Tribunal  to  remake  the
      decision under Article 8.  The appeal was initially listed for hearing
      on 24 March 2014.  However, in the absence of  the  appellant  or  any
      representative, that hearing  was  adjourned  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
      (McCloskey J, President and Miss E Arfon-Jones, Vice President) out of
      a concern that the appellant may not have been  given  notice  of  the
      hearing.

   7. The appeal was relisted before me on 12 May  2014.   It  would  appear
      that notice of the previous resumed hearing had not been received  and
      the hearing proceeded before me.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

   8. Mr Christian Howells, who represented the  appellant,  relied  upon  a
      consolidated bundle of documents, a number of which (including medical
      reports and an expert report) had not  been  relied  upon  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Irwin Richards, who represented the Secretary
      of State made no objection to their admission under rule 15(2A) of the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   9. Mr Richards also sought to rely upon  a  small  bundle  of  background
      documents concerning Nigeria which had not been before the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  Mr Howells did not object in principle to  their  admission
      under rule 15(2A) but, as he had not seen the documents prior  to  the
      hearing, he invited me to grant a short adjournment in order  that  he
      could read and consider the documents.  As a consequence, the  hearing
      was adjourned for a little over one hour at the conclusion of which  I
      heard oral submissions from both Mr Howells and Mr Richards.

The Appellant's Case

  10. Mr Howells  relied  exclusively  upon  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   He
      submitted that the sole issue was one of proportionality and the  best
      interests of L.  He submitted that in considering L's  best  interests
      there were two issues:

           1) Would there be  educational  or  medical  support  for  L  in
              Nigeria? and

           2) Would there be discrimination  (putting  it  at  its  lowest)
              faced by L because of his autism in Nigeria?

  11. Mr Howells submitted that on a balance  of  probabilities  if  L  were
      returned to Nigeria he would not receive the treatment or  support  he
      was receiving in the UK for his autism.  Additionally, he  would  face
      discrimination and violence because of his autistic condition and  the
      risk that he would be perceived as a witch.  Mr Howells submitted that
      taking into account either of these factors (but certainly both)  made
      the appellant's removal to Nigeria disproportionate  even  though  she
      would be accompanied by her husband and their second child (S) who was
      born on 20 July 2013.

  12. Mr Howells drew my attention, and relied upon, a number  of  documents
      in the appellant's consolidate bundle and some additional documents in
      the bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.    First,  he
      relied upon a number of documents which, he submitted, established L's
      diagnosis of autism, his needs and that it was in his best interest to
      continue to receive his current  support  in  the  UK:  "Statement  of
      Special Educational Needs" page 56 at pages  57,  58,  59  and  61;  a
      report of W Davenport, Specialist Speech and Language Therapist  dated
      27 January 2014, page 76 at page  77;  report  of  Dr  Kate  Greening,
      Clinical Psychologist dated 11 November 2013, page 78 at pages 78, 79,
      80 and 81;  a  letter  from  Dr  Elspeth  Webb,  Reader  and  Honorary
      Consultant in Child Health at page 95.  Secondly, in relation  to  the
      situation in Nigeria and the perception of autism as an  attribute  of
      witchcraft: an expert report of Gary Foxcroft  dated  21  April  2014,
      pages 103, 104, 105 and 106; a report entitled "Report on  Accusations
      of Witchcraft  against  Children  in  Akwa  Ibom  State,  Nigeria"  by
      Stepping Stones Nigeria (UK) dated 10 May 2014, page 112 at pages 113,
      119, 120 and 121; the Country of Origin Information Service report  on
      Nigeria dated 14 June 2014, page 133 at pages 138, 140 and 148-149.

  13. Mr Howells also referred me to the "US  Department  of  State  Country
      Report on Human Rights Practices: Nigeria 2012" page 25 of FTT  bundle
      at page 28 in relation to the social stigma and  discrimination  faced
      by persons with disabilities; a paper entitled "Autism  among  Primary
      School Pupils in Benin Metropolis: Implications for Counselling"  page
      257 of FTT bundle at page 72 again  dealing  with  the  perception  of
      children  with  autism  in  Nigeria;  a   paper   from   the   Refugee
      Documentation Centre of Ireland dated 13 May 2010, page 189 of the FTT
      bundle at pages 190-192 dealing with again the perception of  children
      with autism in Nigeria and the issues of  discrimination  and  support
      provided to them.

  14. As regards the law, Mr Howells accepted that the situation of L  could
      not engage the high threshold for Article 3 of the ECHR. Nevertheless,
      Mr Howells submitted that a number of decisions of the Court of Appeal
      and the Upper Tribunal made clear that even  in  a  so-called  'health
      case' an individual could succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR even  if
      a claim under Article 3 was bound to fail.  Specifically, he  referred
      me to the Upper Tribunal's decision in  Akhalu  (Health  Claims:  ECHR
      Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC) and the Court of Appeal's  decision
      in R (SQ) Pakistan v UTIAC [2013] EWCA Civ 1251.

  15. Mr Howells sought to identify a  number  of  factors  in  this  appeal
      which, when taken with the evidence  which  he  submitted  established
      that L would face discrimination (at the very least) and an absence of
      support on return to Nigeria, justified a finding that the appellant's
      removal (with L) would be disproportionate.   First, he submitted that
      this was not a 'health tourism case' as L had been born in the  UK  in
      April 2010 and, as a consequence, had  not  come  to  the  UK  seeking
      treatment or support.  Secondly, L is a child and, unlike the case  of
      an  adult,  his  "best  interests"  were  in  play   and   a   primary
      consideration following ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.   Thirdly,
      Mr Howells submitted that the appellant and her husband had always had
      lawful leave to be in the UK.  He submitted that the respondent  could
      not point to anything which would outweigh the  effect  on  L  of  his
      return to Nigeria and that this would not be in his best interests.

  16. In response to Mr Richards' reliance upon the  new  evidence  admitted
      under rule 15(2A), and in particular in relation to the printout  from
      the "Patrick Speech and Language Centre", Mr  Howells  submitted  that
      the Secretary of State had  made  no  proper  enquiries  whether  this
      institution could provide,  albeit  limited  to  speech  and  language
      support, adequate care and support for L.  Mr Howells  submitted  that
      it was simply not adequate for the Secretary of  State  to  provide  a
      printout from a website and place reliance  upon  it  without  further
      enquiry.

  17. Mr Howells invited me to allow the appellant's appeal, based primarily
      upon L's circumstances, under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The Secretary of State's submissions

  18. Mr Richards accepted that it was "fairly easy" to  conclude  that  L's
      best interests were to remain in the UK and  to  continue  to  benefit
      from the significant investment made  in  him  in  this  country.   Mr
      Richards did not  seek  to  argue  that  L  would  receive  comparable
      services and support for his autism in Nigeria.  However, Mr  Richards
      submitted that L's best  interests  were  not  determinative  of  this
      appeal.

  19. First, he relied on  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  come  as  a
      dependent of a student whose leave had now  expired  and  she  had  no
      expectation of remaining in the UK.

  20. Secondly, she had made an asylum claim and, the account upon which she
      had based that claim, had been rejected by the First-tier Tribunal.

  21. Thirdly, Mr Richards submitted that the  bundle  of  documents  relied
      upon by the Secretary of State showed that education and  support  was
      available for children with autism in Nigeria even if that support was
      not comparable to that in the UK.

  22. Fourthly, Mr Richards submitted that the expert's report dealing  with
      whether a child with autism would be  perceived  as  a  witch  was  of
      limited assistance because it did not focus on the situation in  Lagos
      to which  the  appellant  and  L  would  be  returned  and  where  the
      appellant's family lived.  Mr Richards submitted that the evidence was
      largely dealing with the abandonment of children with autism by  their
      families and mistreatment of children as a result.  He submitted  that
      there was no suggestion that that was going to happen  in  this  case.
      Here, he submitted, L had two parents who were striving  to  do  their
      best for him and there was no reason to conclude that that  would  not
      continue in Nigeria.  L would, as a result,  have  the  best  possible
      protection from ill treatment or discrimination.

  23. Fifthly, Mr Richards submitted  that  given  the  evidence  that  some
      support was available to children with autism and that  L  would  have
      the support of his parents, bearing in mind that his  parents  had  no
      claim to remain in the UK, the appellant's removal was  proportionate.
       Mr Richards relied upon Akhalu where the  Upper  Tribunal  recognised
      that:

           "The counter-veiling public interest in  removal  will  outweigh
           the consequences for the health of the  claimant  because  of  a
           disparity of healthcare facilities in all but a  very  few  rare
           cases." (at [43])

      Mr Richards submitted that the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  L
      would be at any real risk of being harmed  or  suspected  of  being  a
      witch given the protection of his family and there was no evidence  to
      show a significantly increased risk of discrimination  in  Lagos.   Mr
      Richards invited me to find that whilst it might well be in  L's  best
      interest to be in the UK,  nevertheless,  having  regard  to  all  the
      circumstances the appellant's removal (with L) was proportionate.

The Legal Framework

  24. The appellant relies exclusively upon Article  8  of  the  ECHR  which
      provides as follows:

           "Article 8

              1. Everyone has the right  to  respect  for  his  private  and
                 family life, his home and his correspondence.

              2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with
                 the exercise of this right except such as is in  accordance
                 with the law and is necessary in a  democratic  society  in
                 the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
                 economic well being of the country, for the  prevention  of
                 disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
                 or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedoms  of
                 others."

  25. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish that there  are
      substantial grounds for believing that if returned to Nigeria there is
      a real risk of a  breach  of  Article  8.   The  burden  is  upon  the
      Secretary of State to justify any interference  with  the  appellant's
      right to respect for her private and family life under Article 8.2.

  26. In applying Article 8, the five stage test set out in the  opinion  of
      Lord Bingham of Cornhill in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKUT 27  at  [17]
      as follows:

           "(1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
                 authority with the exercise of  the  applicant's  right  to
                 respect for his private or (as the case maybe) family life?

              2) If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of  such
                 gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of  Article
                 8?

              3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

              4) If so, is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
                 society in  the  interests  of  national  security,  public
                 safety or the economic well-being of the country,  for  the
                 prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
                 health or morals, or for the protection of the  rights  and
                 freedoms of others?

              5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
                 public end sought to be achieved/"

  27. At [20], as regards the issue of proportionality,  Lord  Bingham  said
      this:

           "[it] always involve(s) the striking of a fair  balance  between
           the rights of the individual and the interests of the  community
           which is inherent in the whole of the Convention.  The  severity
           and consequences of the interference will  call  for  a  careful
           assessment at this stage."

  28. In this appeal, the appellant does not now argue that she can  succeed
      under the Immigration Rules whether in Appendix  FM  or  para  276ADE.
      Therefore, in order to succeed under  Article  8  the  appellant  must
      establish that there are  "compelling"  circumstances  such  that  her
      removal would lead  to  "unjustifiably  harsh"  consequences  (see  MF
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Gulshan  (Article  8  -  New
      Rules - Correct Approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)).

  29. In determining whether there is a breach of Article 8 in this  appeal,
      I must have regard not only to the rights of the appellant (and indeed
      of her husband) but also of the rights of her children, in  particular
      L who is now four years old.

  30. In that latter regard, the  'best  interests'  of  L  are  a  "primary
      consideration"   (see   ZN   (Tanzania)).     Although    a    primary
      consideration, the best interests  of  a  child  are  not  necessarily
      determinative of the issue of proportionality  since  those  interests
      can be outweighed by sufficiently strong or weighty considerations  of
      the public interest (see ZN (Tanzania)).

  31. In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74, the  Supreme  Court  summarised  the
      applicable principles as follows (at [10]):

           "(1)  The best interests of a child are an integral part of the
                 proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

           (2)   In making that assessment, the best interests of a child
                 must be a primary consideration, although not always the
                 only primary consideration; and the child's best interests
                 do not of themselves have the status of the paramount
                 consideration;


           (3)   Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed
                 by the cumulative effect of other considerations, no other
                 consideration can be treated as inherently more
                 significant;

           (4)   While different judges might approach the question of the
                 best interests of a child in different ways, it is
                 important to ask oneself the right questions in an orderly
                 manner in order to avoid the risk that the best interests
                 of a child might be undervalued when other important
                 considerations were in play;


           (5)    It is important to have a clear idea of a child's
                 circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests
                 before one asks oneself whether those interests are
                 outweighed by the force of other considerations;

           (6)    To that end there is no substitute for a careful
                 examination of all relevant factors when the interests of a
                 child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

           (7)   A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
                 is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."



The 'Health' Cases

  32. It was conceded by Mr Howells on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  she
      could not succeed under Article 3 of the ECHR in this  appeal  on  the
      basis of the jurisprudence dealing with Article 3 claims in  so-called
      'health' cases.  Those are cases where the whole, or an integral part,
      of an individual's claim to remain in the UK is that they will receive
      (substantially) less favourable healthcare or medical treatment in the
      country to which they are to be returned.  Both the case  law  of  the
      Strasbourg Court and of the House  of  Lords  imposes  a  "very  high"
      hurdle, attainable only in wholly exceptional circumstances,  in  such
      cases (D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423; N v SSHD [2004] 2 AC 296 and N v  UK
      (2008) 47 EHRR 39).  In MM (Zimbabwe) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  279,
      Moses LJ identified the  essential  principles  of  the  case  law  as
      follows at [17]:

           "The essential principle is that the ECHR does  not  impose  any
           obligations on the contracting states to provide those liable to
           deportation  with  medical  treatment  lacking  in  their  'home
           countries'.  This principle applies even where  the  consequence
           will  be  that  the  deportee's  life  will   be   significantly
           shortened..."

  33. Consequently, in GS and EO (Article 3 -  Health  Cases)  India  [2012]
      UKUT 397 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal concluded that there was no  breach
      of Article 3 where an individual with end-stage renal failure  was  to
      be returned to his home country where  through  the  lack  of  medical
      treatment he would die within a few weeks.

  34. The case law,  nevertheless,  recognises  that  a  'health'  case  may
      succeed under Article 8 even where it would fail under  Article  3  of
      the ECHR (see Bensaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR 10 at [46]).  The  potential
      health consequences for an individual would engage that aspect of  his
      or her private life  covered  by  the  rubric  of  "the  physical  and
      psychological integrity of [the] person" (see Pretty v  UK  (2002)  35
      EHRR 1 at [61]).

  35. In Razgar, Lord Bingham recognised that this category of case included
      both "health" as  well  as  "welfare"  consequences.   At  [10],  Lord
      Bingham said this:

           "....rights protected by Art 8 can be engaged by the foreseeable
           consequences for health  of  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
           pursuant to an immigration decision,  even  where  such  removal
           does not violate Art 3, if the facts relied on by the  applicant
           is sufficiently strong.  In so answering I make no reference  to
           'welfare', a matter to which no argument was directed.  It would
           seem plain that, as with medical treatment so with  welfare,  an
           applicant could never  hope  to  resist  an  expulsion  decision
           without showing something very much more extreme  than  relative
           disadvantage as compared with the expelling state."

  36. In my judgement, there is no  bright  line  distinction  to  be  drawn
      between 'health' cases and 'welfare' or 'social care'  cases  such  as
      the present.  It would be wrong to distinguish between the social care
      and support that a child such as L, who is  autistic,  needs  and  the
      medical or healthcare per se which were the needs of  the  individuals
      in the jurisprudence.  Although Lord Bingham in Razgar noted  that  no
      argument had been made in relation to 'welfare' cases before the House
      of Lords he nevertheless saw no difference in  principle  in  approach
      (see [10]).  In this appeal, Mr Howells did not seek  to  sustain  any
      distinction and his submissions were based squarely upon the  'health'
      cases which he sought to pray in aid on behalf of the appellant.

  37. In Razgar, Baroness Hale also considered the application of Article  8
      in 'health' cases.   Having referred to Bensaid at [56], at [59]  Lady
      Hale noted that:

           "Although the possibility cannot be excluded, it is not easy  to
           think of a foreign healthcare case which would fail under Art  3
           but succeed under Art 8.  There clearly must be  a  strong  case
           before the article is even engaged and then a fair balance  must
           be struck under Art 8(2).  In striking that  balance,  only  the
           most  compelling  humanitarian  considerations  are  likely   to
           prevail over the  legitimate  aims  of  immigration  control  or
           public safety.  The expelling state is required  to  assess  the
           strength of the threat and strike  that  balance.    It  is  not
           required to compare the adequacies of the  healthcare  available
           in the two countries.  The question is whether  removal  to  the
           foreign country will have a sufficiently adverse affect upon the
           applicant."

  38. In GS and EO, the Upper Tribunal, though only concerned on  the  facts
      of the cases with Article 3, expressed the following  observations  in
      relation to the application  of  Article  8  in  a  'health'  case  at
      [85(8)]:

           "(b)  However, in principle Art 8 can be relied on in  cases  of
           this sort.  The removal of the individual would, on the face  of
           it, engage Art 9(1) on the basis of an interference with his  or
           her private life as an aspect of that individual's 'physical and
           moral integrity' (see Bensaid v UK (2001)  33  EHRR10).   Unlike
           Art 3, however, Art 8 is not absolute and the legitimate aim  of
           the economic well-being of the  country  would  be  relevant  in
           determining whether a breach of Art 8 could be established given
           any financial implications that continued treatment  in  the  UK
           would entail (see also R (on the application of Razgar)  v  SSHD
           [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368).

           (c)  It may be that although, in principle, the scope of  Art  8
           is wider than that of Art 3, in practical terms that in  a  case
           like this where the claimant has no right to remain it will be a
           "very rare case" indeed where such a claim could succeed (see KH
           (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1354  and  MM  (Zimbabwe  v
           SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279).  [1] That  reality  may  lay  at  the
           heart of the majority's view of the Strasbourg Court in N  v  UK
           when, having rejected the individual's claim under Art 3, stated
           that  no  "separate  issue"  arose  under  Art  8  (compare  the
           dissenting Judge's opinion at 1 to 6).

           (d)  Again we note that in N v UK the  minority  disagreed  with
           the failure to address Article 8.  We see some  force  in  this.
           If  it  be  the  case  that  the  Article  3  threshold  is   an
           exceptionally high one because of the absolute character of  the
           prohibition  and  concerns  that  Contracting  States  could  be
           swamped by  health  tourism  claims  by  people  with  no  prior
           connection to the state in question seeking to enter  or  remain
           to gain access to expensive  medical  treatment,  an  Article  8
           proportionality analysis might  yield  a  different  outcome  in
           other cases, possibly where the claimant had a lawful permission
           to reside in the host state before the disease was diagnosed."

  39. In these cases, whilst the  potential  application  of  Article  8  is
      recognised, nevertheless the judges acknowledge  that  in  a  'health'
      case it will be difficult nevertheless  to  succeed  under  Article  8
      either because of the significant threshold to engage Article 8 or, if
      it is engaged, for the circumstances of the individual to be  such  as
      to outweigh the public interest.

  40. In  Akhalu, the Upper Tribunal, having analysed the relevant case  law
      including Bensaid, MM (Zimbabwe), and GS and EO, concluded at [43]:

           "The correct approach is not to leave out of account what is, by
           any view, a material consideration of central importance to  the
           individual concerned but to recognise that  the  counter-veiling
           public interest in removal will outweigh the  consequences  with
           the health of the claimant because of a disparity of  healthcare
           facilities in all but a very few rare cases."

  41.  In  Akhalu  the  Upper  Tribunal  endorsed  a  holistic  approach  to
      proportionality having regard to disparity  in  health  resources  but
      concluding that any such disparity  did  "not  weigh  heavily"  in  an
      individual's favour but rather  spoke  "cogently  in  support  of  the
      public interest in removal" (see [45]-[46]).

  42. Thus far, the cases I have set out all concerned adult applicants.  Mr
      Howells relied upon the case of SQ  (Pakistan)  which,  he  submitted,
      threw a somewhat different light on the case  law  when  a  child  was
      concerned as only then were the  child's  "best  interests"  relevant.
      The case concerned a child who suffered from Beta Thalassaemia, a very
      serious medical  condition  for  which  he  required  treatment.   The
      evidence was that, although healthcare was available in  Pakistan,  it
      was of a significantly lower quality than that available  in  the  UK.
      The applicant had failed in his Article 8 claim before the  First-tier
      Tribunal and had been refused leave to appeal by the  Upper  Tribunal.
      The Court of Appeal was concerned with a judicial review challenge  (a
      Cart challenge) to that refusal of permission to appeal.  The Court of
      Appeal  concluded  that  the  FTT   had   wrongly   excluded   "health
      consideration and the discontinuance of the UK treatment" in assessing
      the child's best interest (see [24]).  As a consequence, the Court  of
      Appeal remitted the case to the Upper Tribunal for  a  rehearing.   In
      doing so, Maurice Kay LJ (with whom Lewison and Underhill LJJ  agreed)
      said this at [26]-[27].

           "26.  What  this  case  demonstrates  is  that  in  some  cases,
                 particularly but not only in relation to children,  Article
                 8 may raise issues separate from Article 3.  In  JA  (Ivory
                 Coast) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009
                 EWCA Civ 1353, an adult succeeded under Article 8 (but  not
                 Article 3) in a health case.    Sedley  LJ  emphasised  (at
                 paragraph 17) that each of the  two  Articles  "has  to  be
                 approached and applied in  its  own  terms".   The  leading
                 authorities of D and N were distinguishable  on  the  basis
                 that,  in  both  of  them,  the  appellants'  presence  and
                 treatment in this country "were owed entirely  to  unlawful
                 entry".  JA's appeal was  allowed  and  her  case  remitted
                 because of the potential significance  of  the  fact  that,
                 following her lawful  entry  and  subsequent  diagnosis  of
                 HIV+, she had been granted  further  exceptional  leave  to
                 remain for treatment.  Although no separate Article 8 issue
                 arose in D or N, it plainly did in JA.

           27.   I do not intend  to  predict  or  seek  to  influence  the
                 outcome of the present case on remittal.  On the one  hand,
                 MQ can prey in aid his lawful entry and  his  status  as  a
                 child with the protection of the ZH approach.  On the other
                 hand, he arrived with his serious medical conditions at  an
                 advanced stage and, although not an  unlawful  entrant,  it
                 will be relevant to consider whether his arrival here was a
                 manifestation of "health tourism".  If it was,  that  would
                 fall to be weighed in the balance.  After all, this country
                 is under no international obligation always to act as  "the
                 hospital of the world".  The difficult question is  whether
                 it would be disproportionate to remove this  child  in  the
                 light of all  the  evidence  in  the  case,  including  the
                 medical evidence which,  at  present,  is  not  as  clearly
                 presented as it could be."

  43. As [27] makes plain, the  Court  of  Appeal,  whilst  recognising  the
      potential application of Article 8 to the applicant, nevertheless  was
      not persuaded that the claim was bound either to succeed or to be lost
      (see also [25]).  The matter was properly  to  be  determined  by  the
      Upper Tribunal on the basis of all the evidence.

  44. Nevertheless, SQ (Pakistan) illustrates that even in a 'health'  case,
      Article 8 may have (greater) purchase where the applicant is a  child.



  45. That approach was followed in the more recent decision of the Court of
      Appeal in AE (Algeria) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  653  decided  shortly
      after the hearing in this appeal.  That case  involved  an  individual
      who had a six year old daughter with spina bifida  which  resulted  in
      her being very severely disabled, with  severe  learning  difficulties
      and extremely complex needs (see  [1]).   There  also,  the  Court  of
      Appeal remitted the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider  the
      application of Article 8 on the basis  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
      failed properly to consider  the  child's  best  interests.   At  [9],
      Maurice Kay LJ (with whom Black and Lewison LJJ agreed) said this:

           "What was required was  a  structured  approach  with  the  best
           interests of [M] and her siblings as a primary consideration but
           with careful consideration also of factors  pointing  the  other
           way.  Such factors include but are  not  limited  to  the  over-
           staying of the children and their mother and the  illegal  entry
           and bogus asylum claim of the appellant father.  The  latter  is
           no doubt what the UT had in mind when referring to 'the need  to
           maintain immigration control'.  Moreover, I do not consider that
           it would be inappropriate for the future cost  and  duration  of
           [M's] treatment and care in this country to play a part  in  the
           balancing exercise as matters  relating  to  the  economic  well
           being  of  this  country,  given  the  strains  on  the   public
           finances."

  46. Again, the Court remitted the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  the
      "outcome is not self-evident" (see [9]).

  47. It seems to me that the decisions in SQ and AE represent no more  than
      an application of the "best interests" jurisprudence as summarised  in
      Zoumbas above.  Whilst the circumstances of a child  may  (though  not
      must) more readily engage Article 8.1,  in  assessing  proportionality
      and taking into account as a "primary consideration"  a  child's  best
      interests, the public interest remains to be weighed bearing  in  mind
      the clear steer of the Strasbourg and domestic courts that, even under
      Article 8, the public interest reflected in the economic well-being of
      the country remains a powerful  and  weighty  factor  in  'health'  or
      'welfare' cases.  As both the Court of Appeal  in  MM  and  the  Upper
      Tribunal in Akhalu recognised, the Convention  imposes  no  obligation
      upon a contracting state to provide medical  treatment  or  healthcare
      (including social care for the purposes of this appeal) when it is not
      available (or not so well  provided)  in  the  country  to  which  the
      individual is to be removed and  so  it  will  only  be  in  a  "truly
      exceptional" or "very rare case" where the public will  be  outweighed
      by the individual's circumstances even  where  that  individual  is  a
      child.

  48. With those principles in mind, I turn to consider the evidence to make
      findings of primary fact and to apply  those  findings  to  the  legal
      framework or Article 8.

Discussion and Findings

  49. I deal first with the evidence concerning L's circumstances.   He  was
      born on 19 April 2010 in the UK and is, consequently,  now  just  four
      years old.  It is now not disputed that he  has  been  diagnosed  with
      "Autistic Spectrum Condition"  (see  Statement  of  Special  Education
      Needs at page 57 of the consolidated bundle).  He is  currently  in  a
      mainstream school but, as I understand it, if he  remains  in  the  UK
      will attend a school for children with special  educational  needs  in
      the autumn.  That is a consequence of the "Statement" dated  18  March
      2014.  That report (at page 57) notes that since he started  attending
      nursery L:

           "has made small steps of progress...he seems more  settled,  had
           adjusted to the daily routines and  is  able  to  sit  for  long
           periods of time on the carpeted area".

  50. In relation to his communication and interaction, it is said that:

           "L currently shows little communicative intent.  His ability  to
           communicate is at a pre-verbal level, with a reliance on the use
           of   vocalisation,   simple   physical   gestures   and    adult
           interpretation of his needs.  L is reported to respond  well  to
           music and songs and will attempt to  join  in.  He  presents  as
           having a limited understanding of spoken language."

  51. At page 58, the Statement continues:

           "L is totally dependent on adult assistance as he is not able to
           help with dressing or undressing and is not yet toilet  trained.
           He has a lot of issues around food.  He used to use a spoon, but
           now does not; it is not known whether this is because  he  can't
           or because he won't."

  52. L's general health is good, and there are no  reported  concerns  with
      his gross motor skills, vision or hearing, although he is sensitive to
      certain noises and to loud noises.

  53. In relation to his educational provision the report sets out at  pages
      60-61 what is required to meet his "needs and objectives".  Mr Howells
      highlighted 4 of the 22 points made as follows:

           "1.   L requires access to  a  broad  and  balanced  educational
                 curriculum, suitably differentiated  to  meet  his  special
                 educational needs.  This will be delivered in  a  provision
                 that  provides  a  high  level  of  individual/small  group
                 teaching with a high  adult  to  pupil  ratio,  with  staff
                 experienced/trained in managing the needs of children  with
                 an  autism  spectrum   condition   and   with   appropriate
                 interventions....

              3.  L  requires  daily  teaching  and  consistent  use  of  an
                 augmentative  approach  to  communication   (e.g.   Picture
                 Exchange Communication  System  -  PECS)  across  different
                 settings (school and home). ...

             18. L requires a carefully  planned,  graduated  and  supported
                 transition to Reception class, with all staff to  be  aware
                 of his needs...

           21.   L needs continued access to a range of  specialists  (e.g.
                 speech and language therapy/Autism  Support)  in  order  to
                 carry out ongoing assessments  of  his  needs  and  provide
                 advice and support in addressing those needs."

  54. In his report Mr W Davenport (dated 27 January 2014) at pages 76-77 of
      the consolidated bundle assesses the speech and language needs  of  L.
      He concludes that:

           "77.  L has been diagnosed as having ASD.  In accordance he  has
                 specific difficulties in the areas of social communication,
                 social  interaction  and   flexibility   of   thought   and
                 behaviour.  He  needs  an  environment  that  supports  his
                 learning  needs;  highly  structured,  calm  and   visually
                 supported.  His difficulties are specific and  need  school
                 based Speech and Language Therapy delivered by a Speech and
                 Language Therapist specialised in ASD working as part of  a
                 multi disciplinary team"

  55. Dr Greening, a Clinical Psychologist in her report dated  11  November
      2013 at pages 78-81 of the consolidated bundle reports that L's father
      told her that:

            "L "displayed 'deep stress and anxiety' during the moves to and
           from Liverpool.  He found the moves very unsettling and appeared
           afraid and anxious.  L is said to be very  clingy  with  adults,
           and does not like to be left alone at night.  His father has  to
           lie beside him until he has fallen asleep, and  he  is  said  to
           continuously check to see if his dad is still there.  His  sleep
           is poor, and he wakes up a  lot  during  the  night  crying  and
           shouting."

  56. Mr Howells referred me to passages in Dr Greening's report noting  L's
      "lack of social engagement" and  that  he  does  not  "appear  to  use
      language to communicate".  At pages 80-81, Dr  Greening  concludes  as
      follows:

           "L will continue to require one-to-one support to encourage  his
           development and engagement with  other  children  and  help  him
           achieve his full potential.  L's parents  will  greatly  benefit
           from being enrolled on the Early Bird course, which will offer a
           unique opportunity to  help  them  understand  L's  autism,  and
           develop strategies for interacting and communicating with him.

           L will certainly benefit from being  nurtured  within  a  stable
           home and school environment, therefore moving L and  his  family
           to Nigeria is likely to significantly impede his development, as
           it is unlikely that L will receive the support and understanding
           that he undoubtedly needs."

  57. Mr Howells relies upon the impact that moving L to Nigeria would  have
      given the experience when he moved from Liverpool previously.

  58. Mr Howells also relied upon the reports' comments that L requires one-
      to-one support and Dr Greening's conclusion that  his  development  is
      likely to be significantly impeded if his family returned  to  Nigeria
      as it is unlikely that L will receive the support that he  needs.   Dr
      Greening does not give any basis  for  her  conclusion  about  support
      which would be available in Nigeria and, I also observe that, there is
      nothing to suggest from her report that Dr Greening has any specialist
      knowledge about  the  provision  of  care  for  autistic  children  in
      Nigeria.

  59. That final observation by Dr Greening is also made by Dr Elspeth  Webb
      in her letter dated 14 May  2013  (at  page  95  of  the  consolidated
      bundle).

           "In terms of  the  implications  of  being  returned  top  (sic)
           Nigeria for a child like L; children with Autism do a great deal
           better  with  appropriate  early  intervention  in  respect   of
           promoting  communication,  behaviour  and  social   interaction.
           These interventions are not available  in  Nigeria;  in  fact  I
           think it is doubtful that the condition of Autism  is  generally
           recognised in that society, certainly outside of a  few  medical
           psychiatric communities.  Therefore repatriation will definitely
           have a detrimental impact on the severity of his autism in later
           childhood and adulthood."

  60. Again, Dr  Webb  provides  no  source  for  her  statement  about  the
      availability of support for L in Nigeria  and  again  nothing  in  her
      letter suggests that she has any expert knowledge of its provision  in
      Nigeria.

  61. The day-to-day life of L's  family  is  set  out  in  the  appellant's
      witness  statement  dated  28  April  2014  (at  pages  13-18  of  the
      consolidated bundle).  There, L's mother sets out at paras  8-19,  the
      daily life of the family.  At paras 10-16 the appellant says this:

           "10.  I have been asked by my legal representative  to  describe
                 my  son's  routine  and  behaviour.    My   son   is   very
                 unpredictable.  Like wakes up at  different  times  in  the
                 morning.  My husband sleeps on the same bed with L.  L will
                 not sleep on his own.  His  is  prescribed  the  medication
                 ciradin to help him sleep. L goes to bed in the evening  at
                 eight clock. My husband goes to bed with him. Once L  falls
                 sleeps my husband returns down stairs.  L has to sleep with
                 the light on.  It takes around  one  hour  for  L  to  fall
                 asleep.

             11. I have to make sure everything in L's  bedroom  is  in  the
                 same place.  If something has been moved, L screams.  I try
                 and keep everything in the house in the same place which is
                 difficult because of S.  Sometimes I notice L looking house
                 around the and the  rooms.   I  know  he  is  restless  and
                 something has been moved.  I start to panic because I  know
                 something is out of place and I  had  to  look  around  the
                 house or the room to try  and  work  out  what  has  moved.
                 Until the item is back in place L is restless, screams  and
                 cries.

             12. When L wakes up in  the  morning  sometimes  he  cries  for
                 hours.  My husband baths L in the morning and provides  his
                 breakfast.  I have to make at least 3  different  types  of
                 food because L is so  unpredictable.  I  make  L  Weetabix,
                 custard and toast.  Sometimes L will not eat any  of  these
                 foods.  L will only eat biscuits if there are no cracks  in
                 the biscuits.  After breakfast (if he eats it) L  plays  on
                 his own with  his  toys.   Like  likes  toys  with  lights.
                 Barnados have provided L with toys.  L now accepts S but it
                 has taken along time.  I  leave  the  TV  on  whilst  L  is
                 playing because he likes cartoons.  No other children  come
                 and play with L at the house. We have tried to bring  other
                 children to the house but L runs away from the children and
                 cries.  Sometimes whilst he is  playing  L  will  start  to
                 scream.  L will run to me or my husband and grabs  us.   He
                 keeps looking around as if somebody is there.

             13. L attends play school in the afternoon for 2 hours  and  30
                 minutes.  My husband takes L to  playschool.   L  does  not
                 play with other children at the play school and he does not
                 interact with other children.  L eats his food on  his  own
                 and he is not allowed to eat with the  other  children.   L
                 cannot cope with the other  children  and  when  the  other
                 children walk over to him, he runs away.  L does  not  like
                 enclosed spaces and screams when  he  feels  enclosed.   My
                 husband collects L from play school.

             14. Before L returns home I start to make  a  number  of  meals
                 hoping he will eat.  I make  cook  L  the  following  meals
                 chips, baked  beans,  fried  rice,  and  Jollofu  rice.   L
                 prefers the fried rice but he only picks the vegetables out
                 the rice.  My husband feeds L  because  he  will  not  feed
                 himself.   L  sometimes  eats  his  tea  and  sometimes  he
                 refuses.  L will not drink water but he will  drink  juice.
                 L also has a drink call paediasure plus which is prescribed
                 by the specialist at the hospital.  L was losing weight  so
                 he was prescribed the supplement.

             15. After his tea L watches cartoons on the TV.  I am unsure if
                 he actually understands the cartoons but he tries  to  copy
                 the characters in the mirror.  Ls favourites  cartoons  are
                 Mr Tomba, Bonny and Bob the Builder.  This is the only time
                 I have peace when L  watches  the  cartoons.   We  are  not
                 allowed to distract L whilst he is watching  the  cartoons.
                 From seven o clock we try to change  the  channels  and  my
                 husband takes L for an evening bath.  My  husband  gives  L
                 his tablets which are crushed in his juice.

             16. L has to wear a nappy because he cannot go to the toilet on
                 his own.  The health visitor referred L to a potty  trainer
                 specialist but he refused to be potty trained.  When L sees
                 the potty he screams and puts the potty  on  his  head.   L
                 does not like new environments or crowds.  L  will  not  go
                 out to restaurants or go out shopping.  I do  the  shopping
                 on my own because it is so  difficult.   Sometimes  I  have
                 taken L to the park with my husband.  I would never take  L
                 alone because I cannot cope.  When he starts  to  scream  I
                 cannot calm him down.  When L goes out he has to be in open
                 areas.  If there are people around he  starts  to  cry  and
                 scream.  I have taken L on the bus when it is quiet.   When
                 the bus becomes crowded we have to get out the bus  because
                 L screams and cries.  It is rare I take L out because if is
                 such an ordeal for the family."

  62. At para 19, the appellant concludes as follows:

           "I feel if I am forced to  return  to  Nigeria,  L  will  suffer
           greatly as he will be  perceived  as  a  witch  because  of  his
           behaviour, L has a place at [] school and I  do  not  believe  L
           will obtain this specialist support on  return  to  Nigeria.   L
           cannot cope with mainstream schools and he has been assessed  to
           attend a specialist school."

  63. I will return to the issue raised by the appellant concerning L  being
      perceived as a witch shortly.  For present, however, it is clear  that
      L is autistic and has a number of  behavioural,  social  and  learning
      difficulties.  At present, these are managed within his family by  his
      loving mother  and  father  and,  at  least  for  the  present,  in  a
      mainstream although he is scheduled to attend a  school  for  children
      with special needs in the autumn.

  64. Mr Richards readily accepted that the  provision  of  care  for  L  is
      better in the UK than it would be in Nigeria.   However,  he  did  not
      accept that support and care for autistic children was  not  available
      in Nigeria.  He relied upon the short  bundle  of  documents  admitted
      under rule 15(2A).  At page B2-B3 is a news article entitled "Managing
      Children with Autism" dated 6 April 2013.  That article  recounts  the
      story of an autistic child of 9  years  of  age  who  attended  Zamaar
      Institute in Abuja in Nigeria.  That school exists, according  to  its
      director, "to meet the needs of children with special  needs  such  as
      autism, down-syndrome, speech defects, amongst others".  The father of
      the child explains that his daughter "has  improved  as  a  result  of
      behavioural  and  communication  skills.  She  has  learned  from  the
      school...."

  65. The director notes that:

           "Some of our children are getting lost  in  the  cracks.   Their
           needs are not being met.  For instance, a  child  with  learning
           difficulties in a mainstream school who is accused of being dumb
           and stupid will lose his self-esteem and we will  probably  lose
           the child. What we offer is such  that  children  with  learning
           disabilities can come here and benefit.  What  we  offer  is  to
           teach in a way that the child will learn."

  66. Further, at C1-C5 is a  document  describing  "The  Nigerian  Autistic
      Society" which it is stated  is:  "dedicated  to  tackling  autism  in
      Nigeria".  It is a non-governmental  organisation  founded  in  Abuja,
      Nigeria in 1993.  It sets out its purpose and functions as follows:

           "It is made up of parents, friends, professionals  and  students
           dedicated to the education and welfare of autistic people and to
           raise  the  visibility  of  autism  and  broadens  services  for
           individuals  who  have   autism   and   related   disorders   of
           communication and behaviours in Nigeria.

           The Autistic Healing School is  at  AJ's  playgroup  foundation,
           which is dedicated to  early  childhood  development  Institute,
           encouraging autistic and communication-handicapped  children  at
           Abuja, FCT, Nigeria.

           Also, the Institute  provides  Day  care,  Nursery  and  Primary
           education for non-handicapped children.

           People with special needs have separate  facility  for  training
           but are encouraged to attend our music  nursery  rhymes  at  our
           multipurpose Hall."

  67. The document goes on to set out the service offered including:  "self-
      help, rehabilitation, music therapy,  sports,  computers,  agriculture
      and recreation".

  68. Finally, at pages D1-D17 is a document relating to the "Patrick Speech
      and Language Centre" in Lagos, Nigeria.  The document states that  the
      centre is:

           "A unique centre for children with  Autism  Spectrum  Disorders,
           Asperger Syndrome and other related developmental  disabilities.



  69. The Centre was established in 2006 and  has  facilities:  "to  provide
      services such as Behavioural, Occupational and  Speech  Therapy."  The
      Centre has been: "at  the  forefront  of  increasing  awareness  about
      Autism Spectrum Disorders in Nigeria".   The  document  sets  out  the
      centre's core objectives as follows:

               .   to   provide   specialised   educational   services   for
                 developmentally challenged,  hearing  and  speech  impaired
                 children.

               . to help as many children as possible join  regular  schools
                 where they can learn under normal school syllabus.

               . create community awareness towards  the  rehabilitation  of
                 the intellectually disabled.

               . Help the society.

  70. I do not accept Mr Howell's criticism of the  Secretary  of  State  in
      relying upon this documentation.  Both the  appellant  and  respondent
      have had a full and fair opportunity over the course of the passage of
      this appeal through the First-tier Tribunal and  subsequently  through
      the Upper Tribunal to submit any material relevant to the issues which
      I have to decide.

  71. In his report Gary Foxcroft, the Executive Director of Witchcraft  and
      Human Rights Information Network (dated 21 April 2014) notes  at  para
      10 that L's:

           "ability to access his right to education  in  Nigeria  will  be
           further reduced as such children are rarely  allowed  to  attend
           school due  to  the  stigma  of  being  perceived  as  a  witch.
           According to UNICEF, children accused  of  witchcraft  typically
           have had 'little or no schooling with most children  staying  at
           home, or  going  out  and  begging.   For  all  of  them,  their
           situation does not improve  over  time.   Those  that  may  have
           attended school initially have to drop  out  in  order  to  earn
           money to feed themselves'".

  72. At para 11 Mr Foxcroft continues by saying:

           "My experience of having  worked  with  teachers  from  a  large
           number of schools in Nigeria has shown that there is very little
           understanding of conditions such as autism among the majority of
           teachers and, as yet, I have failed to meet any teacher who  has
           the skills needed in order to effectively meet the needs of such
           children."

  73. Whilst it may be the case that mainstream  schools  in  Nigeria  would
      lack the facilities and resources to provide specifically for L,  that
      is something that could be equally levelled at mainstream  schools  in
      the UK.  Both Dr  Webb  and  Dr  Greening  expressed  views  that  L's
      development would be impeded if he returns  to  Nigeria.   As  I  have
      already indicated, they appear to have  no  expert  knowledge  of  the
      provision of education and support for autistic  children  in  Nigeria
      and provide no supporting evidence for their views.  In my  judgement,
      it is clear that despite a level of  discrimination  against  autistic
      persons in Nigeria, the evidence to which I have  referred  and  which
      was relied upon by the Secretary  of  State,  demonstrates  that  some
      provision is provided for the education and care of autistic  children
      and, in particular, I note that the Patrick Centre is based  in  Lagos
      to which the appellant will return and where she has  family.   It  is
      not clear whether the services of the Centre are free or a  charge  is
      made. No evidence of that was presented by either  party.  However,  I
      see no reason to doubt that the appellant and her husband, given their
      educational background and (as I understand it) the appellant had  her
      own business before coming to the UK, could  establish  themselves  in
      work so as to resource L's attendance at,  for  example,  the  Patrick
      Centre.  I do not, therefore, accept Mr  Howell's  submission  that  L
      would return to an environment where he would be unable to obtain  any
      support or education tailored to  his  own  specific  needs.    As  Mr
      Richards readily acknowledged, it may  well  be  that  that  provision
      would not be at the level he would receive in the  UK,  but  there  is
      provision for autistic children in Nigeria and I am satisfied that  it
      would be available to L on his return.  I make those findings  bearing
      in mind that it is accepted by Mr Richards that it is no doubt in  L's
      best interests to remain in the UK and to continue to benefit from the
      social, educational and other support he receives in the UK which will
      be at a greater or higher level of provision and so "better" for him.

  74. Turning now to the issue raised by Mr Howells  on  the  basis  of  the
      background evidence and expert  report  of  Mr  Foxcroft,  Mr  Howells
      submitted that L on return to  Nigeria  would,  as  a  result  of  his
      autism, be perceived as a witch and  would  be  at  risk  of  violence
      and/or discrimination.   Mr  Howells  first  relied  upon  the  expert
      report of Mr Foxcroft  beginning  at  page  103  of  the  consolidated
      bundle.  At para 6 of his report (pages  105-106),  Mr  Foxcroft  says
      this:

           "The fact that  Nigerian  children  with  disabilities  such  as
           autism are particularly at risk of being accused  of  witchcraft
           is well established and the wide-ranging stigma  and  denial  of
           their fundamental human rights that they may suffer due to  such
           beliefs has been documented in numerous reports and papers.

           Such is the level of concern in  Nigeria  about  the  abuses  of
           human rights that take place due to the belief that autism is  a
           sign of witchcraft, the Health Minister  -  Onyebuchi  Chukwu  -
           recently lamented that some individuals end up being "locked  in
           cages and fed like animals" and  felt  the  need  to  publically
           state that autism "is not witchcraft".

           The stigma of having autism is primarily linked  to  the  belief
           that there is  a  supernatural  explanation  for  the  character
           traits exhibited by children with autism.  Such character traits
           include challenges with  communication;  repetitive  behaviours;
           social challenges and a number of associated medical conditions.
            In particular it is therefore believed  that  such  traits  are
           linked  to  witchcraft  and  that  the  child  sufferer  may  be
           possessed or be a witch.

           Beliefs in the existence and powers of witches have a  long  and
           diverse history and are found across Nigeria.  Such beliefs have
           commonly  -  although  by  no  means  always   -   resulted   in
           persecution,  social  rejection,  discrimination  and   violence
           towards those  who  are  believed  to  be  witches.   Indeed  as
           Chineyemba highlights, 'Urban and rural dwellers  are  entrapped
           in the deep rooted  fear  of  witches...  society  is  organized
           around an intrinsic fear of witchcraft...  it  is  enshrined  in
           communal consciousness'.

           The stigmatization of children as witches in  Nigeria,  however,
           is a relatively recent phenomenon, being considered to have only
           become widespread in the  early  to  mid-1990s.   Children  with
           disabilities such as autism are considered to be  at  particular
           risk  of  witchcraft  accusations,  as   such   conditions   are
           considered to be evidence of witchcraft.   Mental  and  physical
           disabilities remain misunderstood and feared  in  both  children
           and adults within Nigeria and this contributes  to  the  reasons
           why children with such disabilities are likely to be accused  of
           witchcraft.

           These findings have been corroborated by my personal experiences
           of having worked with hundreds of children who have been accused
           of witchcraft in Nigeria, many of whom exhibit signs  of  autism
           and have been abandoned by their families due to the belief  and
           subsequent stigma that they faced.  These  signs  include  those
           outlined  in  Master  L's  development  assessment  by  Dr  Kate
           Greening, which highlight that his "development  appears  to  be
           significantly delayed and this delay appears to  be  across  all
           areas of his development, including  social  communication"  and
           that "L's presentation is in line with a diagnosis of an  autism
           spectrum disorder"."

  75. At paragraphs 8-9, Mr Foxcroft states what he believes  would  be  the
      consequences of L being accused of witchcraft as follows:

           8.    Should Master L  be  accused  of  witchcraft  due  to  his
                 disabilities then I believe that there is also risk that he
                 may receive the following treatment from ordinary  Nigerian
                 citizens:

                   - physical attacks

                   - verbal attacks

                   - attempts to ostracise him  and  his  mother  from  the
                     community where they live

                   - public disgrace

                 The above potential treatments are  on  the  more  moderate
                 spectrum of the forms  of  abuse  that  could  take  place.
                 Research carried out by the charity  that  I  co-founded  -
                 Stepping Stones Nigeria -  of  cases  of  child  witchcraft
                 stigmatisation in Nigeria also  highlighted  that  children
                 accused of witchcraft  may  suffer  other  forms  of  human
                 rights violations.  This includes being:

                   . chained and imprisoned

                   . subjected to starvation

                   . forced to participate in 'exorcisms' which can have  a
                     lasting negative psychological effect on the child

                   . denied access to medical treatment

                   . denied access to education

                 The specific rights that are often  violated  in  cases  of
                 child witchcraft stigmatisation include:

                   . The right to life

                   . The right to freedom from torture

                   . The right to freedom from violence, abuse and neglect

                   . The right to education

                   . The right  to  the   highest  attainable  standard  of
                     health

                   . The right to an adequate standard of living, including
                     sufficient food, water and shelter.

           9. Such is the severity of the level of risk of  children  posed
              to disabled children following an accusation  of  witchcraft,
              the UN Special Representative to  the  Secretary  General  on
              Violence Against Children - Marta Santos - issued a statement
              on this at the Human Rights Council in March  2014.   In  her
              statements she notes that: "The growing reality  of  children
              being accused of witchcraft  reveals  a  serious  pattern  of
              discrimination, social exclusion, violence,  abandonment  and
              sometimes  even  murder  of  innocent  children.   Vulnerable
              children, such as those with disabilities......are often  the
              target of witchcraft accusations.   Beyond branding  a  child
              as a witch, in itself a form of psychological violence, these
              accusations often lead  to  physical  attacks  against  these
              children and other extreme human rights violations".

              According to Ms Santos: "This in turn leads to the abuse  and
              neglect that accused children face.  Overall, "to be labelled
              a witch...is tantamount to being declared liable to be killed
              with impunity"."

  76.  In  that  report,  Mr  Foxcroft  refers  to  the  "Stepping   Stones"
      organisation and Mr Howells relied upon its  report  of  May  2011  at
      pages 112-128 of the consolidated  bundle.   That  report  notes  that
      children who are accused of witchcraft suffer  significant  abuses  of
      their rights (page 113).  The report sets out at pages  119-120  harsh
      consequences visited upon children who are accused of witchcraft.   At
      page 120 the report notes that:

           "Children who have been stigmatised as  witches  are  frequently
           abandoned or rejected by their parents and/or community."

  77. I interpolate that there is no evidence to  suggest  that  L  will  be
      abandoned by his parents who clearly have (and will continue to  have)
      his best interests at heart and support him.

  78. At page 120-122 of the report, there is reference  to  the  "long-term
      discrimination facing a child stigmatised as  a  witch".   The  report
      gives examples of being denied  access  to  treatment,  to  education,
      participation in the local community  and  of  being  abandoned.   The
      report states that:

           "There is far-reaching social stigma and exclusion stemming from
           witchcraft stigmatisation.   The  child  becomes  isolated  from
           their family and community, becomes  unable  to  socialise  with
           their peers and is unable to experience the usual enjoyments  of
           childhood.  This may have  a  long-term  negative  psychological
           effect on the child."

  79. Mr Howells also drew my attention to passages in the  COI  Report  for
      June 2013.  Under the heading "Witchcraft" at paras  24.24-24.28,  the
      report highlights the dangers of children being accused of witchcraft.
       At para 24.29 quoting from the Stepping  Stones  Report  of  December
      2009, the COI Report refers to the potential witchcraft stigmatisation
      of children with autism as follows:

           "It is clear that the child witchcraft stigmatisation and  abuse
           both results from  and  is  causative  of  mental  and  physical
           disabilities....Certain medical conditions, because they are not
           properly understood, are often  considered  to  be  evidence  of
           witchcraft.  For example, there is a high prevalence  of  autism
           in Nigeria, yet this condition is not widely  acknowledged.   In
           consequence, the particular behaviour autistic children is often
           interpreted as witchcraft....Accusing a child of witchcraft  can
           also  lead  to  the  onset  of  mental  illness   and   physical
           disability.  Some children are permanently damaged by the  abuse
           that they have suffered.  They may be so  traumatised  from  the
           extent of their pain that they never fully recover.  By  way  of
           example, Stepping Stones Nigeria has previously  found  children
           in a distressed state at a church where they  were  chained  up.
           They had been deprived of food and  were  manifesting  signs  of
           mental illness.  Stepping  Stones  Nigeria  has  also  witnessed
           cases   of   physical   disability   due   to   child    witness
           stigmatisation, including a child  who  was  found  roaming  the
           streets after having a nail driven into her head."

  80.  I  accept  on  the  basis  of  this  evidence  that  there  is   some
      discrimination both in relation to children with disabilities (such as
      autism) and the connected risk of  being  accused  of  witchcraft.   I
      note, however, that the Stepping Stones report for May  2011  concerns
      the Akwa Ibom State in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria.  L will  not
      return with his parents to that area of Nigeria but rather to the city
      of Lagos where his mother's family live.  Although the appellant  says
      in her witness statement that she has not told  her  family  about  L,
      there is no reason to believe that their response to him will  be  any
      different from that of the appellant and her husband, namely  to  care
      for him within the family and to seek to provide, as  I  have  already
      indicated, through the educational  and  other  support  available  to
      children with autism the services offered in Lagos.  There is,  in  my
      view, no prospect of L being abandoned by his parents nor is there any
      evidence to show that his wider maternal family with reject,  or  fail
      to care for, him.  I accept that there is a risk that he may face some
      level of discrimination in Nigeria because of his autism but  he  will
      do so in the context of his caring immediate and  wider  family.   The
      evidence also shows that there are organisations dedicated to  raising
      awareness of autism and to promote the interests of  individuals  with
      autism and their families, for example the Nigerian Autistic  Society.
       I do not accept that there is any real risk, given that he  will  not
      be abandoned by his family, of him being accused of being a witch  and
      suffering any of the violence of exclusionary consequences  postulated
      by Mr Foxcroft.  His report does not, in my judgement,  focus  on  the
      situation in Lagos which is important.  Also, it is plain to  me  that
      the risk may arise if a child is abandoned by their family but,  as  I
      have already indicated, I am satisfied that there is  no  prospect  of
      that occurring for L.  I am not satisfied that there is  a  real  risk
      that L will be perceived as a witch and subject to ill-treatment as  a
      consequence.

  81. I now turn to apply these findings to my assessment of the appellant's
      claim under Article 8 of the ECHR. I have taken into account  all  the
      documentary and other evidence to which I was referred and I apply the
      legal principles and framework set out above at paras 24-47.

  82. I accept that both the  appellant's  private  life  and  that  of  her
      family, in particular  L  will  be  interfered  with  if  returned  to
      Nigeria.  I accept  that,  whilst  there  will  be  care  and  support
      available for L in Nigeria, it will not be of the same level as in the
      UK.   Likewise,  there  is  some  discrimination  against  those  with
      disabilities and this may have some impact upon L in  the  future.   I
      did not understand Mr Richards to suggest that  Article  8.1  was  not
      engaged on the basis of the interference with L's moral  and  physical
      integrity.   The  crucial  issue  in  this  appeal  is  whether   that
      interference is justified under Article 8.2.

  83. There is no doubt that the interference is in accordance with the  law
      and for a legitimate aim,  namely  the  economic  well  being  of  the
      country  or  in  order  to  prevent  disorder  (see  Shahzad  (Art  8:
      Legitimate Aim) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC)).  The crucial  issue
      is the assessment of proportionality.

  84. First, it is accepted by Mr Richards that L's best  interests  are  to
      remain in the UK with his parents.  That is a "primary  consideration"
      but one that can be outweighed if sufficiently  weighty  consideration
      of the public interest apply.

  85. Secondly, the appellant, her husband and their two children  (L)  have
      no lawful basis for being in  the  UK.   The  appellant  came  as  the
      dependent of her husband who was a student.  He no longer has leave as
      a result of an  unsuccessful  application  to  extend  his  leave  and
      therefore has  no  basis  for  remaining  in  the  UK.   Further,  the
      appellant can have no legitimate expectation of remaining  beyond  the
      period of her (and her husband's) temporary leave.

  86. Thirdly, for the reasons I have given above, whilst I accept that  L's
      return to Nigeria will not be in his best interests,  I  am  satisfied
      that there will be available educational and  other  support  for  his
      autism although that support will not be of the level he would receive
      in the UK (see especially para 73 above).   I accept that  L's  autism
      may give rise to some discrimination in Nigeria but I  do  not  accept
      that there is a real risk that he will be perceived  as  a  witch  and
      suffer serious consequences  as  a  result  (see  especially  para  80
      above).

  87. Fourthly, I accept that the appellant (and through her L) did not come
      to the UK in order to obtain the social, educational and other support
      L now receives.  The appellant came as a dependent of her husband  and
      L was, of course, born in the UK.

  88. Fifthly, I accept that the immigration status of the appellant  should
      not necessarily reflect upon L.  It remains the case, however, that as
      Judge Lloyd found in his determination in the First-tier Tribunal that
      the appellant had invented her asylum claim in order to seek a  better
      life (as she perceived it) in the UK.

  89. Sixthly, it is clear from the case law that  a  breach  of  Article  8
      cannot be established simply on the basis of a disparity in health or,
      as in this case, social and educational care (welfare) provided in the
      UK (on the one hand) and in the appellant's home country, Nigeria  (on
      the other hand).  That remains, however, a factor  to  be  taken  into
      account.  However, it will only be in a  "very  rare"  case  that  the
      public interest in the economic well-being  of  the  country  will  be
      outweighed by the individual's interests (whether that of a  child  or
      adult) where the central part of the claim is  the  disparity  in  the
      provision of those services or support.  That applies in a  case  such
      as this involving a child, as it does where the claimant is an  adult.
      As Maurice Kay LJ pointed out in AE (Algeria) at [9] it would not be

           "inappropriate for the future cost and duration of [the child's]
           treatment and care in  this  country  to  play  a  part  in  the
           balancing exercise as matters relating  to  the  economic  well-
           being  of  this  country,  given  the  strains  on  the   public
           finances."

  90. In FK and OK (Botswana) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 238 Sir Stanley Burnton
      also made the point about the importance of the economic well-being of
      the country and the burden on the public purse (at [11]):

           "...the maintenance of immigration control is not an aim that is
           implied for the purposes of  article  8.2.  Its  maintenance  is
           necessary in order to preserve or to foster the  economic  well-
           being of the country, in order to protect health and morals, and
           for the protection of the rights  and  freedoms  of  others.  If
           there were no immigration control, enormous numbers  of  persons
           would be able to enter this country, and would  be  entitled  to
           claim social security benefits, the  benefits  of  the  National
           Health Service, to be housed (or to  compete  for  housing  with
           those in this country) and to compete for employment with  those
           already here. Their children would be entitled to be educated at
           the taxpayers' expense (as was the second appellant).  All  such
           matters (and I do not suggest that they are the only matters) go
           to the economic well-being of the country. That the  individuals
           concerned in the present case are  law-abiding  (other  than  in
           respect of immigration controls) does not detract from the  fact
           that the  maintenance  of  a  generally  applicable  immigration
           policy is, albeit indirectly, a legitimate aim for the  purposes
           of article 8.2."

  91. There is no doubt that L, if he remains in the UK, will be entitled to
      a range of state provision to meet his educational and other (welfare)
      needs  with  the  consequent  burden  that  will  place  upon   public
      resources.

  92. I must strike a balance between the rights and interests of L and  his
      parents and the public interest.  The effect of L's autism on both him
      and his family is evident from the evidence of his parents  and  those
      involved with his care and it is accepted  that  it  is  in  his  best
      interests to remain in the  UK.   I  fully  take  that  into  account.
      Nevertheless, having regard to all the evidence and matters I have set
      out above, I am satisfied that L's best interests  are  outweighed  by
      the weighty public interest of the economic well-being of  the  UK  as
      set out in Article 8.2 of the Convention and reflected in the case law
      to which I have referred.

  93. In reaching that  conclusion,  I  take  into  account  the  fact  that
      education and other support is available to  him  for  his  autism  in
      Nigeria (in particular in Lagos to which he will return)  even  though
      the support may not, as Mr Richards candidly accepts, be on  a  parity
      with that which he enjoys (and would continue to enjoy) in the UK.   I
      also take into account that disability (including autism)  attracts  a
      level of discrimination in Nigeria but I do not accept that there is a
      real risk that L will be perceived  as  a  witch.   Nevertheless,  the
      evidence shows that organisations exist to  support  individuals  (and
      their families) with autism, including specific educational needs  and
      more generally to promote awareness, for example the Nigerian Autistic
      Society. I also note the effect that change has on L as  evidenced  by
      his move from Liverpool.  I take into account that he will  return  to
      Nigeria with his mother and father and to the city of Lagos where  the
      appellant's family live.  There  is  no  basis  in  the  evidence  for
      concluding that he will be abandoned or rejected either by his parents
      or the appellant's family in Nigeria.  This is  undoubtedly  a  tragic
      case but I am satisfied that the public interest  outweighs  the  best
      interests of L and the rights of his family.

  94. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant's  removal  would
      be proportionate and she has not established a breach of Article 8.

Decision

  95. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error of  law.   That
      decision is set aside.

  96. The decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds  and
      under the Immigration Rules stands.

  97. I remake the decision in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.  I  dismiss
      the appeal on that ground.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















