
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03239/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     R H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Stuart-King of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Albania born on  24  October  1988.   He
    appealed  against  the  Respondent's   decision   to   refuse   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 July 2015, Judge  Clarke  (the  judge)  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal because he found the appellant was  not  a  credible
    witness regarding events in his own country and that he would not be at
    risk on return.  As regards Article 8, the judge  found  the  appellant
    did not satisfy the requirements  of  the  Rules  nor  were  there  any
    compelling circumstances for him to succeed outside the Rules.

 2. The grounds claimed that the judge erred in assessing whether there was
    an active blood feud.  Further, he erred in  assessing  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal  relocation  by  failing  to  take  account  of
    material factors, misconstruing the law and failing to follow and apply
    the country guidance.

 3. Judge Grimmett refused permission to appeal.  She said the grounds were
    a disagreement only with the judge's findings and raised  no  error  of
    law.  It was clear from the decision why the judge considered there  to
    be no active blood feud and thus the reasoning was adequate.

 4. The grounds were renewed and considered by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill
    who gave permission to appeal in a decision dated  18  September  2015.
    The judge had found there was no active blood feud.  It  was  plain  in
    that regard that he relied upon the fact that there had only  been  one
    attack and in doing so, it was arguable that he overlooked  considering
    the appellant's evidence that his father was  in  self-confinement  and
    that his brother had fled.  See [3] of the grounds.  Judge  Gill  noted
    that the judge mentioned the father's self-confinement at  [41].   That
    was in the context of his assessment of the appellant's  evidence  that
    he did  not  know  his  father's  whereabouts.   Judge  Gill  said  the
    remaining grounds might also be argued.

 5. The respondent filed her  Rule  24  response  on  8  October  2015  and
    submitted that the judge directed  himself  appropriately.   The  judge
    applied the test set down in the  latest  country  guidance  EH  (blood
    feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC), considering  the  five  year
    gap between the alleged  incident  and  the  events  that  led  to  the
    appellant leaving Albania when he concluded on the facts that there was
    no blood feud.  See [37] of the decision.  The judge found  "...  there
    is an absence of commitment on the part of Mr B or his family to pursue
    the blood feud" and that was a finding open to the judge to make on the
    evidence.

 6. The judge went on at [38] to consider the other  elements  required  by
    EH.  At [39] the judge found that the family  had  never  reported  the
    claimed feud to the authorities and accordingly had failed to show even
    to the lower standard that attempts had been made to  avail  themselves
    of police protection.

 7. From [41] the judge considered other parts of the appellant's evidence,
    finding that  in  relation  to  family  contact,  see  [48],  that  the
    appellant declined the offer of contact with his family  and  that  was
    not consistent with a claim of there being an active blood feud.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Ms Stuart-King adopted the grounds  dated  22  July  2015.   The  judge
    appeared to accept that the core of the appellant's claim was  credible
    but found there was an absence of commitment to pursue the  blood  feud
    by the B family.  See [37].  The judge said that no-one had been killed
    and that there had been  only  a  single  incident  in  2014  when  the
    appellant was attacked, but in making that finding the judge failed  to
    take account of material matters:

 9. The appellant's evidence was that his father had been living  in  self-
    confinement throughout the relevant period and  that  his  brother  had
    fled immediately after the initial event.  That explained why there had
    only been one incident since the paralysis of one of the B family.  The
    commitment of the B family to the feud could not be lawfully considered
    without taking that into account.  Moreover, the appellant himself  was
    attacked and told that he would be killed on reaching 16 and becoming a
    legitimate target.

10. The judge further misunderstood the nature of the  risk  faced  by  the
    appellant at [40] in finding that he was not the main target.   As  the
    son and brother of the two people involved in the fight, the  appellant
    would plainly be at risk as a legitimate target for revenge.  That  was
    particularly so if the B family were not able  to  extract  revenge  on
    either the appellant's father or brother, as had been the case.

11. Those errors I have set out above, also rendered  the  judge's  finding
    flawed at [42] when he found there was no blood feud.   Further,  given
    that the judge accepted the core  of  the  appellant's  claim,  he  had
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding there was no  active  blood
    feud.

12. At [39] and [45], the judge noted that the appellant's family  had  not
    sought the protection of the police but the judge failed to  take  into
    account that the evidence was that the family had sought  to  reconcile
    through the village elders, but that the B  family  had  refused.   The
    judge said that as a result of the failure to  report  matters  to  the
    police, the appellant had not shown that he could not avail himself  of
    police protection on return, but that simply did not  follow.   It  was
    not necessary for the appellant  to  show  that  the  matter  had  been
    reported  to  the  police  to  demonstrate   insufficiency   of   state
    protection.  In that regard, the judge failed to  consider  and  follow
    country guidance.  In particular, the headnote of EH [3] said:

         "3.   The  Albanian  state  has  taken  steps  to   improve   state
             protection,  but  in  areas  where  Kanun   law   predominates
             (particularly in northern Albania)  those  steps  do  not  yet
             provide sufficiency of protection  from  Kanun-related  blood-
             taking if an active feud exists  and  affects  the  individual
             claimant."

13. The judge's findings in the alternative at [43]-[49] could  not  render
    the above claimed errors immaterial as they infected  the  findings  on
    internal relocation, in particular, the judge's  flawed  finding  about
    the B family's commitment to the feud.  The headnote of EH at [3]  also
    addressed internal relocation:

         "Internal relocation to an area of Albania less  dependent  on  the
         Kanun may provide sufficient protection, depending  on  the  reach,
         influence, and  commitment  to  prosecution  of  the  feud  by  the
         aggressor clan."

14. The assessment of the commitment to the prosecution of the feud by  the
    aggressor clan was a  material  part  of  the  assessment  of  internal
    relocation.  Thus the flawed finding on the commitment of the aggressor
    clan to the  feud  infected  the  assessment  of  internal  relocation.
    Further, the judge failed to consider the reach and  influence  of  the
    clan in assessing internal relocation.

15. The assessment of internal relocation in any  event  contained  further
    errors.  At [43] the judge referred  to  the  possibility  of  a  "bese
    declaration" without taking into account the fact that the B family had
    refused to reconcile.

16. At [44] the judge departed from the findings in  the  country  guidance
    case and failed to give adequate reasons for doing so.

17. The judge took no account of the matters set out at [69]-[70] of EH and
    the expert opinion expressed therein by Dr Sievers at Appendix C at [6]
    and [22] that internal relocation would not be  available  where  there
    was an active blood feud.

18. Ms Stuart-King submitted that certain aspects of the appellant's  claim
    had been accepted but it appeared that the judge misunderstood  certain
    issues.  There were  no  findings  as  to  whether  the  appellant  was
    attacked or whether his father was in self- confinement.  As a  result,
    there was no adequate analysis regarding  whether  there  was  truly  a
    blood feud.

19. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the judge was entirely alert to the
    situation.  There was no failure to engage and my attention  was  drawn
    to [19], [41] and [49] of the  decision.   The  judge  had  taken  into
    account the fact there had been no further action  from  the  aggressor
    family

Conclusion on Error of Law

20. In refusing the appellant's  application  for  asylum,  the  respondent
    adhered to the UNHCR Guidelines on Policies and Procedures  in  Dealing
    with Unaccompanied Children Seeking Asylum  1997  and  the  appellant's
    degree  of  mental  development  and  maturity,  UNHCR  Guidelines   on
    Protection and Care 1994.  As a result, greater dispensation was  given
    to the appellant throughout his claim.  See [20]-[21] of  the  refusal.
    The  respondent  observed  that  the  appellant  had   been   generally
    consistent with  regard  to  his  core  account  but  that  there  were
    inconsistencies.   See  [35]  and  [32]-[33]  of  the   refusal.    The
    respondent did not say  the  appellant's  claim  was  incredible.   Her
    position was that it was not accepted an  active  blood  feud  existed.
    That same approach was adopted by the judge.  He made various  findings
    and concluded that there was no active blood feud, however, he made  no
    finding that the appellant had put forward an untruthful account.

21. The grounds are misleading at [5] when they say the judge found at [42]
    that there was no blood feud.  What the judge said was that  there  was
    no active blood feud, referring in that regard to EH  at  [35]  of  his
    decision.

22. The judge made the following findings:

       . The feud was not prosecuted by the B family over a five year period
         from 2015.

       . There was only one incident against the appellant in June 2014.

       . No-one had been killed.

       . There was an absence of commitment on the part of the B  family  to
         pursue the feud.

       . The main target of the feud was the appellant's father and brother.
          The appellant was not the main target.

23. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that there was no failure on the part of
    the judge to engage with the evidence, however, I find that he did fail
    to engage with the evidence in the sense that he made no findings  with
    regard to the truth of the appellant's account.  It was incumbent  upon
    the judge to make credibility findings regarding the existence  of  the
    blood feud, the 2009 event, the 2014 event,  the  appellant's  father's
    self-confinement and whether the  appellant's  brother  was  forced  to
    flee.  I find that the judge materially erred in dismissing the  appeal
    on the discrete point that there was no  active  blood  feud.   It  was
    incumbent upon the judge to analyse the evidence and make  findings  on
    the core issues, giving credit for the appellant's tender years. It was
    only by such a process that the judge could come to a reasoned decision
    with regard to risk on return. As a result, the judge  gave  inadequate
    reasons for the basis upon which he reached his  decision.  Further,  I
    find what findings the judge did make infected his findings on internal
    relocation.

Summary

24. The judge erred materially in law for the reasons I have set out above.



Decision

25. I set aside the judge's decision in its entirety which must be  re-made
    in the First tier following a de novo hearing. Directions are  attached
    to this short decision.

Anonymity direction is continued.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 19 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
                                    [pic]
IAC-hw-mp-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/03239/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     R H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Stuart-King of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. Remit to the First-tier Tribunal, Taylor House, for a de novo hearing.

 2. List first available date.  Time estimate four hours.

 3. Not later than ten working days prior to the hearing, the parties  must
    file with the First-tier  Tribunal  and  serve  upon  each  other,  all
    documentary evidence (including witness  statements)  upon  which  they
    intend to rely, as well as any skeleton arguments.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 19 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

