
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03640/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Sent                   |
|On 25th September 2014               |On 8th October 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    [N H]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania and  his  date  of  birth  is  18
    March 1995.

2.   On 11 September 2012 the appellant made  an  application  to  vary  his
    leave on asylum grounds and this application was refused in a  decision
    of 3 April 2014.

3.   The appellant's case is that in 2006 his uncle got into a fight with  a
    member of the Kadiu family as a result of a land dispute.  Adrian Kadiu
    shot and killed the appellant's uncle and the appellant's cousin  Plumb
    shot and wounded Adrian Kadiu.  The appellant's cousin was sentenced to
    eight years' imprisonment and Adrian Kadiu received a sentence of  four
    years.

4.   In September 2010 Adrian Kadiu was released from prison.   In  December
    2010 the appellant heard gunfire outside his  home  and  shortly  after
    that he discovered that Adrian Kadiu had been  killed.   The  next  day
    somebody was shot  at  the  appellant's  house  and  the  windows  were
    shattered.  The appellant's father told the police about  the  incident
    and that he believed the shooting was linked to Adrian Kadiu's death.

5.   As a result of the blood feud it was decided that the appellant  should
    leave Albania.

6.   The appellant left Albania in May 2011  and  arrived  here  on  23  May
    2011.  He claimed asylum on 24 May 2011.  The  respondent  granted  the
    appellant discretionary leave until he was 17�.

7.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  L  K
    Gibbs following a hearing on 7 July 2014.  The  decision  is  dated  14
    July 2014.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Reed in a decision of 7 August 2014.  Thus  the
    matter came before me.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

8.   The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings:

         "20. I am satisfied that the events of 2006 took place  as  claimed
             by the appellant.  In my view he has given consistent evidence
             regarding these events, and given that he was only 11 years of
             age at this time I do not consider that any lack of  knowledge
             regarding the  details  of  the  protagonists  undermines  his
             credibility on this issue.  I am therefore satisfied that  his
             uncle was murdered by Adrian Kadiu and that  his  cousin  shot
             and  injured  Mr  Kadiu  during  this  incident.   I  am  also
             satisfied that both parties were prosecuted by the police  for
             their criminal acts and sentenced to a term of imprisonment.

         21.  I am not satisfied however, even to the lower  standard,  that
             the events of 2010 occurred  as  claimed.   One  of  the  main
             reasons that I do not accept this aspect  of  the  appellant's
             claim is because it runs counter to what is  known  about  the
             way in which blood feuds are conducted,  specifically  that  a
             person, in their own home, is safe from attack,  and  in  fact
             the appellant relies on this principle in  fleeing  to  Durres
             where his evidence is that  he  was  safe  because  he  stayed
             indoors.  In addition to this his evidence  regarding  threats
             from Alban Kadiu apparently made indirectly  are  not,  in  my
             view, consistent with the appellant's claim that  Alban  Kadiu
             was actively pursuing the blood feud.  I  also  consider  that
             the  appellant's  evidence  that  his  parents  did  not  seek
             reconciliation before they arranged for  their  son  to  leave
             Albania lacks plausibility.  Finally, the appellant's evidence
             is that despite this imminent threat he  was  able  to  escape
             from the family home and travel  to  Durres  without  incident
             also, in my view, is inconsistent with his claim of an  active
             and ongoing blood feud.

         22.  I do not find that the documents  provided  by  the  appellant
             advance his claim.  I accept that his father  owned  the  land
             that was the start of the dispute in 1997  and  culminated  in
             the incident in 2006, but I find that in the light of my above
             findings and the guidance  in  EH  "Attestation  letters  from
             Albanian non-governmental organisations should not in  general
             be regarded as reliable evidence of the existence of  a  feud"
             taken with the country background information (as set  out  in
             the reasons for refusal letter) I cannot place any  weight  on
             the  Certification  from   the   All-National   Reconciliation
             Mission.

         23.  Based on these findings at their highest I have  assessed  the
             appellant's family as having been involved in an incident that
             took place in 2006 but ended  with  the  imprisonment  of  his
             cousin and Adrian Kadiu.  Applying the relevant factors as set
             out in EH I am not satisfied that an active blood feud exists.

             (i)  The history of the alleged feud, including the  notoriety
                  of the original killings,  the  numbers  killed,  and  the
                  degree of commitment by the  aggressor  clan  towards  the
                  prosecution of the feud;

             (ii)  The  length  of  time  since  the  last  death  and  the
                  relationship of the last person killed to the appellant;

             (iii)    The ability of  members  of  the  aggressor  clan  to
                  locate the  appellant  if  returned  to  another  part  of
                  Albania;

         24.  As I have said I find that there has been one killing in 2006,
             which was in fact the killing of a member of  the  appellant's
             family and I do not find that there is evidence to satisfy me,
             even to the lower standard that the Kadiu family  have  sought
             to pursue this or would have the ability to do so elsewhere in
             Albania if they so wanted."

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

9.   Mr Lams' grounds of appeal and oral submissions can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

    (i)  The Judge failed to take relevant matters into account mainly that
         she had accepted the appellant's evidence that  there  had  been  a
         land dispute with the Kadiu family and that this led to  the  death
         of the appellant's uncle and the wounding of a member of the  Kadiu
         family in 2006.

    (ii) The Judge made insufficient findings.  She did not make a  finding
         in relation to the death of Adrian Kadiu in 2010.

    (iii)    The Judge made a misconception and her findings are irrational
         in relation to self-confinement.  She did not take into account the
         country guidance case of EH (Blood Feuds) Albania  CG  [2012]  UKUT
         00348 (IAC) and in  particular  the  section  on  key  concepts  in
         Albanian blood feuds at paragraph 5:

             "(ix)    Self-confinement.  Also known as self-isolation,  the
                  practise of males in the target  family  staying  indoors,
                  sometimes for years, as a mark of respect and  recognition
                  of the feelings of the aggressor family.  A  self-confined
                  person will not usually be at risk in their home, although
                  this is not completely certain."

    (iv) There is also reference in the grounds of appeal to Appendix C  of
         the country guidance where the expert  evidence  was  recorded  and
         there is specific reference to paragraph 24 which reads as follows:



             "24. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Dr  Schwandner-
                  Sievers said that although traditionally, women and  young
                  boys were not at risk, there had been  killings  of  both.
                  People self-confined themselves to contain  any  risk:  it
                  showed respect for the other  family,  by  keeping  a  low
                  profile.  There  had  been  plenty  of  events  where  the
                  sanctity of the home was not respected and  the  community
                  had punished the offenders.  The risk passed traditionally
                  from father to son.  If the deceased  had  a  brother,  he
                  would be a very important target.   The  deceased's  adult
                  brothers and younger son were prime targets."

         The Judge did not take into  account  the  disputed  interpretation
         that the safety of the home was absolute in the appellant's witness
         statement at paragraph 6 referred to in the skeleton argument  that
         was before the First-tier Tribunal.

         The  Judge  also  misunderstood  the  concept  of  self-confinement
         described in EH in finding that a person in self-confinement  would
         not be able to "escape from the family home and  travel  to  Durres
         without incident."

    (v)  The Judge's finding that it is not plausible that the  appellant's
         parents had not sought  reconciliation  prior  to  the  appellant's
         departure  is  irrational  because  the  killing  of  Adrian  Kadiu
         occurred shortly before the appellant left Albania.

10.  Ms Holmes made submissions in the context of the respondent's  Rule  24
    response and argued that the Judge analysed the  appellant's  claim  in
    the light of EH and the findings were open to him. In Ms  Holmes  view,
    EH makes it clear that it is very unlikely that a person is not safe in
    their home in any event the Judge found  that  there  was  no  internal
    relocation option available to the appellant.  It is  advanced  in  the
    Rule 24 response that  the  respondent  has  concerns  as  to  why  the
    appellant was found credible in respect of the events in  2006  because
    there is no corroboration from the  family  despite  them  having  been
    traced by the respondent and the claims by the appellant  that  he  has
    lost contact with his  family  which  seems  unlikely  given  that  the
    respondent has made contact with them.  There were a number of  reasons
    why the Judge did not accept the appellant's account.   In  Ms  Holmes'
    submissions it is not clear whether the Judge did accept that there had
    been a blood feud in 2006.

11.  Mr Lams responded and argued that the respondent  had  presented  their
    case before the First-tier Tribunal that it was an absolute that people
    will not be at risk in their home, but this is  not  what  the  country
    guidance  says.  There  is  no   requirement   that   there   must   be
    reconciliation in order for an appellant's account to  be  credible  or
    plausible.

12.  The head note in the country guidance case of EH (Blood Feuds)  Albania
    CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC) reads as follows

         "1.  While there remain a number of active blood feuds in  Albania,
             they are few and declining.   There  are  a  small  number  of
             deaths annually arising from these feuds and a small number of
             adults and children living in self-confinement for protection.
              Government programmes to educate self-confined children exist
             but very few children are involved in them.

         2.   The existence of a 'modern blood  feud'  is  not  established:
             Kanun blood feuds have always allowed for the  possibility  of
             pre-emptive killing by a dominant clan.

         3.    The  Albanian  state  has  taken  steps  to   improve   state
             protection,  but  in  areas  where  Kanun   law   predominates
             (particularly in northern Albania)  those  steps  do  not  yet
             provide sufficiency of protection  from  Kanun-related  blood-
             taking if an active feud exists  and  affects  the  individual
             claimant.  Internal relocation to  an  area  of  Albania  less
             dependent on the  Kanun  may  provide  sufficient  protection,
             depending  on  the  reach,  influence,   and   commitment   to
             prosecution of the feud by the aggressor clan.

         4.    International  protection  under  the   Refugee   Convention,
             Qualification Directive or  Articles  2  and  3  ECHR  is  not
             available to an appellant who is willing and intends to commit
             a revenge killing on return  to  his  country  of  origin,  by
             reference to that intention.

         5.   Where there is an active feud affecting an individual and self-
             confinement is the only  option,  that  person  will  normally
             qualify for Refugee status.

         6.   In determining, whether an active blood feud exists, the fact-
             finding Tribunal should consider:

             (i)  the history of the alleged feud, including the  notoriety
                  of the original killings,  the  numbers  killed,  and  the
                  degree of commitment by  the  aggressor  clan  toward  the
                  prosecution of the feud;

             (ii)  the  length  of  time  since  the  last  death  and  the
                  relationship of the last person killed to the appellant;

             (iii)    the ability of  members  of  the  aggressor  clan  to
                  locate the  appellant  if  returned  to  another  part  of
                  Albania; and

             (iv) the past and likely future attitude  of  the  police  and
                  other authorities towards the feud and the  protection  of
                  the family of the person claiming to be at risk, including
                  any past attempts to seek prosecution of  members  of  the
                  aggressor clan, or to seek protection  from  the  Albanian
                  authorities.

         7.   In order to establish that  there  is  an  active  blood  feud
             affecting  him   personally,   an   appellant   must   produce
             satisfactory individual evidence of its existence in  relation
             to him.  In particular, the appellant must establish:

             (i)  his profile as a potential target of the feud  identified
                  and which family carried out the most recent killing; and

             (ii) whether the appellant has been, or other members  of  his
                  family have been, or are  currently,  in  self-confinement
                  within Albania.

         8.     Attestation   letters   from    Albanian    non-governmental
             organisations should not in general be  regarded  as  reliable
             evidence of the existence of a feud.

         9.   Documents originating from  the  Albanian  courts,  police  or
             prosecution service, if genuine, may  assist  in  establishing
             the existence of a blood feud at  the  date  of  the  document
             relied upon, subject to the test of reliability set out in A v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Pakistan)  UKIAT
             00439, [2002] Imm A R 318 (Tanveer Ahmed).

         10.  Unless factual, prompt and consistent, Albanian press  reports
             will add little or no evidential weight in considering whether
             a feud exists.

         11.  Whether the feud  continues  and  what  the  attitude  of  the
             aggressor clan to its pursuit may be will remain questions  of
             fact to be determined by the fact-finding Tribunal.

         12.  The guidance replaces that contained  in  TB  (Blood  feuds  -
             relevant risk factors) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 000158."

Conclusions

13.  The Judge accepted that the events of 2006 took  place  as  claimed  by
    the appellant.  In my view this is a clear unequivocal finding that she
    accepted the appellant's evidence about the events that took  place  in
    2006 namely that there was a land dispute and a blood  feud.   However,
    she did not  accept  the  events  that  took  place  according  to  the
    appellant's evidence in 2010. There is no incongruity in these findings
    and they were open to the Judge. They are not in my  view  inconsistent
    with the Judge's finding that the document submitted by  the  appellant
    is unreliable (see [22] of the determination). There is no challenge to
    this finding. It is clear that although the Judge  must  have  accepted
    that certain details in the documents were accurate, she did not accept
    that it was a reliable piece of evidence and this was  a  finding  that
    was open to her.

14.  The Judge did not make a specific finding about the killing  of  Adrian
    Kadiu but this was not necessary because she very  clearly  found  that
    she did not accept the appellant's evidence in  relation  to  what  had
    happened in 2010.  In my view she made adequate findings of fact.

15.  In relation to the issue of self-confinement and the interpretation  of
    this, I do not agree with Mr Lams.  However the case was  presented  by
    the Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  Judge  was
    aware of the case of EH and the head note which summarises the  primary
    findings of the Upper Tribunal and reached  her  own  conclusions.  The
    head note of EH  does  not  refer  to  self-confinement.   Paragraph  5
    referred to by Mr Lams is describes "key concepts of an Albanian  blood
    feud". It was open to the Judge in this case to find it damaging to the
    appellant's credibility that he had been attacked in his home.  It  was
    not in any event dispositive of  the  appeal  and  she  considered  the
    evidence in the  round.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant's evidence was contrary to what is known about the way  blood
    feuds are conducted because generally this is the case.

16.  The Judge took into account the factors that she was bound to  consider
    in accordance with EH and she specifically refers to these at [23]. She
    found that the  fact  that  the  appellant's  parents  had  not  sought
    reconciliation before they arranged for the appellant to leave  Albania
    lacked plausibility.  This finding is not  irrational  for  the  reason
    identified in the grounds of appeal  because  the  period  between  the
    alleged shooting of Adrian Kadiu and the appellant leaving  Albania  is
    not insignificant.

17.  The appellant was able to travel to Durres without incident  whilst  in
    self-confinement and the Judge found that this  was  inconsistent  with
    the evidence of a blood feud.  In my view  there  is  nothing  in  this
    finding which is at odds with the findings made in  EH  and  it  was  a
    matter for the Judge to decide what to  make  of  this  evidence.   The
    finding is not irrational or perverse.

18.  The main thrust of Mr Lams' argument  appears  to  be  that  the  Judge
    failed to take into account material facts and consider the evidence in
    the round.  This is because she had accepted  that  there  had  been  a
    blood feud in 2006 and her findings in relation to  2010  do  not  take
    account of this.  However I am satisfied that the Judge considered  the
    appellant's evidence against the backdrop of the fact  that  there  had
    been a historic feud as a result of a land dispute.  I  refer  to  [24]
    where in my view the Judge makes this clear.

19.  There is no error of law for the reasons identified by Mr Lams  in  the
    grounds of appeal and in oral submissions.  The findings of  the  Judge
    are lawful and sustainable and the decision to dismiss  his  appeal  is
    maintained.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 6 October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

