
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03223/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 4 August 2016                              |On 8 August 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                            LOGARAJ ARULANANTHAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H. Sarwar, counsel instructed by Biruntha,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka, arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in October 2010 and was admitted as a student  with  leave  to
      remain until 12 January 2012. He overstayed that leave and on 13  June
      2013 he claimed asylum. He  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal
      against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Miles  who,  by  a
      determination promulgated on 18 May 2016, dismissed his appeal against
      the respondent's decision to refuse his asylum claim.


   2. The nature of that claim is well known to both parties and it  is  not
      necessary to recite it  in  complete  detail.  It  was  summarised  at
      paragraph 2 of  the  grounds  for  seeking  permission  to  appeal  as
      follows:

           "The core of the appellant's case was (1) that  he  had  been  a
           member of the LTTE, and (2) that he  had  engaged  in  diasporic
           activities in the UK, as a consequence of which he was  at  risk
           of serious harm and/or persecution."


   3. The grounds raise two challenges to the decision of the judge.  First,
      it is said that the approach taken to a medical  report  of  Professor
      Lingam, which spoke of the appellant's scars being diagnostic, in  the
      vocabulary of the Istanbul Protocol, was legally  flawed  and  second,
      the conclusion that the appellant was not at risk on return on account
      of his sur place activities was not one reasonably open to  the  judge
      on the evidence.


   4. At paragraph 3.2 of his decision, the judge described  the  nature  of
      the appellant's activities in Sri Lanka. He said  he  had  been  given
      training as a spy and had been involved in moving people  to  Colombo.
      He claimed to have been arrested and questioned in January 2009, being
      released on payment of a bribe, and again later the same year when  he
      was tortured during the two months he was held before, once  again,  a
      bribe secured his release. Part of the serious ill treatment meted out
      to him during this period of detention was, said the appellant,  being
      burned on his back  by  hot  metal  rods.  He  was  released  after  a
      substantial bribe was paid after which arrangements were made for  him
      to leave Sri Lanka and travel to the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of
      the student visa that had been obtained for him. The agent advised him
      not to claim asylum until after the visa expired.


   5. A medical report was provided by  Professor  Lingam,  upon  which  the
      appellant relied in relation to his claim to have  been  tortured.  Of
      this report the judge observed:

           "He told Professor Lingam that it was on the second arrest  that
           his back was burned with metal rods. The appellant  pointed  out
           injuries which  he  stated  had  been  caused  on  each  of  the
           occasions of detention which Prof Lingam regarded as  consistent
           with the history given, including the fact that the pigmentation
           of the scars in the healing process was completely in line  with
           the scars having been caused some four years ago.


           .... Professor  Lingam  was  satisfied  that  those  scars  were
           inflicted almost at the same time and by the same equipment  and
           were diagnostic of the history given. Professor Lingam ruled out
           the  possibility  of   self-inflicted   injuries....   He   also
           considered whether they were caused deliberately to mislead  and
           confirms that clinically there is no way he or any other medical
           expert can  scientifically  differentiate  between  deliberately
           inflicted wounds, say at a third  parties  behest,  from  wounds
           inflicted from trauma..."

   6. The judge dismissed the appeal because he did not believe to  be  true
      any part of the appellant's account of his experiences in  Sri  Lanka.
      That was  because  he  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  given  an
      inconsistent and contradictory account of events  that,  had  they  in
      fact occurred, it would be reasonable to expect a  consistent  account
      to be given. The difficulties identified by the judge in the  evidence
      included the following:

        a. At his screening  interview,  the  answers  given  at  which  he
           confirmed were correct when asked that at the beginning  of  his
           substantive asylum interview, the appellant had spoken  of  just
           one arrest and detention, that being the first arrest in January
           2009. He said also that he had problems with his legs because of
           the torture, something from which he had suffered for 2 � years.
           But as the screening interview took place at  the  end  of  June
           2013 that would mean that the detention took place at the end of
           2010, and not in January 2009 as claimed;


        b. It has been the  appellant's  case  that  the  first  arrest  in
           January 2009 was by the army and the second in December 2009 was
           by the police. He now relies upon a document said to be a police
           report to establish the first period of detention, the appellant
           saying that was issued by police on the day they detained him in
           December 2009. The  judge  found  lacking  in  credibility  that
           police officers detaining the appellant in December  2009  would
           see any reason to provide him with  written  confirmation  of  a
           detention earlier that year by the army,  when  their  intention
           was to extract information under torture about LTTE  activities.
           Also, as police  played  no  part  in  the  earlier  arrest  and
           detention it was unexplained how they would be able to  document
           that event;

        c. The lawyer's letter relied upon by the appellant states that the
           appellant was arrested in January 2009 by  police,  whereas  his
           evidence is that it was the army who had arrested  him  on  that
           occasion;

        d. The appellant's evidence is that he was arrested in January 2009
           because two people he had transported to Colombo had  themselves
           been arrested and had disclosed his name  when  questioned.  But
           the  appellant's  evidence  is  that  he  had  never  met  these
           individuals before, he knew only the names given for them by the
           LTTE and he himself had used only the name Logan,  also  a  name
           provided by the LTTE for him to use, and when  asked  how  these
           two men could possibly be able to identify him  sufficiently  as
           to enable his arrest, the appellant was unable  to  provide  any
           credible response;

        e. In interview he had indicated that the serious ill treatment  he
           was subjected to with his back being burned with hot metal  rods
           took place at the first detention and it was only  after  having
           described those events that he went  on,  at  question  144,  to
           speak of a second detention. Yet in his witness  statement,  and
           in giving his account to Professor Lingam, he says this  serious
           ill-treatment took place during his second period of  detention,
           nearly a year after the first. Further,  in  a  letter  from  Mr
           Cyril, also relied upon, which letter speaks of both periods  of
           detention, there is reference to ill treatment only  during  the
           first period of detention, whereas it  is  now  the  appellant's
           account that the most serious torture was inflicted  during  the
           second period of detention;


        f. The appellant's credibility is damaged by his delay in  claiming
           asylum, given that he says he came here for that purpose. Having
           been admitted as a student in October 2010 he left  the  college
           after just two months and found a job working in a shop and  did
           not claim asylum until June 2013. He said the agent told him not
           to make the claim until the visa expired, but  that  was  on  12
           January 2012 and the asylum claim was not made  until  nearly  a
           year and a half later;

   7. At paragraph 10.32 of his decision the judge  summarised  his  reasons
      for finding than the appellant's account of  his  experiences  in  Sri
      Lanka was untrue, those  reasons  being  discussed  in  the  preceding
      paragraphs:

           "... I am not satisfied that the appellant has established  that
           he was ever detained or tortured by the authorities in Sri Lanka
           as he claims.  In my judgment there are simply  too  many  major
           inconsistencies in his  account  which  I  have  endeavoured  to
           explain above, and the documentary evidence from the police  and
           the lawyer simply reinforces those inconsistencies, as does  the
           appellant's failure to explain in any  credible  and  reasonable
           manner the delay in making his claim. While I accept that  there
           is evidence that the appellant has been burned with a  hot  iron
           rod on  his  back  and  legs,  there  is,  in  my  judgment,  an
           alternative explanation for how those injuries were caused.  And
           the appellant's evidence of when they were caused is  undermined
           by what he said in the screening  interview.  When  set  against
           the many other significant  credibility  questions  against  his
           account  that  evidence,  is  not,  of  itself,  sufficient   to
           establish that account as a whole is  reasonably  likely  to  be
           true, and I therefore reject it accordingly."

   8. The complaint raised concerning the approach to the medical report  is
      that the judge failed to follow the approach set out in KV (scarring -
      medical evidence) Sri Lanka  [2014]  and  that,  having  rejected  the
      evidence on the basis that there was an  alternative  explanation  for
      the presence of scarring, he did not set out what that was and did not
      provide the appellant with an opportunity to deal with it. This  means
      that there has been unfairness to the appellant because,  despite  the
      scars being said to be diagnostic of what the appellant had  asserted,
      the judge has found that the scars were caused in some other  way  but
      without putting that to the appellant for him to deal with it.


   9. In developing that submission Mr Sawar referred to paragraphs 295  and
      298 of KV:

           "So far as decision-makers are concerned (primary or  judicial),
           it should not be thought that our analysis requires them to make
           any definitive finding of whether  scarring  is  the  result  of
           SIBP. If the evidence strongly points to such a  finding  we  do
           think it is necessary to say that SIBP is a real possibility. In
           this regard we do not agree with Mr  Duffy  that  it  is  enough
           simply to say that the burden of proof in asylum cases rests  on
           the appellant and that if he has failed to demonstrate that  his
           scarring was the result of torture, then he has not  established
           his claim. That does not in  itself  make  intelligible  to  the
           reader why the decision maker has engaged with SIBP  as  a  real
           possibility. When there is at least one  presenting  feature  of
           the  case  that  makes  SIBP  a  real  possibility  and,   after
           consideration of the state of the evidence as a whole  there  is
           no other real possibility, that should be said. To state as much
           is entirely consistent with  the  guidance  given  to  decision-
           makers in Karanakaran [2000] EWCA Civ 11, [2000] ImmAR 271.  But
           to go further would risk violating  the  cardinal  principle  of
           holistic assessment. In the context of  a  holistic  assessment,
           where for example a claimant has given a strongly consistent and
           plausible account of his claim to have been  tortured,  but  the
           medical evidence points against this,  a  decision  maker  might
           properly conclude that the claimant has  nevertheless  made  out
           his claim to the lower standard.

            ...

           So far as concerns tribunal  judges  dealing  with  appeals,  we
           consider that the head note in RR recognises the importance,  in
           order to guarantee a fair hearing, of ensuring that an appellant
           has an opportunity to deal with allegations that an  injury  has
           been "not caused in the way alleged by the appellant  but  by  a
           different mechanism"."


  10. Here, however, the appellant was in no doubt at all that a significant
      matter in issue was whether his scars had been caused  in  the  manner
      claimed or in some other manner. At paragraph 43 of  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse the asylum claim she said:


           "... it is not accepted that these injuries  were  inflicted  by
           the army or the police when you were tortured as a member of the
           LTTE..."


      and at paragraph 44:


           "It is considered that your injuries could have been established
           in any number of ways..."


      and, as the judge observed, Professor Lingam had recognised that  this
      was a matter in issue between the parties and had accepted that:


           "... there is  no  way  he  or  any  other  medical  expert  can
           scientifically  differentiate  between  deliberately   inflicted
           wounds, say at a third parties  behest,  from  wounds  inflicted
           from trauma..."


  11. The position was perfectly clear to all. The respondent did not accept
      that the injuries were inflicted by the authorities because it was not
      accepted that the appellant was ever detained.  Professor  Lingam  had
      confirmed that the scars were diagnostic of  the  treatment  asserted.
      Therefore, what was in issue to be determined by  the  judge  was  not
      whether the appellant suffered these injuries by  the  application  to
      his back and legs of hot metal rods but  the  circumstances  in  which
      that happened. As Professor  Lingam  had  confirmed  also  that  these
      injuries could not  have  been  self  inflicted  that  left  only  two
      possibilities.  Either  the  respondent  was  wrong   to   doubt   the
      appellant's account and the injuries had been inflicted under  torture
      by the authorities, it not being claimed or suggested that anyone else
      had sought to do him harm, or that the appellant was complicit in  the
      infliction of these injures  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  him  to
      establish his asylum claim.


  12. The approach taken by the judge cannot be faulted. He  recognised  the
      weight to be given to the expert evidence but recognised also that  it
      was part of the evidence as a whole and had to be weighed against  the
      evidence  as  a  whole  generally.  He  has  carried  out  a   careful
      examination of the evidence and has made very clear findings of  fact.
      In so doing, he has given clear, cogent and legally sufficient reasons
      for arriving at conclusions that were  plainly  open  to  him  on  the
      evidence. His approach to this evidence discloses  no  error  of  law,
      material or otherwise.

  13. As I have recorded above, the appellant  advanced  also  a  sur  place
      claim. In 2014 he had joined the  Transnational  Government  of  Tamil
      Eelam party ("TGTE"). This is an organisation proscribed  by  the  Sri
      Lankan government and he said that, on account of his support for this
      group, which would be known by the Sri Lankan authorities, he would be
      at risk on return as someone who  sought  to  support  the  separatist
      cause.  Once again, the parties are aware of the detailed  account  of
      the appellant in respect of those activities and  I  do  not  need  to
      reproduce a detailed account here. Having directed himself in terms of
      the guidance given in the current country guidance of  GJ  and  others
      (post civil war- returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC),  the
      judge was satisfied that this generated no  risk  on  return  for  the
      reasons given at paragraph 10.35 of his decision:

           "In my judgment the fact that this appellant has joined the TGTE
           in the United Kingdom and has been distributing leaflets,  books
           and attending and helping in many meetings and events  organised
           by TGTE, is simply wholly insufficient to find  that  he  is  or
           would perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as
           a single state. Despite that organisation  being  proscribed  by
           the Sri Lankan government the appellant, in  my  judgment,  does
           not have, nor would he be perceived to have a  significant  role
           in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within   the
           diaspora and or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka, given
           the timing of this decision to join that  organisation  and  the
           description of his contribution to it in the letter of support."


  14. The grounds categorise that finding a perverse. It is  said  that  the
      point about the timing of the decision to join this organisation would
      be lost on the Sri Lankan authorities as they would be unaware of  the
      progress of the asylum claim and the appellants attempt  to  challenge
      refusal by pursing an appeal. Further, the level of  involvement  with
      the TGTE and the nature of  the  appellant's  activities  in  support,
      which were not disputed, were such as to attract adverse  interest  on
      return. That was because London  is  a  known  "hotspot"  of  diaspora
      activity, the government of Sri Lanka has a sophisticated intelligence
      system and has a real interest in monitoring diaspora events  and,  as
      the appellant had sais in his witness statement, it was clear that the
      authorities were aware of his activities in the United Kingdom because
      the authorities had said so when visiting his family home to ask after
      him.


  15. I do not understand Mr Sarwar's submission in support of  this  ground
      to extend to an assertion that any level of involvement with  TGTE  in
      the United Kingdom would be bound to come to the attention of the  Sri
      Lankan authorities and so to generate adverse interest on return. That
      is not established by the evidence. Thus, an assessment was called for
      and that assessment was one for the judge to carry out.  Having  heard
      oral evidence he was best placed to do so. He has found the  appellant
      not to be a witness of truth and has concluded that his entire account
      of his experiences in Sri Lanka is untrue. Therefore, the  account  of
      the authorities visiting his home simply falls  away  also  since  the
      appellant is of no interest whatever to the authorities  and  so  they
      have no reason to visit the family home or to ask about the appellant.
      There is, therefore, no evidence that the  authorities  are  aware  of
      anything the appellant has done here  and  so  the  asserted  risk  on
      return is entirely speculative. It was open to the judge to find  that
      the appellant's level of involvement was not sufficiently prominent to
      bring him to notice. That  was  a  finding  that  cannot  possibly  be
      considered to be perverse.


  16. For these reasons I am entirely satisfied that the judge made no error
      of law and so there is no proper basis upon which her decision may  be
      disturbed.

Summary of decision:

  17. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a no material error  of  law
      error of law


  18.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


  19. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles is to stand.


                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 5 August 2016

