
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03638/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 28 April 2014                              |                             |
|Oral Determination given following the Hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                          remon samy mahrouse samy

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Poynor, Counsel instructed by Brighton Housing
Trust
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a national of Egypt who was born on  11  August  1989.
    He appeals with leave against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cooper who had dismissed his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    refusing to grant him asylum.

 2. This appeal came before me on 28 November 2013 when I found for reasons
    which are set out within  the  decision  that  I  made  following  that
    hearing that Judge Cooper's determination contained  an  error  of  law
    such that the decision would have to be re-made by the Upper  Tribunal.
    At the time of the hearing I was aware  that  there  would  shortly  be
    country guidance issued in respect of the position of Coptic Christians
    in Egypt and that decision was  promulgated  prior  to  my  giving  the
    decision following that hearing formally.  That decision is reported as
    MS (Coptic Christians - Egypt) CG [2013] UKUT 611.  I  gave  directions
    for this appeal to be re-listed before me with a view  to  subsequently
    listing the appeal for a further hearing in light of the guidance given
    in MS.  I also noted that the  respondent  had  been  provided  with  a
    further copy of an expert report from Dr George which had  been  served
    but which had been missing from the respondent's files.

 3. The appeal then came back before me on 27 February  2014  and  on  that
    occasion it was re-fixed for hearing again before me on  today's  date.
    This was a date on which the Tribunal had been informed that Ms  Poynor
    would be available to represent the  appellant.   I  also  recorded  in
    these directions that on behalf of the appellant Ms Poynor undertook to
    file a skeleton argument with the Tribunal and  I  directed  that  this
    should be served by no later than seven days before the hearing.  I  do
    not know whether these directions were in fact served  and  it  may  be
    that something went astray here  because  in  the  event  the  skeleton
    argument on behalf of the appellant was not received  by  the  Tribunal
    until it was handed to me during the course of  the  hearing.   It  was
    however a useful document and it has assisted me.  I can summarise  the
    appellant's position very briefly and it is as follows.

 4. He is a Coptic Christian and it was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge at paragraph 69 that he had  a  desire  to  preach  his  religion
    "thus,  potentially,  giving  him  a  higher  profile  than  a   simple
    practising member of the church ".

 5. However the judge, while accepting that the appellant would be at  risk
    on return to his home area which  is  Alexandria,  considered  that  he
    could relocate to Cairo.  As I recorded in the decision  which  I  gave
    following the error of law hearing I consider that the judge failed  to
    have any regard to the consequence of the  decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in HJ (Iran) to the effect that in this case if the  only  reason
    why on return to Egypt this appellant would not proselytise was because
    of his fear of persecution if  he  did,  that  in  itself  amounted  to
    persecution.  Also I considered that the finding made by the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge at paragraph 82 of his determination that the  appellant
    could safely relocate to Cairo was not adequately reasoned in light  of
    the background material which had been put before  him  and  which  had
    been relied upon on behalf of the appellant to the effect that a Coptic
    Christian such as this appellant who wished to proselytise would not be
    safe anywhere in Egypt.  As I have already  stated  above  the  country
    guidance has now been given in MS and the purpose of this  hearing  was
    to consider, in light of that country guidance and on the basis of  the
    preserved findings which  had  been  made  taken  with  any  subsequent
    evidence, this appellant could safely relocate.  My starting point  has
    to be the preserved findings which are effectively that  the  appellant
    is an honest witness whose credibility is accepted and  who  wishes  to
    proselytise.  The real issue is as to the extent to which he wishes  to
    proselytise and in light of this whether he could be safe  anywhere  in
    Egypt.



The Hearing

 6. I heard evidence from the appellant  who  relied  on  three  subsequent
    statements he had made on which he was cross-examined.  There was  also
    before me a bundle prepared on behalf of the  appellant  subsequent  to
    the previous hearing which included a new expert report from  Dr  Mariz
    Tavros dated 23 April 2014 as well as other  material.   I  also  heard
    submissions on behalf of both parties.  As I recorded all the  evidence
    and the submissions contemporaneously and these are contained within my
    Record of Proceedings I shall not refer below to everything  which  was
    said to me during the course of the hearing but only  to  such  of  the
    evidence and submissions as are necessary  for  the  purposes  of  this
    determination.  I have however had regard to everything which was  said
    to me during the course of the hearing as well as to all the  documents
    which are contained within the file whether or not these  are  referred
    to specifically below.

 7. The key part of the evidence was contained in an answer  given  by  the
    appellant to a question he was asked in cross-examination by Ms Everett
    which was what he meant when he said  he  would  "start  preaching"  on
    return to Egypt.  He said (and I record that  his  evidence  was  given
    with the assistance of an  Arabic  interpreter,  the  appellant  having
    confirmed that he was satisfied that he and the interpreter  understood
    each other) that "it should be outside of the church, because I want to
    preach  Christianity  not  just  to  Christian  people  but   to   non-
    Christians".

 8. It should be recorded and there is  no  challenge  to  the  appellant's
    evidence that the course which he is currently taking in  this  country
    is one which will lead to him becoming a missionary.   In  other  words
    this is not a Coptic Christian who will  just  get  on  with  his  life
    within his own community but a person who not  only  has  a  desire  to
    become a Minister but also someone who has a positive  wish  to  preach
    his religion to non-Christian people wherever he might  be  and  if  he
    were to return to Egypt to non-Christians in that country.

 9. On behalf of the respondent Ms  Everett  with  her  customary  fairness
    accepted that there were preserved findings in this case and  that  the
    appellant's evidence had been that he desired to proselytise.  In cross-
    examination Ms Everett had sought to give some  context  to  what  that
    might actually mean but the  appellant  had  said  that  he  wished  to
    practise to non-Christians.  She accepted that in light of the  country
    guidance decision of this Tribunal in MS it was difficult to argue that
    that would not put him at risk anywhere in Egypt.   She  did  not  feel
    that she could usefully add anything by way of further submissions.

10. On behalf of the appellant Ms Poynor said that what she  had  attempted
    to do in her skeleton argument was  to  demonstrate  how  the  guidance
    given in MS was relevant in  this  case  especially  in  light  of  the
    decision in HJ (Iran).  This is a person who would wish to  proselytise
    on return and he would be at risk anywhere in Egypt if he did.



Discussion

11. It is not necessary for the purposes of this determination in light  of
    my other findings to go into the  arguments  advanced  in  Dr  Tavros's
    expert report in any  detail.   However,  I  will  record  that  it  is
    unfortunate that in the course of this report he seemed to refer to the
    guidance given in MS as "the Immigration Rules"  and  that  it  is  not
    apparent either that he  had  been  informed  that  the  appellant  had
    already been found to be a credible witness who would be at risk in his
    home area.  However, by reason of my other findings as I  have  already
    noted, it is not necessary for me to consider his report in any detail.



12. I have regard to the findings and guidance contained  within  MS  which
    are summarised  in  the  head  note.   The  relevant  country  guidance
    contained within that head note can be summarised as follows:

         "3.  On the evidence before the Upper Tribunal, the  following  are
             particular risk categories in the  sense  that  those  falling
             within them will generally be able to  show  a  real  risk  of
             persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3,  at  least  in
             their home area:

              ...


             (iii)     those accused of proselytising where the  accusation
                  is serious and not casual;


             (iv)     those accused  of  being  physically  or  emotionally
                  involved with a Muslim woman, where the accusation is made
                  seriously and not casually.

          6.  If a claimant is able to establish that in  their  home  area
             they fall within one or more of the risk categories identified
             in 3 (i)-(iv) above or that they come from an area  where  the
             local Coptic population faces a real risk of  persecution,  it
             will not necessarily follow that they qualify as  refugees  or
             as beneficiaries of subsidiary protection or  Article  3  ECHR
             protection. That will depend on whether  they  can  show  they
             would not have a viable internal  relocation  alternative.  In
             such cases there will be need for a  fact-specific  assessment
             but, in general terms, resettlement in an area where Islamists
             are not strong would appear to be a viable option."

13. Very fairly on behalf of the respondent (and I would have and do in any
    event so find) Ms Everett accepted that although  the  Tribunal  in  MS
    perhaps did not go as far as it could in terms of guidance, it would be
    hard to say that in light of these findings it could properly be argued
    that somebody who had been found to be a proselytising Coptic Christian
    could safely relocate  elsewhere  within  Egypt.   In  my  judgment  Ms
    Everett was right not to seek to argue the contrary.

14. The fact specific assessment which is necessary in this case  leads  me
    to a finding that this appellant first of all is as  has  already  been
    found a credible witness whose evidence should be accepted as truthful.
     That is not of course to say that  his  interpretation  of  everything
    that happened to him must necessarily be accepted (and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in some respects considered that he was not correct when
    he thought that he had been specifically targeted in Cairo) but clearly
    there is in light  of  the  general  credibility  findings  which  have
    already been made, no reason why this Tribunal  should  doubt  that  if
    returned to Egypt he would genuinely wish to  proselytise  in  the  way
    that he has said, that is to say  he  would  wish  to  preach  to  non-
    Christians because that is what he sees as his  mission  in  life.   In
    those circumstances,  given  the  country  situation  within  Egypt  as
    discussed in MS, I agree with Ms Everett that this  appellant  must  be
    considered to be at risk on return anywhere in that country.  While  if
    he did not preach that risk would be lessened or even removed,  as  the
    only reason why he would not preach would be for fear of persecution if
    he did, in light of the decision of the House of  Lords  in  HJ  (Iran)
    that in itself would amount to persecution such that his  return  would
    be in breach of his protected rights.  It follows that this appeal must
    succeed and I so find.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.




Signed:                                 Date: 30 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


