
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03831/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 21st January 2016                 |On 19th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   MR A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss H Naz (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hagan promulgated on 8th June 2015, following a hearing at Birmingham
    Sheldon Court on 27th  May  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Sudan,  who  was  born  on  10th
    August 1994.  He appealed against a decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    20th February 2015 refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection and giving directions for his removal.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that  he  is  a  Sudanese  national  of  Berti
    ethnicity, had never been to school, was taught to read the Koran,  and
    had helped his father with farming since he was 5 years of age.  He had
    married a woman called Fany, and the Janjaweed had attacked his village
    and shot his cousin and the family had fought  back.   The  Appellant's
    uncle had advised that the Appellant leave the  country  and  had  made
    arrangements for him.

 4. The refusal letter stated that  there  were  gaps  in  the  Appellant's
    knowledge  because  he  incorrectly  named   the   currency   and   the
    international dialling code for Sudan.  He was unable to  remember  the
    first line of the national anthem.  He  was  unable  to  remember  when
    Sudanese Independence Day was celebrated.  These  matters  should  have
    been known to him notwithstanding the fact that he was uneducated.   It
    was not accepted that he was a member of the Berti clan because of  his
    lack of knowledge of the customs, traditions and history of the  tribe.
    He had also  travelled  through  Italy  and  France  and  not  made  an
    application for asylum there and this too affected his credibility.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge observed that it was common ground that the Berti  Tribe  are
    persecuted as a minority tribe in Sudan.  If the Appellant  could  show
    that he belonged to the Berti Tribe then he could show he was  at  risk
    and there would be insufficiency of protection for him in that country.
     The judge did not accept that the Appellant was able to  show  on  the
    lower standard that the Appellant belonged to  the  Berti  Tribe.   The
    established authorities (see paragraph 33)  therefore  meant  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk in these circumstances.  He  established
    that it was also  concluded  that  neither  involuntary  returnees  nor
    failed asylum seekers nor persons of military age were at real risk  on
    return to Khartoum (see paragraph 33).

 6. The judge went on to express himself in terms that,
         "I am not considering whether the Appellant is a non-Arab  Darfuri.
         In that respect, I entirely agree ... that it was for the Secretary
         of State, and is also for me, to consider the claim for asylum  put
         forward by the Appellant.  It is his case that he is  a  member  of
         the Berti Tribe.  It is that which I have to consider."  (paragraph
         34)

 7. The judge went on to say that the fact that the Appellant spoke  Arabic
    was a neutral factor in this case (see  paragraph  35).   However,  the
    interview  answers   that   the   Appellant   gave   were   "hopelessly
    inconsistent"  and  the  judge  set  these  out.   The  Appellant   was
    inconsistent in naming his wife or  when  he  last  saw  her.   He  was
    inconsistent as to when the Janajweed attack took place on his village.
     He was inconsistent as to whether the uncle to whom he had fled was  a
    maternal or paternal uncle.  He was also inconsistent as to whether  he
    fled in a lorry or a livestock truck.

 8. The judge went on to say that he would recognise that "people who  have
    genuinely  experienced  trauma  will  sometimes  give  fragmented   and
    seemingly inconsistent accounts of the traumatic events" and  that  the
    benefit of the doubt should be given here (see paragraph 40).  Even so,
    the account given could not possibly be true (see paragraph  42).   The
    Appellant had given no satisfactory explanation for the  fact  that  he
    did not claim asylum in Italy (paragraph 43).  The  judge  went  on  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE  and  found  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under this provision (paragraph 45).  Consideration  was  given
    to whether the Appellant qualified under Appendix FM (paragraph 47) and
    this too did  not  assist  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  failed  in
    freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence (paragraph 49 to paragraph 52).

 9.  Finally,  the  judge  gave  consideration  to  the   public   interest
    requirement in paragraph 117B and held that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed in  the  totality  of  the  circumstances  in  this  case  (see
    paragraph 53).

10. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    make a finding as to whether the Appellant was a non-Arab Darfuri.  The
    grounds also allege that the judge should have made various findings as
    to the risk to be faced by the Appellant on return as a  failed  asylum
    seeker.

12. On 1st July 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

13. On 13th July 2015, a Rule 24 response was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State making three substantial points.   First,  that  the
    Appellant claimed to be a member of the Berti Tribe  which  is  a  non-
    Darfuri Tribe and that the claim was rejected and adequate reasons were
    given for disbelieving this claim.  Second,  that  although  the  judge
    said he was not  considering  whether  the  Appellant  was  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri, the fact was that this was an inherent part of  the  claim  of
    being a member of the Berti Tribe, and this had been rejected.   Third,
    the Appellant did not advance an alternative claim not to  be  a  Berti
    Tribe member or that he is a member  of  some  other  non-Arab  Darfuri
    Tribe.

14. At the hearing before me on 21st January 2016, Miss Naz,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, began by  saying  that  she  would  adopt  the
    grounds of application and argued that I should set aside the  decision
    and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  reconsideration.



15. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that at its  highest,  the  claim  put
    forward by the Appellant rested on the judge's rather cryptic statement
    that, "I am  not  considering  whether  the  Appellant  is  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri"  (paragraph  54).   However,  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  this
    statement has to be read in conjunction with the one  that  immediately
    follows it where the judge states that, "... it was for  the  Secretary
    of State, and is also for me, to consider  the  claim  for  asylum  put
    forward by the Appellant.  It is his case that he is a  member  of  the
    Berti Tribe.  It is that which I have to consider" (paragraph 34).  The
    membership of the  Berti  Tribe  is,  of  course,  a  membership  of  a
    persecuted minority tribe in Sudan.

16. The Appellant was not putting forward any other claim  except  for  the
    fact that he was indeed a member of the  Berti  Tribe.   The  judge  so
    stated himself by saying, "I must and shall confine myself to the issue
    of whether the specific claims that he has made are established to  the
    evidential standard applicable in cases of this kind" (paragraph 34).

17. The judge then, in fact,  goes  on  to  say  that  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant spoke Arabic rather than a language  specific  to  the  Berti
    Tribe, was not to be taken against him.  The judge even went on to  say
    that this "does not undermine his claim that he  is  a  member  of  the
    Berti Tribe."  He added that it did not support his claim, but the fact
    that he spoke Arabic "is a neutral factor" (paragraph 35).

18. With respect to  consideration  specifically  of  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant did put forward, the judge went on to analyse that and to say
    that "the Appellant had significant gaps in  his  knowledge  about  the
    history and culture of the Berti Tribe" (paragraph 36).  He then made a
    specific finding that, "the linguistic analysis establishes that he  is
    from South Darfur, but does not establish that he is a  member  of  the
    Berti ..." (paragraph 37).

19. The judge then considered the Appellant's  own  evidence  and  observed
    that this has "a number of unsatisfactory features which, cumulatively,
    led me to the view that he was not telling the truth"  (paragraph  38).
    He went on to conclude that the Appellant "during  his  interviews  was
    hopelessly inconsistent" (paragraph 39).

20. Finally, the judge observes that the Appellant does not  discharge  the
    burden of proof (see paragraph 44).  As far as Ground 3 of the claim is
    concerned, this is based upon the country situation, and it is entirely
    misconceived.  The OGN is about non-Arab Darfuris, and the OGN is quite
    clear in what it says.  Therefore, Ground 3 simply is unarguable.

21. In reply Miss  Naz  said  that  the  Appellant  had  answered  all  the
    questions correctly.  If there were gaps in  his  knowledge  about  the
    culture it was because he was traumatised.  She referred to a  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  She went on  to  submit
    that the judge failed to give the Appellant the benefit of  the  doubt.
    The issue of the non-Darfuri was vital to the claim and the  judge  had
    glossed over it.

22. However, she said that the greatest problem arose from the way in which
    the judge had dealt with the analysis (at paragraph  34)  by  observing
    that, "I am  not  considering  whether  the  Appellant  is  a  non-Arab
    Darfuri."  The Appellant's precise claim was exactly  to  do  with  the
    fact that he was at risk because he was a non-Arab Darfuri.

No Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should set aside that  decision.   My  reasons
    are essentially those that had been advanced by Mr Mills in his careful
    submissions before me.  The high point of  this  claim  is  indeed  the
    judge's cryptic  statement  at,  "I  am  not  considering  whether  the
    Appellant is a non-Arab Darfuri" (paragraph 34), but that statement  is
    entirely comprehensible and rational in its  analysis  when  it  states
    also that the judge is fundamentally concerned,  as  the  Secretary  of
    State was concerned, to determine  the  claim  that  was  actually  put
    forward by the Appellant.  The claim put forward by the  Appellant  is,
    as the judge said, "it is his case that he is a  member  of  the  Berti
    Tribe" (paragraph 34).

24. The Appellant did not put forward any other alternative claim.  Had the
    Appellant done so the judge would have considered it.  Thereafter,  the
    judge gave the benefit of the doubt to the Appellant  where  he  could,
    and held some matters, such as the use of the Arabic  language,  to  be
    entirely neutral, and one that did not undermine the Appellant's claim.



25. In short, the determination of the judge is careful, comprehensive, and
    sensitive to the claims of the Appellant, and it is determined  at  the
    appropriate level of proof, and is entirely sustainable as a matter  of
    law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        13th February 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have rejected the claim, there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016
