

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                               Appeal Numbers: AA/03446/2014
                                                               AA/03458/2014
                                                               AA/03459/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2014                            |On 27 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                                     S D
                                     K D
                                     K D

                      ANONYMITY DIRECTION IS RETAINED


                                                                  Appellants

                                   and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Rizwan Ashiq of Counsel instructed by Malik &
Malik, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Alice Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Albania. The principal appellant  before
  the First Tier Tribunal was the mother born on 12 December 1982  and  the
  two other appellants are her children born in July 2009 and October  2005
  respectively. Their appeals against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
  refusing to grant them asylum and leave to remain under Article 8 of  the
  ECHR were allowed by Judge J H H Cooper following  a  hearing  at  Taylor
  House on 27 June 2014


2.   The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal  by
  Judge Foudy, a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal. In his decision dated 20
  August 2014 the Judge said inter alia "The  grounds  of  appeal  complain
  that the Judge erred in failing to take account  of  background  evidence
  relied upon by the respondent and gave inadequate reasons for  concluding
  that the main appellant would be re-trafficked, having also found that  a
  sufficiency of protection in Albania existed." Judge  Foudy  went  on  to
  say, " The issue of protection available to trafficked women returned  to
  Albania was central to the appeal. The case of AM & BM was heard in 2009.
  The detailed material relied upon by the  Respondent,  dated  1  November
  2013, is suggestive of considerable developments  in  the  protection  of
  such women. It is unclear from the Tribunal whether this information  was
  taken into account or, if it was, why the provisions described in it were
  thought to leave the Appellant at risk."


3.   At the hearing before me I heard submissions from Ms  Holmes  and  from
  Mr Ashiq. Ms Holmes submitted that the Immigration  Judge  Cooper  should
  have considered all the evidence and since he had not done so, there  was
  a material error of law in the decision". She argued that the Immigration
  Judge had erred in placing too much weight on  the  evidence  that  there
  were special reasons why she could not seek  protection  of  the  police.
  When I asked what evidence had the Judge overlooked, Ms Holmes said  "the
  objective evidence". However she could not point to any specific relevant
  objective evidence that the Judge had ignored. Mr Ashiq submitted that no
  evidence of any relevance had been ignored or overlooked. He pointed  out
  that the criticism made by the Respondent of the decision made  by  Judge
  Foudy was misconceived  and  simply  a  disagreement  on  Judge  Coopers'
  careful  and  well-reasoned  decision.  He  argued  that  the  Judge  was
  perfectly entitled to find the evidence of the  main  appellant  credible
  for the reasons given in paragraphs 25 and 26. According to Mr Ashiq, the
  Judge gave full and proper consideration to  the  respondent's  case  for
  rejecting the claim of the appellants as is evident from the contents  of
  Paragraph 19 of the determination. Mr  Ashiq  produced  a  copy  of  what
  appeared to be an e-mail which seemingly supported the reasoning  of  the
  Judge for allowing the appeals on asylum grounds.  I  declined  to  admit
  this evidence as it was not before Judge Cooper and I was given  no  good
  reason why I should admit it at this stage - no notice in fairness having
  been given of it to the respondent too.


4.    I have perused the determination of Judge Cooper with care and in  the
  context of the criticisms made of  it  in  the  respondent's  grounds  of
  appeal and oral submissions. I am afraid I found none of  the  criticisms
  raised to be well founded. I have found the determination to be full  and
  well reasoned. For the reasons given  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  make
  positive credibility findings in respect of the main appellants claim. He
  addressed the concerns raised by the respondent about credibility of  the
  appellant but for very good reasons found those to be wrong. This is  set
  out in paragraphs 25 and 26 of the determination.  The  Judge  has  given
  reasons for finding that the main appellant in  her  circumstances  would
  not receive sufficient protection from the State.  That  is  set  out  in
  paragraph 30 and the reasons why she cannot avail of internal re-location
  are addressed in paragraph 31.  The legal test  applied  is  the  correct
  one. I have not found any error in the decision of Judge  Cooper  as  set
  out in the determination. It may be that a  different  Judge  could  have
  found differently but that is neither here nor  there.  The  decision  of
  Judge Cooper was evidence based, applying the  correct  legal  tests  for
  findings made and well reasoned.

5.   This application for permission to appeal is  refused  as  no  material
  error of law has been found to exist in the decision of  the  First  Tier
  Tribunal Judge Cooper allowing the appeal of the appellants.





      K Drabu CBE
      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
      22 October 2014



































