

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03319/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 December 2014                            |On 16 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     NR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Edwards instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on  12  May  1961.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 April 2014 and claimed asylum.  On 1
    May 2014, the Secretary of State refused to grant the appellant  asylum
    and made a decision to remove him to Iran by way  of  directions  under
    s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 11 August 2014, Judge Harries dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.  On
    1 September 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge P J G  White)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Thus,  the
    appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Claim

 4. The appellant's claim for asylum was based on the following  background
    facts. He claimed that he had worked as a technical engineer  with  the
    State TV and Radio Network.  In 1999, he stopped a radio  broadcast  of
    the Supreme Leader because he disagreed with it  but  his  conduct  was
    excused by his employers  when  he  said  it  was  a  technical  fault.
    However, in 2006 he again stopped a TV programme in a similar way  but,
    even though he again claimed it was a technical fault, on this occasion
    he was sacked by his employer.

 5. Thereafter, the appellant started up his own business.  He claims  that
    he was politically active  supporting  Mr  Khatami,  a  reformist.   He
    participated in demonstrations after the 2009 presidential election and
    was arrested and detained before being released under  an  amnesty  for
    political prisoners. He claimed that whilst  he  was  detained  he  was
    slapped in the face but he experienced no problems with the authorities
    after he was released.

 6. The appellant says that towards the end of 2010, he was bundled into  a
    car by unknown persons who punched him, threatened him with  death  and
    stabbed him in the back, at the base of his neck, with  a  knife.   The
    ordeal lasted for about half an hour before he was thrown from the car.
     The appellant claims that these individuals were  Hezbollah  and  that
    their purpose was to hurt him to stop his political activities.

 7. The appellant left Shiraz where he then lived and moved  to  a  village
    which he considered a safe  place  and  where  he  had  relatives.   He
    remained there without any problems until 9  February  2014.   On  that
    day, the appellant claimed that men in plain  clothes  knocked  on  his
    door with a warrant to  search  his  house.   They  were  seen  on  the
    intercom and the appellant fled through the backdoor.  The men searched
    his house and an arrest warrant was presented to his wife.  They seized
    a computer, books and leaflets.

 8. The appellant went to stay at a friends' house for a  few  days  before
    travelling by coach to Tehran where he stayed with another friend for a
    few days before leaving Iran on 11 March 2014 and travelling via Turkey
    to the United Kingdom where he arrived on 7 April 2014.

 9. The appellant claims to be a supporter of  President  Rouhani  who  was
    elected in the 2013 presidential election.  The appellant  claims  that
    his political activities, even as a supporter of the current President,
    created a real risk of persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment  because
    hardliners within the Iranian government oppose President  Rouhani  and
    his supporters.

The Judge's Decision

10. Judge Harries did not accept that the appellant was at risk  on  return
    to Iran.  At paragraph 29 she stated that:

         "....looked  at  in  the  round  the  appellant's  claim   is   not
         plausible."

11. At paragraph 31 she stated that:

         "I do not accept  the  core  elements  of  the  appellant's  claim,
         including his claim to have been detained and  ill-treated  by  the
         authorities."

12. In paragraph 37, having concluded that no adverse  inference  could  be
    drawn under s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants
    etc) Act 2004 from the appellant's failure to claim asylum  in  Turkey,
    Judge Harries stated:

         "I have, however, for  all  the  reasons  set  out  above,  reached
         adverse credibility findings for other  reasons  having  considered
         the totality of the evidence.  I find that the evidence as a  whole
         does not reach  the  required  standard  to  establish  an  asylum,
         humanitarian or human rights claim.  I  find  the  evidence  to  be
         implausible and  insufficiently  reliable  to  establish  the  core
         aspects of the claim."

The Grounds

13.  The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal,  drafted  by  Mr  Edwards   who
    represented the appellant at  the  hearing  before  me,  set  out  four
    grounds.

          1. The Judge failed to make a finding on the issue of whether the
             appellant had, towards the end of 2010, been  bundled  into  a
             car by plain-clothed Hezbollah operatives.  This was a central
             element of the claim, and consideration of  this  claim  would
             therefore materially affect  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
             claim as a whole.

          2. The Judge failed to make a finding on  the  issue  of  whether
             support for President Rouhani would be  considered  subversive
             by the authorities, or elements of the  authorities  in  Iran.
             It is relevant to  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  political
             profile in Iran, and is therefore  material  to  the  risk  on
             return.

          3. The Judge failed to take into account the appellant's detailed
             account of his 2009 protest activity and subsequent  detention
             in his  asylum  interview,  and  the  objective  evidence  for
             corroborating  the  account.   She  failed  to  apply  anxious
             scrutiny to this element of the claim and erred in finding  at
             [31] "there is a lack of supporting evidence" for this  aspect
             of the claim, which was an issue material to the  question  of
             whether the appellant would face a risk upon return.

          4. It was procedurally improper for the Judge to  have  made  the
             finding that the appellant had not participated  in  the  2009
             protests or been detained, because the appellant had not  been
             cross-examined on this aspect of the claim.

14. In granting permission to appeal, Judge White considered that grounds 1
    and 2 were arguable.  He did not,  however,  exclude  consideration  of
    grounds 3 and 4 and Mr Edwards addressed me on  those  grounds  in  his
    oral submissions.

Grounds 1 and 3

15. Ground 1 ground relates to the appellant's account that towards the end
    of 2010 he was bundled into a car by Hezbollah and stabbed with a knife
    at the base of his neck.

16. Mr Edwards submitted that  the  Judge  referred  to  this  incident  at
    paragraphs 7 and 13 of her determination setting out  respectively  the
    appellant's claim and the respondent's case.  However, in reaching  her
    findings at paragraphs 17 onwards, she made no reference to this aspect
    of  the  appellant's  account.   He  submitted   that,   although   she
    specifically rejected the other aspects of the appellant's account, she
    made no findings in relation to the 2010 "Hezbollah  incident".   This,
    he submitted was an error of law and, on reading paragraph  30  of  the
    Judge's determination, he submitted that she had clearly overlooked the
    2010 event as she said that it was  not  credible  that  the  appellant
    would  have  "9  trouble-free  years"  which,  Mr  Edwards   submitted,
    overlooked the 2010 incident.  He referred me to the document  entitled
    "Iran's Hardline Vigilantes and the Prospect for Reform" dated 12  June
    2001 at pages 107-109 of  the  appellant's  bundle  which  referred  to
    vigilante groups including Hezbollah who, Mr Edwards submitted  on  the
    basis of this report, were sponsored by "powerful  figures  within  the
    Government".  He submitted that the Judge's failure  to  consider  this
    discreet incident in 2010  was  material  to  her  adverse  credibility
    findings.

17. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the  Judge  had
    evaluated the whole of the appellant's evidence and  had  not  believed
    what she was being told.  He submitted that the  Judge's  statement  in
    paragraph 31 that  she  did  not  "accept  the  core  elements  of  the
    appellant's claim, including his claim to have been detained  and  ill-
    treated by the authorities" had to be read also in  the  light  of  her
    finding in paragraph 29 that having looked at the evidence in the round
    "the appellant's claim is not plausible".  Mr Richards  submitted  that
    the Judge had given adequate reasons for her conclusion.

18. Although Mr Edwards' submissions have a  superficial  attraction,  they
    are in my judgement not well founded.  To the extent that  it  is  said
    that the Judge made no finding in relation to the 2010  incident,  that
    cannot be sustained on a fair reading  of  the  whole  of  the  Judge's
    determination.  Mr Edwards placed great reliance upon  what  the  Judge
    said in paragraph 31 in relation to not accepting the core elements  of
    the appellant's claim including  his  claim  to  be  detained  and  ill
    treated by the authorities and submitted, in effect, that only  related
    to his claimed detention  following  the  2009  presidential  election.
    However, that is not a fair reading of those words and pays  no  regard
    to the word "including" referring to the appellant's detention and ill-
    treatment.  The "core elements" of the appellant's claim  included  the
    2010 "Hezbollah incident".  In addition, the Judge also stated that the
    appellant's  claim  was  "not  plausible"   (see   para   29   of   her
    determination) and repeated, again, that the evidence  was  implausible
    and insufficiently reliable to establish the core aspects of the  claim
    at paragraph 37.  There is no doubt that the Judge, therefore, rejected
    the appellant's  account  as  a  whole  including  the  2010  Hezbollah
    incident.

19. Mr Edwards' submission that the Judge had been wrong in paragraph 30 to
    refer to "9 trouble-free  years"  and  had  thereby  ignored  the  2010
    "Hezbollah incident" is, in truth, in substance  a  reasons  challenge.
    On the face of it, it does seem to be problematic  as  the  appellant's
    case was not that he had lived trouble-free for  9  years  until  2014.
    That would have been, in effect, to have failed to  grasp  his  account
    that he had been abducted by Hezbollah in 2010 and also that he had not
    been arrested  following  the  presidential  election  in  2009  whilst
    demonstrating.  It is difficult to see precisely what the Judge had  in
    mind by this comment (see also para 8 of her determination).

20. The issue is whether, if that reason  is  inadequate,  looking  at  the
    totality of the Judge's reasoning her ultimate adverse finding  on  the
    reliability of the appellant's account is sustainable.

21. The Judge's reasoning is set out at length at paragraphs 17-39  of  her
    determination.  At paragraphs 22-23 of  the  determination,  the  Judge
    rejected a reason relied upon by the respondent for not  accepting  the
    claimed visit to the family home in February 2014 on the basis that  he
    had not mentioned it in his screening interview.  The Judge referred to
    Part 6 where the appellant had said in relation to  what  documents  or
    other evidence he had to support his claim:

         "Only the scar on my neck.  The people who came to our home did not
         bring anything."

22. That latter sentence, the Judge concluded,  could  only  refer  to  the
    February 2014 visit.

23. However, the  Judge  then  identified  an  inconsistency  between  that
    evidence and  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  in  his  asylum
    interview as follows:

         "However, this evidence conflicts with the appellant's evidence  in
         the asylum interview at B9, Question 12, that the men who  came  to
         his house in 2014 had a search warrant in their hand and  also  had
         an arrest warrant for him.  I accept that he said subsequently that
         no document was left with his wife but there is a conflict  in  the
         evidence."

24. That conflict in the evidence is not challenged in the grounds.

25. The Judge then went on at  paras  24-26  to  consider  the  appellant's
    evidence as it evolved over the lifetime of his claim:

         "24.     The reference in the screening interview,  on  16th  April
             2014, to the February 2014 visit  to  his  home  is  fleeting,
             without reference to the date or the  existence  of  warrants.
             At this stage he attributes his reason for leaving Iran to the
             events in 2010 but the focus of  the  claim  had  in  my  view
             altered by the time of the asylum interview conducted on  24th
             April 2014 with much greater emphasis on later events.  I take
             this  view  notwithstanding  the  purpose  of  the   screening
             interview and its intended brevity.  The appellant's claim  in
             my view lacks coherence between the different events  he  sets
             out and as the claim progresses the context of them is adapted
             to provide a link between them.

         25.      In my view the  appellant  does  not  give  a  very  clear
             account in interview of his  activities  in  interfering  with
             broadcasts or how those contribute to his claim  These  events
             as described early on in the appellant's claim are not relayed
             by him in such  a  way  to  show  that  he  attracted  adverse
             interest from the authorities.  In his recent statement, dated
             10th June 2014, adopted  as  his  evidence  in  chief  at  the
             hearing, he clarifies matters  by  stating  that  in  1999  he
             stopped the broadcast of the Supreme  Leader  by  cutting  the
             electricity because of his  political  disagreement  with  its
             content.  However, he passed this off  as  a  technical  fault
             with  his  employers.   In  2006  he   interfered   with   the
             electricity supply to prevent another broadcast and  explained
             this as a technical fault but was sacked.  In his statement he
             claims that he was questioned about the incident before  being
             sacked and since then his employers have called  his  wife  to
             say he must come to answer further questions.

         26. In interview the appellant makes no mention of his wife  being
             contacted  by  his  employers  about  the  need  for   further
             questioning.   The  appellant's  first  response   in   cross-
             examination explaining his fears on  return  to  Iran  was  to
             refer to his interference in  2006  with  the  broadcast.   He
             added very significant evidence at the hearing, not previously
             mentioned in his claim, namely that  3  months  after  he  was
             sacked he was supposed to go to court, first of all internally
             with the organisation and then, if  sufficiently  serious,  he
             would have been taken to the public court.  He  said  that  he
             denied and refused what they said he had done...."

27. Having set that evidence out, the Judge concluded:

         "I find the  appellant's  credibility  to  be  undermined  by  this
         significant escalation in detail.  As the claim  progresses  in  my
         view the appellant seeks to enhance the political  significance  of
         events."

28. At paragraph 27 the Judge further referred to a "continuing addition of
    detail" in relation to the February 2014 visit to the appellant's home.
     The Judge said this:

         "The appellant's oral  evidence  differed  significantly  from  his
         evidence in interview; in oral evidence he said the men knocked his
         door in 2014 because he had not attended the  hearing  referred  to
         above; the organisation told the judiciary  and  someone  from  the
         judiciary knocked  his  door.   I  consider  that  this  continuing
         addition of detail undermines the claim in an effort to link events
         to make a more coherent claim.  In his oral evidence the  appellant
         continued to link the 2014 visit to the house to his activities  in
         2006.   In  cross-examination  the  appellant   stated   that   the
         authorities had not been back to his house in Iran  but  they  have
         said he must hand himself in."

29. The Judge's reasoning in paragraphs 24-27 is not, in  itself,  directly
    challenged in any of the grounds.  In my judgment, both  the  reasoning
    and conclusion was properly open to the Judge to support her view  that
    the reliability or credibility of the appellant's account was  damaged.



30.  At  paragraphs  28-30,  the  Judge  further  considered  the  evidence
    concluding the appellant's account to be "not plausible" as follows:

         "28.     In oral evidence the appellant said his wife had been told
             of charges against him because of  the  destruction  with  the
             broadcasting network; they knew he had listened  to  the  BBC.
             The broadcasting organisation thought  he  was  related  to  a
             person in BBC Persia, but he  was  not.   The  relay  of  such
             information to his wife is not  explicit  in  the  appellant's
             evidence in interview.  The appellant said  in  oral  evidence
             that when his house was searched a computer case,  ideological
             leaflets and magazines were taken; some of the  leaflets  were
             banned.  The appellant was asked why he would keep  high  risk
             material at home and he replied that  the  leaflets  had  been
             hidden in a safe place, namely his bedroom  drawer,  but  this
             was not so secretive that the materials were not  found.   The
             authorities had to look for these items to find  them.   Asked
             again why he would take this risk the appellant explained that
             he kept materials at home as discussion material.

         29. I find that looked at in the round the  appellant's  claim  is
             not  plausible.   He  claims  to  have  a  profile  with   the
             authorities which attracted adverse interest in him and leaves
             him at risk but I find no coherent explanation to explain  how
             this profile was achieved.  There is a conflict with his claim
             to have  concealed  his  political  activities  in  his  media
             employment to cover his  tracks  but  he  unnecessarily  keeps
             political  materials  at  home.   It  is  submitted  for   the
             appellant that his support  for  Mr  Rouhani  would  still  be
             considered subversive by the  authorities,  in  spite  of  his
             successful election. He claims that  when  items  were  seized
             from his home evidence was found of his Rouhani  support,  but
             this was not apparent from his evidence in interview.

         30. I find that the authorities have made little attempt  to  find
             or pursue the appellant if they were genuinely  interested  in
             him, for the reasons claimed.  There was a single visit to his
             house and he remained for 31 days in Iran before  leaving  the
             country, albeit not at his home address.  I  do  not  find  it
             credible that there would have been 9 trouble-free  years  for
             the appellant in Iran before the authorities came looking  for
             him for again if he were of genuine  interest  to  them.   The
             appellant states that his 2 daughters  are  at  university  in
             Iran, but not in Shiraz; he said one reason  for  leaving  the
             country was his fear that their lives  were  in  danger.   The
             appellant states that he keeps  weekly  contact  by  telephone
             with his family in Iran but no harm has come to  his  wife  or
             daughters.  I find that these circumstances are not consistent
             with the appellant's claim to be of a  life-threatening  level
             of interest to the authorities  for  political  or  any  other
             reasons."

31. Then, at paragraph 31 the Judge stated  her  conclusion  which  I  have
    referred to above that she did not accept

         "the core elements of the appellant's claim, including his claim to
         have been detained and ill-treated by the authorities".

32. Whilst paragraph 30 contains the reason for  doubting  the  appellant's
    credibility based upon "9 trouble-free years" it contains an additional
    reason, namely that he had remained for 31 days in Iran before  leaving
    which was inconsistent with the authorities being "genuinely interested
    in him" and his family had experienced no difficulties or  interest  in
    them from the authorities.  Whilst these may not be the  most  forceful
    of the Judge's reasons, they do have to be seen as part of the totality
    of the Judge's reasons beginning, in effect, at paras 23 onwards of her
    determination.

33. At paragraph 31, the Judge added a further reason namely that there was
    a "lack of supporting evidence for the  claim"  and  then  went  on  to
    consider  the  "authentication  report"  at  paras  31-36   which   she
    considered to be unreliable.

34. The grounds take no issue with the Judge's view on that "authentication
    report" based  upon  a  series  of  questions  posed  by  an  anonymous
    "purported expert".  As I have said, the reasoning of the Judge is  not
    challenged and, in any event, the  Judge's  reasoning  particularly  at
    paras 34-36 is entirely convincing.

35. As regards the "lack of supporting evidence" that is a matter raised by
    Mr Edwards in Ground 3.  It is convenient  to  deal  with  that  reason
    here.

36. Mr Edwards submitted that the Judge was wrong to say that there  was  a
    "lack of supporting evidence".  In the written grounds he  relied  upon
    the appellant's evidence at question 4.2  of  his  screening  interview
    dealing with the release of prisoners after an incident at the Kahrizak
    jail at the  instigation  of  the  Supreme  Leader  Khatami  (see  also
    question 86 of the appellant's interview at B23).  Mr Edwards submitted
    that  this  evidence  was  supported  by  a  document  at  D2  of   the
    respondent's bundle  dated  28  July  2009  entitled  "Kahrizak  prison
    holding Iranian protesters, ordered closed after abuses"  which  refers
    to the closure of Kahrizak prison on the orders of the  Supreme  Leader
    Khamenei.  Mr Edwards also relied upon the background evidence relating
    to the crackdown following the 2009 election.  He  submitted  that  the
    appellant's evidence was internally consistent and was consistent  with
    this background evidence.

37. There is, in my judgment, no substance to this ground.  As regards  the
    2009  election  and  its  aftermath,  there  is  no  doubt  that   this
    experienced judge was no doubt aware of that  general  background.   In
    any  event,  the  background  evidence  does  not  unseat  the  Judge's
    reasoning specific to the appellant's  particular  account  based  upon
    inconsistencies in the evidence and the  Judge's  entirely  justifiable
    conclusion that the appellant's account was, over time, enhanced in  an
    attempt to establish  the  political  significance  of  the  events  he
    claimed had occurred.  As regards the evidence concerning  the  closure
    of Kahrizak prison, this does not, of course, relate to the appellant's
    particular circumstances.  He has never claimed to have  been  detained
    there but rather in Adel Abad prison.  The appellant's evidence on this
    concerned a matter which was, no doubt, in the public domain  in  Iran.
    Whilst his evidence is consistent with the background evidence  on  the
    closure  of  his  prison,  it  sheds  no  light   on   the   particular
    circumstances of the appellant and his account which the Judge, on  the
    basis of her reasons based upon his particular  account,  found  to  be
    implausible and not credible.

38.  Given  the   Judge's   rejection   (entirely   justifiably)   of   the
    "authentication report" - which is not now challenged - the  Judge  did
    not fail to consider  supporting  documentation  which  could,  in  any
    material way, have affected the Judge's findings.

39. For these reasons, I reject Grounds 1 and 3.

Ground 2

40. Mr Edwards submitted that the Judge had failed to consider whether  the
    appellant would be at risk as a supporter  of  President  Rouhani.   He
    relied upon three documents at pages 95, 99 and 101 of the  appellant's
    bundle respectively.  These documents, he submitted, demonstrated  that
    despite Rouhani being President of Iran,  there  remained  conservative
    and hardline elements in the Iranian establishment which disapproved of
    President Rouhani and, as a consequence, put the appellant at risk as a
    supporter of the President.

41. The three documents do establish that President Rouhani is a  reformist
    political figure and that  there  are  hardliners  within  the  Iranian
    establishment who disagree with his stance.  The document  at  page  99
    entitled "Rouhani at 100 days: Few New  Freedoms  Yet"  refers  to  his
    campaign on an "ambitious platform that included free  speech,  release
    of political prisoners and gender equality."  The document goes  on  to
    note, that despite these promises, the Iranian  government  has  failed
    fully to deliver.  For example, although the Government  announced  the
    release of some 80 political prisoners in September 2013,  by  November
    2013 only half had actually been  freed.    The  document  at  page  95
    entitled "The End of Rouhani's  Honeymoon"  (dated  18  February  2014)
    states that:

         "The honeymoon that Iran's hardliners extended to President  Hassan
         Rouhani after his June 2013 election is coming to an end.  As  they
         have in the past, particularly during the  Presidency  of  Mohammad
         Khatami, the conservative factions within the State are reasserting
         their power against a perceived reformist threat."

42. The document goes on to relate what maybe described, at its highest, to
    be an internal political struggle between hardliners and Rouhani as  to
    internal and foreign policy.

43. That point is also made in the document at page 101  entitled  "It's  a
    Sabotage" which again,  in  effect,  highlight  tensions  and  internal
    struggle between hardliners and Rouhani and his supporters, for example
    in their dealings with the West  and  in  relation  to  Iran's  nuclear
    capability.

44. Mr Edwards is correct that Judge Harries  made  no  reference  to  this
    material although it was part of the appellant's  submissions  recorded
    at paragraph 29 of the determination as: "his support  for  Mr  Rouhani
    would still be considered subversive by the authorities,  in  spite  of
    his successful election."

45. There are in my judgment, two principal reasons why this ground  cannot
    succeed.

46. First, the Judge  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  against  the
    appellant.  It was the appellant's claim that he  was  a  supporter  of
    Rouhani but given the adverse credibility finding  the  Judge  did  not
    accept that claim - which was a "core element"  of  his  claim.   There
    was, therefore, no evidential basis upon which it could be argued  that
    the background material demonstrated a  risk  to  the  appellant  as  a
    Rouhani supporter.

47. Secondly, in any event, the background evidence to which  I  have  been
    referred does not  come  anywhere  near  establishing  that  a  Rouhani
    supporter would, as such, be at risk of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment at the hands of the Iranian  authorities  directed  by  hard-
    liners.   Mr Edwards did not draw my attention to any examples of  ill-
    treatment to  Rouhani  supporters  in  the  material  to  which  I  was
    referred.  The appellant was, at best, characterised  as  a  low  level
    supporter of Rouhani even on his own account.  There  was  no  evidence
    before the Judge that such individuals were at risk of  persecution  or
    serious  ill-treatment.   As  Mr  Richards  submitted,  it   would   be
    remarkable if there was unanimous support in Iran or within the Iranian
    Government for President Rouhani but, even given  that,  the  news  and
    blog report at pages 95-102  do  not  establish  a  real  risk  to  the
    appellant on return to Iran even if he is a Rouhani supporter.

48. That, in my judgement, also disposes of any challenge  to  the  Judge's
    decision based on SB (Risk on Return - Illegal  Exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00053.

49. For these reasons, I reject Ground 2.

Ground 4

50. This ground seeks to argue that the Judge was wrong to  find  that  the
    appellant  had  not  participated  in  the  2009   protests   and   had
    subsequently been detained because the appellant was not cross-examined
    on this aspect of the claim.  Reliance is placed upon a passage in  the
    judgment of Lord Judge CJ in R v Farooqi [2013] EWCA Crim 1649 at [112]
    that:

         "[Counsel's] critical comments  about  prosecution  witnesses  were
         advanced without the witness (or the prosecution) having been given
         a fair opportunity  to  address  and  answer  the  criticism.   The
         fairness principle operates both ways.  The defendant must  have  a
         fair trial.  It is however equally unfair to an individual  witness
         to postpone criticism of his conduct until closing submissions  are
         made to the jury, not least because if given the  opportunity,  the
         witness whose behaviour is impugned may have a complete or  partial
         answer to the criticism.  All this is elementary."

51. On behalf of the appellant, it is said that  this  equally  applies  in
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal such that the appellant, who
    was not cross-examined on this issue was treated  unfairly  as  he  may
    have had a partial or complete answer to the respondent's case.

52. The simple answer to this ground is that the appellant did have a  fair
    opportunity to deal with the respondent's case.  The respondent's  case
    was set out in the  refusal  letter  including  her  rejection  of  the
    appellant's account that he had been arrested, detained and ill-treated
    following  demonstrations  in  2009.   The  appellant  (and  his  legal
    representatives) could be in no doubt of the respondent's  case  before
    the Judge.  That, of course, may  reflect  a  difference  between  this
    jurisdiction and the  criminal  jurisdiction  where  the  prosecution's
    case, and in particular the challenge to any witnesses'  evidence,  may
    well arise only in  questions  put  to  defence  witnesses  or,  as  in
    Farooqi, put to prosecution witnesses by  defence  counsel.   Here,  by
    contrast, the appellant had a  full  opportunity  in  giving  evidence,
    first to know what was being said by the respondent  against  him,  and
    secondly to give such evidence as he wished so as to  deal  with   that
    case and to seek to persuade the Judge to believe him.   The  appellant
    could expect no more as a matter of fairness.

53. For these reasons, I also reject Ground 4.

Decision

54. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

55. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is accordingly  dismissed.








                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:    3 December 2014


