
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03258/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 3 March  2016                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                             Mr Mahdi Soleimani
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge who, in a decision  promulgated  on  4  June  2015,
    dismissed his appeal for international protection and human rights.

 2. The appellant is a national of Iran born on 19 July  1985.  He  claimed
    asylum on arrival in the UK on 15 March 2014. The claim was refused  on
    10 February 2015. Mr Pipe  did  not  represent  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing. He was represented by counsel, Ms Norman.

 3. On 10 October 2015, Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the grounds relied on. Those  grounds
     contended that the Judge erred: in failing to grant the  appellant  an
    application for an adjournment  and  in  not  giving  reasons  for  the
    refusal; in making a negative reference to the fact that the  appellant
    had not made a complaint against his former solicitors, who had  closed
    down; in his treatment of a document and the subsequent finding that it
    impacted on the appellant's credibility  as  a  whole  and  finally  in
    making findings without providing any basis for such finding.

 4. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it appears that Ms Norman
    referred to the various difficulties associated with the preparation of
    the appellant's case, and in particular the problems  with  his  former
    representatives.  She made an initial application for  an  adjournment.
    The Judge then allowed her further  time  to  prepare  a  statement  in
    manuscript. Ms Norman had not received the  respondent's  bundle  which
    was only handed to her on the day.

 5. It is evident from the record of proceedings contained in the file that
    Ms Norman again applied for an  adjournment.  The  Judge  at  [18]  was
    satisfied "after allowing  time"  that  it  was  in  the  interests  of
    fairness to proceed. He accordingly rejected  the  application  for  an
    adjournment.

 6. In a document produced by Mr Mills  from  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer,  there  is  reference  to  a  preliminary  issue  raised.  The
    appellant had noted that he had problems with his previous  solicitors,
    Bake and Co, whose firm had closed down. The case was then  transferred
    to Genesis whom the appellant  claimed  did  not  deal  with  his  case
    properly. Mr Mills informed me that although Bake and Co  closed  down,
    those who had been employed by Bake and Co also went to Genesis.  After
    the appellant was dissatisfied with  Genesis,  he  went  to  JM  Wilson
    Solicitors in March 2015. The appeal had been set down to be  heard  on
    20 May 2015.

 7. However, the appellant's funding was only approved on 15  May  2015,  a
    few days before the hearing.  His  solicitors  prepared  a  very  short
    bundle of some  16  pages  including  an  undated  statement  from  the
    appellant. As part of the bundle there was a  Farsi  document  produced
    together with the translation.

 8. That translation from Farsi referred to a warning  notice  relating  to
    the appellant had allegedly been issued by the Ministry of  Justice  of
    Iran. The appellant's name is set out, including that  of  his  father.
    The address  is  also  set  out.  The  "warning  notice"  required  the
    appellant to attend the Tehran Revolutionary Court on 27 August 2014 at
    9am. The  summons  related  to  a  charge  of  having  an  illegitimate
    relationship, trespassing and raping "you are notified  to  attend  the
    Court at the appointed time." The date of issue was 3 August 2014.  The
    document is said to have been served on 8 August and  was  "signed  and
    sealed by Branch 26 of the Tehran Revolutionary Court."

 9. The appellant also provided a copy of  a  summons  with  a  translation
    indicating that he had been required to attend Court on 9 July 2013  to
    answer an allegation of drinking alcohol.

10. At the hearing the appellant  produced  his  "supplementary  statement.
    This has been typed. It was evidently not prepared at Court.

11. The Judge notes that at the hearing, Ms Norman called  the  interpreter
    who assisted the appellant and counsel at court. He stated that  he  is
    the  registered  interpreter.  He  was  aware   of   the   difficulties
    experienced by the appellant in dealing with his former solicitors.  It
    was within his knowledge that the firm had closed down because he  used
    to work for them. [20]

12. Ms Norman had prepared a short statement in manuscript dealing with the
    errors in the appellant's statement of  30  June  2014.  There  are  21
    paragraphs in all, setting out the errors.

13. It appears from paragraph 7 of the grounds of appeal,  that  Ms  Norman
    indicated to the Judge that there had been  various  difficulties  with
    regard to the preparation of his case having  regard  to  the  problems
    with his previous representatives. She noted that counsel did not  have
    a copy of the respondent's  bundle  which  was  only  provided  to  the
    appellant by the presenting officer at the hearing [18].

14. It is thus asserted that the appellant was put into the position  where
    he had to prepare a statement with counsel on the day of  the  hearing.
    He contended that it is  highly  irregular  and  unsatisfactory  for  a
    statement to be prepared this way in an asylum matter. Moreover this is
    not usually a task undertaken by counsel.

15. At [21] the Judge noted that the appellant prepared two  statements  at
    Court.

16. In the course of his submissions Mr Pipe referred to Rule 2 of the 2014
    First-tier Procedure Rules setting out the overriding  objective  which
    in particular is to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases  fairly  and
    justly.  This  includes  dealing  with  the  case  in  ways  which  are
    proportionate to the importance of the case and the complexity  of  the
    issues. The objective is also to ensure so far as is  practicable  that
    the parties are able to  participate  fully  in  the  proceedings.  The
    avoiding of delay, so far as is compatible with proper consideration of
    the issues, is an objective. The  Tribunal  must  give  effect  to  the
    overriding objective when exercising any power under the rules.

17. He referred to the case management powers at Rule 4 which provides that
    the Tribunal is entitled to adjourn or postpone a hearing.

18. He submitted that apart from a brief reference by the  Judge  to  being
    satisfied that it was in the interests of fairness to proceed,  he  has
    given no reasons for such a finding. Mr Pipe submitted  that  "fairness
    has not been done." The situation in which the appellant found  himself
    had not been occasioned through any fault by the appellant himself.  In
    fact, at [32] it was noted that the  discrepancies  relied  on  by  the
    respondent were small and arose because of  the  poor  conduct  of  the
    appellant's first solicitor. He did not speak English and  was  reliant
    on others.

19. Mr Pipe relied on the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  Wagner  (Advocates'
    conduct - fair hearing) [2015] UKUT 00655 (IAC) at [11].  The  Tribunal
    held that with regard to the right of every litigant to a fair hearing,
    there are a wide variety of contexts in which every case is  invariably
    fact sensitive. The central tenet to the right to  a  fair  hearing  is
    having the opportunity to put one's case and to respond on all material
    issues. Regard was had to the decision in MM (Unfairness: E & R)  Sudan
    [2014] UKUT 105 in which the Tribunal  noted  that  it  is  doctrinally
    incorrect to adopt a two stage process of asking whether  there  was  a
    procedural irregularity giving rise to unfairness  and  if  so  whether
    this had any material bearing on the outcome. These are two elements of
    a single question, namely whether there was procedural unfairness.

20. An appellate court should  exercise  caution  in  concluding  that  the
    outcome  would  have  been  the  same  if  the   diagnosed   procedural
    irregularity or impropriety had not occurred.

21. Mr Pipe also adopted the second ground of appeal with regard to [35] of
    the determination where the Judge noted that the appellant had not made
    a complaint against the  former  solicitors.  However,  the  Judge  had
    earlier heard evidence that the firm  of  solicitors  had  closed  down
    [20]. There was accordingly no-one to complain to.

22. The third ground related to the finding at  [40].  The  Judge  was  not
    persuaded that the  document  presented  was  a  genuine  document  and
    attached no weight to it. He went on to find that the  use  of  such  a
    document undermined the appellant's credibility generally.

23. It is asserted that the Judge erred  in  attaching  no  weight  to  the
    document. The Judge accepted that the respondent's submission regrading
    service of a document fell away. Accordingly,  the  only  justification
    left for attaching no  weight  to  the  document  was  the  appellant's
    family's failure to disclose the existence of the document sooner.

24. It was however not open to the  Judge  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    general credibility was damaged regardless of the weight  he  chose  to
    attach to the document. Mr Pipe relied on the decision in R  v  IAT  ex
    parte Gomes - Salinas [2001] EWCA 287 (Admin) where Sullivan J,  as  he
    then was, stated that there have been instances where adjudicators have
    said in respect of a document produced by the claimant that he does not
    accept that the document is genuine, and therefore that casts doubt  on
    the credibility of the claimant.  In  such  cases,  where  the  special
    adjudicator  has  effectively  cast  a  burden  on  the   claimant   to
    demonstrate that  a  document  is  genuine  and  then  reached  adverse
    credibility findings because the appellant has failed to discharge that
    burden, the courts have been prepared to quash adjudicators'  decisions
    on applications for judicial review.

25. It was finally submitted that the findings by the Judge  regarding  his
    relationship with Linda lacks credibility. The contention is  that  the
    Judge "...made a number of statements without providing any  basis  for
    his findings". These appeared to be nothing more  than  assumptions  on
    the part of the Judge in  conflict  with  MK  (Duty  to  Give  Reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), where the Tribunal stated that it  is
    axiomatic that a determination discloses  clearly  the  reasons  for  a
    Tribunal's  decision.  If  a  Tribunal  finds  oral  evidence   to   be
    implausible, incredible, unreliable or a document to be worth no weight
    whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and for such
    findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
    was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely
    to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

26. Mr Pipe submitted that in the circumstances, the decision should be set
    aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  to
    be made.

27. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Mills submitted that it is  clear  that
    the solicitors JM Wilson to whom the appellant had gone in  March  2015
    according to the presenting officer's summary at the hearing, only  had
    their funding approved on 15 May 2015. That was five days prior to  the
    hearing.

28. Despite not being funded until a few days before the hearing, there was
    nothing stopping him from attending the CMR. All they produced  however
    was a short bundle including a statement from the appellant, a  warning
    notice and other documents. A statement from the appellant in  response
    to the refusal letter was produced at the hearing which was not  signed
    and dated. What the Judge did then was to put the case to the  back  of
    his list to afford the appellant's counsel an opportunity  to  draft  a
    statement.

29. Mr Mills accepted that the 2014 Procedure  Rules  emphasised  that  the
    overriding objective was to enable the  Tribunal  to  deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly. The Tribunal in exercising any power under the rules
    must give effect to the overriding objective. Under the 2005  Procedure
    Rules it was stated that the Tribunal must not adjourn the  hearing  of
    an appeal unless satisfied that the appeal cannot otherwise  be  justly
    determined.  He accepted that the  current  approach  in  this  respect
    emphasises fairness.

30. He submitted that the Judge at [18] had in fact satisfied himself  that
    having allowed time, it was in the interests of  fairness  to  proceed.
    Although that was 'sparse', he was entitled to come to that conclusion.
    Extra time had been given to provide statements.

31. The findings with regard to the  making  of  a  complaint  against  the
    original solicitors was proper, even  though  the  solicitors  were  no
    longer in practice. The individual solicitors could still be  targeted.
    Mr Mills noted that the solicitors had re-formed as Genesis Law.

32. Moreover the Judge was entitled to look at how the document came to  be
    produced so late in the day. The findings  were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence. It matters not that another  Judge  might  have  come  to  an
    opposite conclusion.

33. Mr Pipe stated in reply that the submissions relating to the conduct of
    the solicitors  JM  Wilson,  who  had  no  funding  at  the  time,  was
    speculative. He asked rhetorically:  'Why would they have been  obliged
    to come to  the  CMR  in  the  absence  of  funding?'  They  cannot  be
    criticised for not attending that hearing.

34. Finally, even though Ms Norman had been given an opportunity to take  a
    statement, she still sought an adjournment and renewed her application.
    This is evident from the Judge's own record of proceedings at pages  4-
    5.

35. Under the 2005 Rules there had to be good reasons  for  an  adjournment
    and there was a presumption that a case should not  be  adjourned.  The
    position today is that fairness is the benchmark.

    Assessment

36. It was evident from the determination itself that at the outset of  the
    proceedings, experienced  counsel,  Ms  Norman,  set  out  the  various
    difficulties she had with regard to the preparation of the  appellant's
    case; these had arisen in  consequence  of  problems  with  his  former
    solicitors. The current solicitors had not been supplied with a copy of
    the respondent's bundle. It was only on the day of the hearing  that  a
    respondent's bundle was given to her.

37. It is evident that Ms Norman did her best in the short time  available,
    to produce a manuscript statement from  the  appellant,  who  does  not
    speak English. That statement related  to  errors  that  the  appellant
    claimed had occurred in his statement of 20 June 2014. She  managed  to
    produce a 21 paragraph statement which was clearly time consuming.  She
    also had to familiarise herself with the contents of  the  respondent's
    bundle and attempt to communicate the respondent's assertions to him.

38.  It  appears  from  the  determination  that  Ms  Norman  renewed   her
    application for an adjournment. The record of proceedings does not  set
    out the basis of that application. All the Judge  states  at  [18]  was
    that "I was satisfied after allowing time that it was in the  interests
    of fairness to proceed."

39. However, no reasons are given as to how or why he  was  satisfied.  Nor
    did he deal in terms with any of  the  later  and  further  submissions
    advanced by Ms Norman.

40. It is evident  that  the  appellant  had  problems  with  his  previous
    representatives, Bake and Co, who closed down. The appellant  was  then
    transferred to Genesis Law whom the appellant claimed did not deal with
    his  case  properly.  That  resulted  in  turn  with  his  case   being
    transferred to JM Wilson in March 2015.

41. It is correct, as submitted by  Mr  Mills,  that  JM  Wilson  had  been
    instructed in March 2015. However, funding was only approved on 15  May
    2015. It is also stated  in  the  presenting  officer's  notes  of  the
    hearing that "he has had the original court document which he  received
    on 15 May 2015."  It is not clear what the  "original  court  document"
    comprises.

42. What did transpire is that the solicitors sent a letter to the Tribunal
    two days prior to the hearing enclosing a copy of his bundle. There was
    also a request for a copy of the respondent's  bundle.  The  solicitors
    had been in possession of the refusal letter dated  10  February  2015.
    The full bundle however had not been provided.

43. In the short space  of  time  the  solicitors  nonetheless  produced  a
    statement from the appellant in reaction to the reasons for refusal, as
    well as enclosing various documents, including the warning note.

44. It is also evident from the presenting officer's notes of  the  hearing
    that an adjournment had also been sought to make  a  complaint  against
    the previous solicitor. That  was  refused.  However,  there  does  not
    appear to be any reference to that particular application. The Judge in
    fact stated at [35] that no complaint had been made against the  former
    solicitors who were not able to answer the appellant's allegations. The
    Judge nevertheless made a "negative reference to the fact that  he  had
    not made a complaint against the former solicitors" (Ground 2).

45. Having regard to the circumstances set out,  I  am  satisfied  that  Ms
    Norman was placed under great pressure in attempting to comply with the
    Judge's grant of time to prepare a statement on the day of the hearing.
    She also had to familiarise herself, as far as practicable in the  time
    allotted, with the contents of the respondent's bundle. There was  also
    the added difficulty of the appellant's speaking in  Farsi.  The  Judge
    noted at [21]  that  he  wrote  his  statement  in  Farsi  and  had  it
    translated into English with a friend over the telephone.

46. I find that to be unsatisfactory because, as contended,  there  was  no
    information regarding the friend's level of English and the accuracy or
    otherwise of the translation.

47. I have also had regard to the decision  relied  on  by  the  appellant,
    namely, Nwaigwe (Adjournment: Fairness) [2014]  UKUT  000418  (IAC)  at
    [7], which was not referred to or considered by the First-tier Judge.

48. The  President  held  that  a  decision  to  refuse  to  accede  to  an
    adjournment request could in principle be erroneous in law  in  several
    respects. Amongst them is denying the party concerned a fair hearing.

49. In most cases the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the
    affected party of his right to a  fair  hearing.  When  an  adjournment
    refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is important to recognise
    that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  First-tier
    Tribunal acted reasonably. Rather, the test to be applied  is  that  of
    fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected party's right to  a
    fair hearing? Any temptation to review the conduct and decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal through the lens of reasonableness must  be  firmly
    resisted, in order to avoid a  misdirection  in  law.  In  a  nutshell,
    fairness is the supreme criterion.

50. I find having regard to the circumstances as a whole, that the  refusal
    to provide the  appellant  with  the  adjournment  sought  resulted  in
    unfairness. He was deprived of a right to a fair hearing.

51. I have also had regard to the further grounds relied on. In particular,
    even assuming that the  Judge  was  not  persuaded  that  the  document
    produced was genuine and that he attached no weight to it, he  was  not
    entitled to  find  that  the  use  of  such  documents  undermined  his
    credibility generally [40]. I have already referred to the statement of
    Sullivan J in this respect.

52. It appears that the Judge's justification for attaching  no  weight  to
    the document was the failure by the appellant's family to disclose  the
    existence of the document sooner.

53. The Judge has provided reasons for credibility findings made  regarding
    the appellant's essential case at [41]. However, in the  circumstances,
    given the erroneous reasoning concerning the warning notice at [40], it
    is not possible to find that those findings were not  tainted  by  that
    error, including the problems that the appellant had  experienced  with
    his former representatives.

54. I accordingly  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error on a point of law. I accordingly set it
    aside.

55. Mr Pipe submitted, without opposition from Mr Mills, that this  was  an
    appropriate case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh
    re-hearing.

56. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    regarding the issue of remitting an appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh  decision.  In  giving  effect  to  that  statement,  I  am
    satisfied that the extent of judicial fact finding which  is  necessary
    for a decision to be re-made is extensive. Moreover, the appellant  has
    been deprived of a proper opportunity of presenting and  preparing  his
    case. I have also had regard to the overriding objective and find  that
    it is just and fair to remit the case.

57.  The  appeal  is  accordingly  remitted  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    (Birmingham) for a fresh decision to be made by another Judge.

    Notice of Decision

    Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Birmingham) for a  fresh  decision
    to be made.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 24 February 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
