
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03533/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2014                             |On 20 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                               MR SHIPON AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M B Hussain, Zahra & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Bird dismissing the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

 2) The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came  to  the  UK  as  a
    visitor in 2003 aged around 16.  He became an overstayer and in  August
    2011 was encountered by Immigration Officers working at  a  restaurant.
    He subsequently claimed asylum, alleging that he was unable  to  return
    to Bangladesh because of his father's involvement with  the  BNP.   The
    judge did not find the appellant's evidence in support  of  his  asylum
    claim to be credible.

 3) Under Article 8 it was argued on behalf of the appellant  that  he  had
    established a private life in the UK and reliance  was  placed  on  the
    case of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  00060.
    The judge  found  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE but accepted when considering Article  8  outside  the
    Rules that the appellant had established a private life in the UK - the
    threshold for engaging Article 8 being a low one.  The judge noted that
    the appellant claimed that he had no ties with Bangladesh but the judge
    found that the appellant had failed to explain why his parents had  not
    left the country if  his  father  faced  difficulties  because  of  his
    political beliefs.  The judge did not  believe  the  appellant's  claim
    that  his  parents  were  in  hiding.   There  was  reference  to   the
    appellant's father having obtained entry clearances  on  two  occasions
    and having travelled to the UK.  The appellant had remained in  the  UK
    without authority since 2003 but did not bring himself to the attention
    of the authorities.  He claimed asylum only after his arrest  in  2011.
    There was a lack of evidence as  to  the  extent  and  quality  of  the
    appellant's private life in the UK.  The appellant had  worked  without
    permission.  His parents and extended family were in Bangladesh and  he
    would be able to re-establish both private and family life there.

 4) Permission to appeal was granted principally  on  the  basis  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing to direct herself
    properly as to the correct approach to  the  application  of  paragraph
    276ADE.  In considering paragraph 276ADE she  had  taken  into  account
    paragraphs S-LTR1.2 to 2.3 and 3.1 and paragraph E-LRTP.2.2 of Appendix
    FM.  The relevant passage of  the  determination  is  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 23, which reads as follows:

         "Turning to consider whether the appellant meets  the  requirements
         of paragraph 276ADE I consider  that  in  order  to  succeed  under
         276ADE the appellant has to show that he does not fall for  refusal
         under any of the suitability grounds  in  section  S-LTR1.2  to  S-
         LTR2.3 and S-LTR3.1.  The appellant has been in the United  Kingdom
         in breach of immigration laws (E-LTRP.2.2) and further although the
         appellant is aged 18 years and above, he has not spent half of  his
         life in the United Kingdom and has not shown that he has no ties in
         his own country.  His application under this paragraph must fail as
         fails [sic] to meet the suitability requirement which he  has  also
         to meet."


 5) In the application for permission to appeal it was submitted  that  the
    judge had no basis for making an assessment under paragraph  276ADE  by
    reference to the provisions of E-LTRP2.2 or the cited provisions of  S-
    LTR.  It was  further  submitted  that  the  judge  had  confused  sub-
    paragraphs (v) and (vi) of  paragraph  276ADE.   In  relation  to  sub-
    paragraph (v) there was no requirement to show that the  appellant  had
    no ties to his country of origin although this was relevant under  sub-
    paragraph (vi).  In this regard it was pointed out that  the  appellant
    had come to the UK as a minor and had  lived  here  continuously  since
    2003.  It was further submitted in the application that the claim  made
    on behalf of the respondent  that  the  appellant's  father  had  twice
    obtained entry clearance  to  travel  to  the  UK  was  stated  in  the
    respondent's reasons for refusal letter but was  not  substantiated  by
    evidence.  The appellant had sought an adjournment and a  direction  to
    the respondent to produce evidence of the  alleged  visits.   When  the
    adjournment was refused prior to the hearing it was said  that  if  the
    respondent sought to make an  allegation  the  onus  would  be  on  the
    respondent to  prove  it.   The  judge  said  the  same  thing  in  her
    determination but appeared to have accepted the respondent's assertions
    without evidence.

 6) A rule 24 notice was submitted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.   This
    accepted that the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erroneously
    considered E-LTRP2.2 but the only limb of  276ADE  that  the  appellant
    could possibly take advantage of would be 276ADE(vi).   The  judge  had
    found that the appellant had  parents  and  other  extended  family  in
    Bangladesh.  This being the case it would seem impossible to argue  the
    appellant had "no ties", even within the  meaning  of  that  phrase  in
    Ogundimu.  It is further stated on behalf of the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's father's "putative journeys to the  UK  were  a  peripheral
    matter".   The  live  issues  before  the  Tribunal  were  whether  the
    appellant was at  risk  in  Bangladesh  and  whether  he  had  ties  to
    Bangladesh.

 7) In his submission  at  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Hussain  began  by
    referring to the rule 24 notice.  He pointed out that it  was  accepted
    that the judge's approach to paragraph 276ADE  was  erroneous  but  the
    error  was  regarded  by  the  respondent  as  immaterial  because  the
    appellant had no ties with his country  of  origin,  the  judge  having
    found that he had family there.  However, Mr Hussain  continued,  there
    was no evidence on which the judge could base these findings.  If there
    was any evidence to show the appellant's father had travelled to the UK
    in 2007 and 2010 this was in the possession of the respondent.  In  his
    evidence at the hearing  the  appellant  denied  that  his  father  had
    visited the UK in 2007 or 2010.  There was nothing in the  respondent's
    bundle to support the assertion at paragraph  28  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter in relation to these alleged visits.  The appellant  had
    applied for an adjournment for the respondent to produce this evidence.
     The respondent's assertion had not been substantiated  and  the  judge
    had no basis for making a finding with regard to the visits.

 8) Mr Hussain continued that the second point he wished to make  was  that
    merely because the appellant had relatives in his country of origin was
    not a sufficient basis to support a finding that he had not  lost  ties
    with his country of origin.  If that was the case no-one would  succeed
    under this  provision.   Reference  was  again  made  to  the  case  of
    Ogundimu.  The findings made by the Tribunal in that case were  reached
    in a case where there was extended family in the country of origin  and
    the appellant had returned  to  his  country  of  origin  whereas  this
    appellant had never  been  back  to  Bangladesh.   Merely  because  the
    appellant might still have family in Bangladesh was not  sufficient  to
    show that he had ties with that country.

 9) For the respondent Mr Walker explained that visas had been  issued  for
    the appellant's father, as alleged, but it had  not  been  possible  to
    locate the Visa Application Forms for these visits.  In the appellant's
    written statement,  which  was  before  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant confirmed that his parents were in  Bangladesh.
    The judge  took  account  of  the  appellant's  circumstances  in  this
    country.  He had arrived in 2003 using a visit visa  and  had  gone  to
    ground until he was apprehended in 2011.  There  must  have  been  some
    evidence on which the statement was made in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter that visas had been issued to the appellant's  father.   It  was
    accepted by the respondent that the judge had erred in relation  to  E-
    LTRP2.2 but it could not be said that the appellant had  no  ties  with
    his country of origin.   The  reference  to  the  appellant's  father's
    journey to the UK was in any event a peripheral matter.

10) For the appellant Mr Hussain said the matter was  not  peripheral.   If
    the appellant's father had made a visit to the UK in 2007 or 2010  this
    undermined the appellant's case that he  had  no  ties  to  Bangladesh.
    This matter was now being described as peripheral because it could  not
    be supported by evidence.  It was not enough to say that the  Secretary
    of State would not have stated this  without  evidence  but  the  maxim
    applied "he who asserts must prove".  The appellant's evidence  at  the
    hearing was that his parents were in hiding.

11) By way of further procedure  Mr  Hussain  submitted  that  the  judge's
    findings of fact could not be sustained and fresh  findings  should  be
    made but he seemed to acknowledge that the asylum claim was  not  being
    pursued.  When asked for confirmation of this Mr Hussain  replied  that
    the asylum claim was not being formally conceded.

Discussion

12) It is acknowledged that the judge made an error of law in her  approach
    to paragraph 276ADE.  This is  a  freestanding  provision  and  is  not
    related to the suitability or eligibility provisions  in  Appendix  FM.
    For the judge to have referred to these was an error.

13) It was also clear at the hearing before me,  however,  that  there  was
    only one provision in paragraph 276ADE on  which  the  appellant  might
    rely and  this  was  sub-paragraph  (vi).   The  wording  of  this  has
    subsequently been amended but I will refer to the wording at  the  time
    of the hearing before the Tribunal in July 2014.  Paragraph 276ADE sets
    out the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
    the grounds of private  life.   According  to  sub-paragraph  (vi),  an
    applicant aged 18 years or above would meet  the  requirements  if  the
    applicant has lived continuously in the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
    (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  has  no  ties  (including
    social, cultural, or family) with the country to which he would have to
    go if required to leave the UK.   (Although  this  provision  has  been
    amended with effect from 28th July 2014, the amendments were made after
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, which  took  place  on  1st
    July 2014.)

14) The meaning of his provision was considered in Ogundimu as referred  to
    above.  The Tribunal made the following observations:

         "123.    The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  "ties"
             imports, we think, a concept  involving  something  more  than
             merely remote and abstract links to the  country  of  proposed
             deportation or removal.  It involves there being  a  continued
             connection to life in that  country;  something  that  ties  a
             claimant to his or her country of origin.  If  this  were  not
             the case then it would appear that a person's  nationality  of
             the country of proposed deportation could of itself lead to  a
             failure to meet the requirements  of  the  rule.   This  would
             render the application of the rule, given the  context  within
             which it operates, entirely meaningless.


        124. We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting one.
              Consideration of whether a person has "no  ties"  to  such  a
             country must involve a rounded assessment of all the  relevant
             circumstances and is not to be limited  to  "social,  cultural
             and family" circumstances.   Nevertheless,  we  are  satisfied
             that the appellant has no ties with Nigeria.  He is a stranger
             to the country, the people, and the way of life.   His  father
             may have ties but they are not ties of the  appellant  or  any
             ties that could result in support  of  the  appellant  in  the
             event of his return there.  Unsurprisingly, given  the  length
             of the appellant's residence here, all of his  ties  are  with
             the United Kingdom.  Consequently the appellant has so  little
             connection with Nigeria so as to mean the consequences for him
             in establishing private life there at the age of 28, after  22
             years residence in the United Kingdom, would be "unjustifiably
             harsh".


        125. Whilst  each  case  turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
             relevant to the assessment of whether a person has ties to the
             country in which they would have to go if they  were  required
             to leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not  limited
             to: the length of time a person has spent in  the  country  to
             which he would have to go if he were  required  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom, the age that the person left the country,  the
             exposure that person has had to the  cultural  norms  of  that
             country, whether  that  person  speaks  the  language  of  the
             country, the extent of the family and friends that person  has
             in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and
             the quality of the relationships that person  has  with  those
             friends and family members."


15) Some of the facts set out above are  known.   The  appellant  lived  in
    Bangladesh till around the age of 16 and, at the time  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal, had been in the UK for around 11 years.
     The appellant has relatives  in  Bangladesh,  including  his  parents,
    although the manner  of  life  of  his  parents  is  in  dispute.   The
    appellant claims that they live  in  hiding  because  of  his  father's
    political activities but the judge did not accept  this,  although  the
    supposed basis for her findings is disputed.

16) It is not the case though that the  appellant  left  Bangladesh  at  an
    early age before he would have experienced the cultural norms  of  that
    country and before he would have learnt to speak the language  of  that
    country.  In terms  of  Ogundimu  the  crucial  issue  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE (vi) is the one which was identified  at  the  hearing
    before me, namely the extent of the family and  friends  the  appellant
    has in Bangladesh and the quality of the relationships that he has with
    those friends and family members.

17) Mr Hussain referred to an evidential burden on the Secretary  of  State
    to provide evidence of the alleged visas issued to and visits  made  by
    the appellant's father.  There is merit in Mr Hussain's  argument  that
    this assertion by the Secretary of State has  not  been  substantiated.
    Nevertheless, the legal burden of proof remains  on  the  appellant  to
    show that he has no ties with his country of origin, within the meaning
    of the term "ties".

18) There was little evidence on this recorded in  the  determination.   In
    cross-examination at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant said he had come to the UK with his parents but they were now
    in hiding in Bangladesh because of his father's  political  activities.
    As already stated, he denied that his father had visited the UK in 2007
    or 2010.  The judge made a finding at paragraph 26 to the  effect  that
    not only were the appellant's parents in Bangladesh but he had extended
    family there also.  It is not clear where the  evidence  came  from  on
    which this finding is based but it does not appear to be disputed.   In
    other words, it is not disputed that the appellant has  family  members
    in Bangladesh.  It is only the  situation  in  which  his  parents  are
    alleged to be living that is in dispute.

19) At this juncture it is appropriate to look at the reasons given by  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal for her adverse credibility  findings.
    The judge  pointed  at  paragraphs  18  and  19  to  the  lack  of  any
    documentary evidence as to the appellant's father's  alleged  political
    activities or as to the problems the appellant claimed his  father  had
    encountered on account of these.  The judge noted that according to the
    appellant's own evidence he had come to the UK to study but  there  was
    no evidence that he had undertaken any studies here.  The evidence  was
    that once his visa had expired he started working and he had worked  in
    various  restaurants  until  he  was  arrested  in  2011.   Indeed,  in
    rejecting the appellant's asylum claim,  at  paragraphs  18-21  of  the
    determination, the judge made no reference at all to the alleged visits
    by the appellant's father to the UK.  These alleged visits do not  form
    part of her reasoning in relation to the  adverse  credibility  finding
    made against the appellant in respect of his asylum claim.   The  judge
    referred to the alleged visits only at paragraph 24,  when  considering
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Here  the  judge  stated  the
    following:

         "24.     Turning to consider  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,  the
         appellant has been in  the  UK  for  a  number  of  years  and  has
         established private life here (the threshold of engaging Article  8
         is a low one).  Although the appellant claims he has no  ties  with
         his country he has failed to explain why his parents have not  left
         the country  if  his  father  faced  difficulties  because  of  his
         political beliefs.  The appellant simply states that  they  are  in
         hiding - I did not find this credible.  There is  evidence  of  the
         appellant's father obtaining entry clearances on two occasions  and
         travelling to the UK.  I find that the appellant has family in  his
         own country."


20) Although in this paragraph the judge  juxtaposed  the  finding  to  the
    effect that she did not  believe  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his
    parents were in hiding with an apparent acceptance of  the  appellant's
    father's visits to the UK, a full reading of  her  determination  shows
    that the first finding was based upon her assessment of the credibility
    of the appellant's evidence in relation  to  his  asylum  claim.   This
    adverse credibility finding was not made by reference  to  the  alleged
    visits to the UK by the appellant's  father  but  was  based  on  other
    grounds, as summarised above.  Accordingly the judge made  the  finding
    to the effect that she did not believe the appellant's parents were  in
    hiding without regard to the  assertion  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's father had visited the UK  on  two  occasions.   Mr  Walker
    described the references to these alleged visits as peripheral  to  the
    judge's decision and on analysing the determination it  is  clear  that
    they were indeed peripheral, and  indeed  did  not  form  part  of  the
    judge's reasoning in relation to the asylum grounds of appeal  and  the
    adverse credibility findings made in this regard.

21) The judge made a finding, fully supported by  reasons,  to  the  effect
    that the appellant's evidence  that  his  parents  were  in  hiding  in
    Bangladesh  because  of  his  father's  political  activities  was  not
    credible.  This finding was relevant to the quality of the relationship
    that the appellant had with his parents and the question of whether  he
    had no ties with Bangladesh.  If the appellant's  parents  were  living
    freely and openly in Bangladesh, as the judge found, then this  greatly
    weakened the appellant's claim that he had no ties with Bangladesh.   I
    would emphasise again that the judge's finding to the effect  that  she
    did not accept the appellant's evidence that his parents were in hiding
    in Bangladesh was not based upon the respondent's allegations as to the
    appellant's father's alleged visits to the UK but on other reasons,  as
    summarised above.

22) The position is that although  the  judge  erred  in  her  approach  to
    paragraph 276ADE the appellant could not have succeeded under paragraph
    276ADE (vi) in showing that  he  had  no  ties  with  Bangladesh.   The
    judge's findings in this regard are entirely sustainable, based as they
    are on reasons  other  than  the  alleged  visits  to  the  UK  by  the
    appellant's  father.   Accordingly,  the  judge's  finding   that   the
    appellant would not qualify for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE,
    although flawed could not have been otherwise.

23) The judge's  decision  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  was  not
    challenged at the hearing before me, although it was only  in  relation
    to this assessment that the judge founded upon the  alleged  visits  by
    the appellant's father to the UK.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  reasons
    given by the judge for finding that the appellant's removal  would  not
    be disproportionate are set out strongly at paragraph  25.   The  judge
    pointed out that the appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  without  lawful
    authority since 2003.  He did not bring himself to the attention of the
    authorities until arrested in 2011.  Although there was a long delay by
    the respondent in making a decision this did not tip the scale  in  the
    appellant's favour  and  could  not  be  described  as  an  exceptional
    circumstance.  At paragraph 26 the judge noted that there was a paucity
    of evidence of the extent and quality of private life the appellant had
    in the UK.  There was no documentary evidence  to  support  this.   The
    evidence pointed to the appellant having worked without authority.  The
    appellant had both parents and other extended family in his own country
    and could re-establish both private and family life there and it  would
    be reasonable to expect him to do so.  This reasoning  is  adequate  to
    show that the removal decision was not disproportionate.

24) In conclusion, the position is that although the  judge  erred  in  her
    interpretation of paragraph 276ADE she  could  have  reached  no  other
    decision under that provision on the findings she had made, which  were
    entirely sustainable for the reasons which she gave at paragraphs 18 to
    21 of the determination.  Accordingly, the decision of the Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal shall stand.

Conclusions

25) To the extent that  the  making  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of  law  the  error
    did not affect the outcome of the appeal  and  is  not  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Anonymity

26) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  see
    no reason for making such an order.



Signed      Date 2 October 2014

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
