
                                    [pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03283/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th November 2016                         |On 30th November 2016         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                    mr a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel, instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify the  Appellant  described  as  A.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who entered the UK in or  about
    September 2009.  The Appellant, appeals with  permission,  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal who in a determination  promulgated
    on 15th September 2006 dismissed his appeal on asylum and human  rights
    grounds. Permission to appeal the decision was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 18th October 2016.

 3. The summary of the Appellant's claim is set out in the determination at
    paragraphs [12 to 35].  The claim also made reference  to  having  been
    detained  and  having  suffered  ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of  the
    authorities.

 4. There were a number of medical reports  placed  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as set out  at  paragraph  [10]  of  the  determination  which
    included  psychiatric  evidence,  medico-legal  reports   relating   to
    scarring and a psychological report.  There was also a Rule 35  report.
    As a consequence of the contents of the reports, the Appellant did  not
    give oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal (see paragraph [11]),
    thus the Tribunal had to consider the written evidence in  reaching  an
    assessment of  risk  in  conjunction  with  the  submissions  from  the
    advocates.

 5. The judge's findings on credibility are set out at  paragraphs  [58  to
    70] and in summary,  the  judge  observed  that  the  question  of  the
    assessment of credibility was difficult when the Appellant relied  upon
    a "detailed and careful rebuttal of the reasons for refusal letter" but
    equally submitted that "any inconsistencies were as  a  result  of  his
    condition of PTSD and depression."  The judge  considered  the  medical
    evidence at paragraph [60] and specifically at paragraphs [65  to  70].
    In summary the judge found that "multiplicity of the  medical  reports"
    to be "unhelpful" and that the reports produced after the report of  Dr
    Lawrence was an attempt to overcome the difficulties  that  his  report
    presented for the Appellant.  The judge made reference to the fact that
    it was "alarming that none  of  the  other  experts  saw  fit  to  make
    reference to the  Appellant's  head  condition  nor  to  his  low-level
    functioning".  At [67] the judge considered that none  of  the  medical
    experts had conducted a holistic assessment nor considered  his  memory
    loss.  The judge placed weight on  the  conclusion  at  page  9  of  Dr
    Lawrence's report which the judge  considered  to  cast  doubt  on  the
    reliability of the Beck Depression Inventory and that  there  could  be
    something else to cause the Appellant not to function and  also  placed
    weight on the conclusion that he was not an immediate risk  of  suicide
    (at page [10] of the report).  The judge went on to consider  that  the
    Appellant had not given a credible account as to the  circumstances  in
    his country of origin and consequently found that the Appellant did not
    fall within any of the categories identified in  the  country  guidance
    decision of GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 319.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and permission was granted by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 18th October 2016.  At  the  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal, Ms Kiai appeared on behalf of the Appellant and  Ms
    Ahmad on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.   At  the  conclusion  of
    Counsel's  submissions  relating  to  the  assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence,  Ms  Ahmad  conceded  that  in  relation  to  Ground  1,  the
    references made by the judge were  factually  incorrect  and  that  she
    could not argue otherwise and that this amounted to  an  error  of  law
    being established.  She did, however, submit that  if  the  credibility
    assessment was correct then any error may not be material.  However, in
    the light of the concession that the medical evidence was not  properly
    considered, in my judgment the credibility findings  were  required  to
    have been considered alongside and in the light of the medical evidence
    applying the decision in  Mibanga.   Thus  if  the  assessment  of  the
    medical evidence was not correct, it could not possibly  be  said  that
    the credibility findings  themselves  were  safe  or  reliable  in  the
    circumstances, given the requirement of "anxious scrutiny".

 7. Both advocates were in agreement that the decision should be set  aside
    and that the correct course would be for the appeal to be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  whereupon  further  updated  medical  evidence
    would be available.

 8. In those circumstances it is not necessary for me to set out in  detail
    the reasons for reaching the  view  that  an  error  of  law  has  been
    established.

 9. The core error related to the  judge's  consideration  of  the  medical
    evidence.  There were a number of reports before the Tribunal including
    two reports dealing with scarring (Professor Lingam and Dr Martin), two
    reports by Consultant Psychiatrists, Dr  Lawrence  and  Dr  Dhumad  and
    further  reports  in  the  form  of  a  Rule  35  and  a  psychological
    assessment.

10. The judge began her assessment of the medical reports at [66] by making
    reference to the "multiplicity of  the  reports"  and  that  they  were
    "unhelpful" and expressly found that the reports produced after that of
    Dr Lawrence were an  attempt  to  overcome  the  difficulties  that  Dr
    Lawrence's report presented for the Appellant.

11. In essence the judge found that every report  following  Dr  Lawrence's
    report should be disregarded and gave two reasons.   Firstly,  none  of
    the experts noted that the Appellant suffered from  a  congenital  head
    condition nor  that  the  Appellant  functioned  at  a  very  low-level
    intellectually.  However that was an incorrect characterisation of  the
    reports.  The Appellant's head condition was in fact not  noted  by  Dr
    Lawrence but was considered by Dr Martin (see page 14  of  the  updated
    bundle).  This was an  important  report  dealing  with  the  issue  of
    scarring which lent support and weight to the Appellant's account  that
    he had been subjected to ill-treatment.  After going  through  each  of
    the scars, the expert concluded at page 18 there was no doubt that  the
    scars were caused by intentional injuries and that they were diagnostic
    of "intentionally caused injuries" that were "likely to be caused by  a
    third party" as described by the Appellant.  The judge did  not  appear
    to attach any weight to that report despite having  made  reference  to
    and having identified the congenital head condition thereby  accounting
    for some of the scars.  It is right that Professor Lingam's report  did
    not refer to the head condition but in fairness  Professor  Lingam  did
    not say that the scars on the Appellant's head were as a result of  any
    trauma.

12. As set out the judge also stated that the reports other than that of Dr
    Lawrence failed to address the issue of the  Appellant's  low-level  of
    functioning.  However that is not factually correct.  The report of  Dr
    D did consider the Appellant's functioning.  As the report  stated,  he
    had been provided with the report of Dr Lawrence (paragraph 3.2) and at
    paragraph 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 made reference to the  Appellant's  learning
    difficulties when setting out his  personal  history.   Furthermore  at
    13.4 the doctor quoted from Dr Lawrence's report and at paragraph  16.5
    made further reference to his  learning  difficulties  since  childhood
    that may have been aggravated by further conditions.  At 17.3  he  gave
    the conclusion that his background was highly suggestive as a  learning
    disability.   Whilst  it  is  right  that  he  made  reference  to  the
    requirement of an IQ assessment to confirm such a diagnosis, the doctor
    had made references to his  learning  disability  and  difficulties  by
    reference to his history.

13. Thus the judge did make factual errors when considering  the  basis  of
    the reports as Counsel submitted and failed to attach weight to reports
    on this basis which  were  factually  incorrect.   At  [67]  the  judge
    concluded that none of the medical reports had considered  a  "holistic
    assessment" or considered the Appellant's memory loss  and  failure  to
    give  evidence  in  the  context  of  family  history  and  the  higher
    educational achievements of his family members.  However  the  contents
    of the report demonstrate that both Dr Lawrence  and  Professor  Lingam
    met with the Appellant at the same time (see page 9 of  updated  bundle
    and page 5 of Professor Lingam's report).  Thus it  could  properly  be
    seen as a "holistic report".

14. Furthermore the judge's conclusions at [67] when considering the report
    of Dr Lawrence does not take  into  account  his  full  report  and  in
    particular whilst at page 9 he found the Appellant to be a man severely
    impaired in functioning and that whilst he showed symptoms of PTSD that
    there could be something else that was causing  the  Appellant  not  to
    function.  However the judge stopped there when reaching  a  conclusion
    at paragraph 67 whereas the report went on to conclude that the  expert
    had given consideration  of  whether  the  Appellant  could  have  been
    simulating the symptoms but reached the conclusion that he had not  for
    the reasons set out at page 10 of the report.  The judge did not attach
    weight to that part of the report and thus did not consider it  in  its
    totality.

15. In the light of the submissions and the concession made  by  Ms  Ahmad,
    the decision discloses a material error of law in the consideration  of
    the medical evidence.  Having found an error of law, relating to Ground
    1, it is not necessary for me to reach any further conclusions  on  the
    other grounds advanced.  Suffice to say that Ground 3 made reference to
    the risk of suicide which was considered at paragraphs [82  to  83]  of
    the determination.  Whilst the judge recorded that no oral  submissions
    were made in this regard, the judge went on to consider the matter  set
    out in the skeleton argument which did raise  the  issue.   However  at
    [83] the judge found that by reason of the lack of reliability  of  the
    medical reports (save  for  that  of  Dr  Lawrence)  and  that  as  the
    Appellant had been in the UK since 2009 and had not  made  any  suicide
    attempt, he would not be at risk  on  return.   However  that  was  not
    factually correct as there was recent evidence  in  the  report  of  Dr
    Dhumad at paragraph 9.7 and the assessment  of  risk  was  said  to  be
    moderate.  This was evidence that was later  in  time  to  that  of  Dr
    Lawrence and was thus evidence upon which such an assessment could have
    been made, notwithstanding the lack of oral submissions.

16. I have therefore reached the conclusion that the  nature  of  error  is
    such that the credibility findings cannot stand in isolation  from  the
    medical evidence and as both advocates have agreed, the nature  of  the
    error is such that the decision should be set aside  with  no  findings
    preserved and that the correct course is for it to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set aside, it is remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal for a further hearing.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

