
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03355/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2013                               |On 16 August 2013            |
|Prepared on 25 July 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                                Mr YAOJUN MO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel, instructed by Asylum Aid
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 4  September  1986,  is  a  national  of
    China. He originally entered this country in 2008 with a  student  visa
    valid from 25 February 2008 until the end of February 2009.  This  visa
    was extended twice, and, while here lawfully, on 26  August  2011,  the
    appellant claimed asylum, on the basis that  as  a  Roman  Catholic  he
    would be persecuted if he returned to China.

 2. This application was refused by the respondent on 21  March  2013,  and
    the refusal letter is dated the same date.  Notice of this decision was
    served on the appellant four days later.

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision, and his appeal was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Meadows, sitting at Hatton Cross on  8
    May 2013. In a determination prepared two days  later  and  promulgated
    shortly thereafter, Judge Meadows dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds, and also under Article 8.

 4. The appellant now appeals against this decision, with leave granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemingway on 13 June 2013.

 5. Before me, on behalf of the respondent, Ms Horsley accepted that  there
    were  shortcomings  in  Judge  Meadows'  determination,  primarily   in
    relation to how he dealt with the expert report.  His consideration  of
    this report was insufficient.  Also, Judge Meadows had not given proper
    consideration to the issue of whether or  not  he  was  a  refugee  sur
    place. Although the respondent would say that he  was  not,  and  would
    raise credibility issues, this was not dealt with by a judge.   It  was
    accordingly accepted that the appeal needed to be  re-heard.   Also,  a
    country guidance decision had been promulgated a  month  ago  regarding
    the position of Christians in China, which needed to be considered when
    the Tribunal assessed the risk on return for this appellant.

 6. It was agreed by the representatives for both parties that there  would
    have to be a complete re-hearing, and that none of the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal could stand.

 7. Having considered the representations made on behalf of both parties, I
    agree that Judge Meadows' determination did contain material errors  of
    law, such that his  decision  must  be  re-made.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  Judge Meadows failed to make credibility findings with regard
    to the evidence of the appellant and his  witness,  failed  further  to
    give proper consideration to the expert report adduced  on  his  behalf
    and failed to address adequately the primary issue, which  was  whether
    or not the appellant would wish to join the underground Catholic Church
    in China and if he did, whether he would be persecuted on return.

 8. Having regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Practice  Statements  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber in the Upper Tribunal, I  consider  that
    the effect of the errors contained within  the  determination  is  such
    that the appellant was effectively deprived of a fair hearing.  I  also
    consider that the nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding  which
    will now  be  necessary  in  order  for  the  decision  to  be  re-made
    (effectively all the issues will have to be  considered  de  novo)  are
    such that, having regard to the overriding objective, it is appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal, which I shall order.

Decision

I set aside the determination of Judge  Meadows  as  containing  a  material
error of law.

I direct that this appeal be remitted for a  re-hearing  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, sitting at Hatton Cross, to be put before  any  judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Meadows.





Signed:                                 Date: 13 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

