
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03137/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th April 2015                   |On 22nd April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                     HZ
                            (ANONYMITY RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 6th September 1958 is a citizen of Eritrea.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Brown of Counsel.   The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Harrison, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application  for  asylum  in  the  UK  and  that
    application had been refused by the Respondent on 28th April 2014.  The
    Appellant had appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by  Judge
    De Haney a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Manchester  on
    5th September 2014.  The judge allowed the Appellant's appeal on asylum
    grounds.

 3. The Respondent had made application to appeal that decision the grounds
    asserting that the judge had misdirected himself by failing  to  follow
    the country guidance case of MO Eritrea CG  [2011]  UKUT  00190.   That
    application was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on 6th October
    2014.  The Respondent had renewed the application in precisely the same
    terms essentially stating that the judge had rejected the  entirety  of
    the Appellant's account and allowed the appeal on the  basis  that  she
    had overstayed her visa, and the Appellant could only therefore be seen
    as a failed asylum seeker who had left Eritrea legally and was  not  at
    risk on return in line with the findings of MO.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  Coker
    on 28th January 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that inadequate
    reasons have been provided firstly for relying upon  an  expert  report
    and finding that she would at risk of persecution on return to Eritrea.
     Directions were issued for the  Upper  Tribunal  firstly  to  consider
    whether an error of law had been made and the matter comes before me in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Harrison referred me to the Grounds of Appeal and did  not  seek  to
    expand upon those matters raised.  There was discussion between  myself
    and the representatives in respect of the matters  that  needed  to  be
    considered in this case and I indicated to Mr  Brown  that  I  did  not
    require any  additional  or  separate  submissions  from  him  in  this
    respect.  In indicated that I would provide a decision in writing  with
    my reasons which I now provide.

Decision and Reasons

 6. It was something of an exaggeration for the Respondent to state in  the
    resubmitted Grounds of Appeal that the Immigration Judge  had  rejected
    the entirety of the Appellant's account.  This is in some  respects  an
    unusual case in terms of those seeking asylum  from  Eritrea.   However
    the judge had made  clear  at  paragraph  10  that  having  heard  oral
    evidence both from the Appellant and from a witness,  Mr M,  he  found
    both witnesses to be credible witnesses with certain reservations about
    the Appellant's evidence that he had detailed below.  It  is  also  the
    case that there appears to have been certain agreed factors within  the
    Appellant's history that perhaps made this an unusual  case.   Firstly,
    it appears to have been agreed evidence that the Appellant had obtained
    asylum status  in  America  some  years  before  but  had  nevertheless
    returned to Eritrea.  Secondly, the Appellant was highly  educated  and
    had been involved in  a  not  inconsiderable  amount  of  international
    travel connected with her work.  Thirdly, the  Appellant  had  lawfully
    exited Eritrea on a one month visit visa.  Those factors perhaps  place
    this case in an unusual category in that this Appellant had  on  agreed
    evidence exited Eritrea lawfully.   However  as  indicated  within  the
    decision thereafter she had remained outside of Eritrea  for  over  two
    years longer than the exit  visa  permitted  additionally  to  claiming
    asylum.

 7. The judge was clearly aware of the country guidance cases of MA and MO.
     The case of MO in general terms adopted  the  approach  taken  in  the
    earlier case of MA.

 8. The central criticism from the Respondent in this case is that  as  the
    Appellant had not left Eritrea illegally then  being  simply  a  failed
    asylum seeker would not place her at risk on return.

 9. In MO headnote (v) the case stated:

         "Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum seekers  as
         such are not generally at real risk of persecution or serious  harm
         on return on present evidence the great majority  of  such  persons
         are likely to be perceived as having left illegally and this  fact,
         save for very limited exceptions, will mean  that  on  return  they
         face a real risk of persecution or serious harm."

10. In  reality  the  case  before  the  judge  fell  outside  the  general
    consideration and evidential analysis that had taken place in the  case
    of MA [2007] and MO [2011].  Those cases were centrally concerned  with
    the position of those who had  exited  Eritrea  illegally,  or  may  be
    presumed to have exited illegally when they were approaching or  within
    the wide bracket of military service.

11. This Appellant aged 55 was above the draft age for military service and
    had exited legally for an envisaged period of about one month.

12. The Presenting Officer before the First-tier Judge  had  accepted  that
    essentially the Appellant was not in a category covered by the  country
    guidance case of MO or MA (paragraph 26).  That is largely correct.

13. The judge therefore had to look at the  potential  risk  on  return  in
    light of the evidence available to him and mindful of the  standard  of
    proof in asylum cases.  As indicated above in large measure  the  judge
    had found the Appellant and her witness to be credible and  there  were
    agreed features within this case.  Secondly, the judge  had  considered
    as he was bound to do an  expert  report  prepared  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and dated 30th July 2014.  Whilst the Respondent submits that
    much of that report relied upon information predating the case of MO as
    indicated above this Appellant did  not  in  reality  fall  within  the
    categories considered in MO.  Thirdly, the report did not  stop  at  an
    earlier period of time and was written  with  this  case  in  mind  and
    specific to this case in large part.  Further the case of  MO  headnote
    (i) noted a number of indications that it had become more difficult for
    Eritreans to obtain lawful exit from Eritrea since the case  of  MA  in
    2007.  That would seem to indicate a hardening rather than a  softening
    of the attitude of the Eritrean authorities.

14. The judge also clearly had in mind that whilst the Appellant  may  have
    been granted a lawful exit for a narrow period of time she had remained
    unlawfully out of the country for over two years  and  it  is  somewhat
    difficult to  see  therefore  what  distinction  if  any  the  Eritrean
    authorities would make between a person exiting illegally or  a  person
    exiting legally but overstaying without  permission  well  beyond  that
    lawful exit period.  The  judge  also  took  into  account  as  he  was
    entitled to do that the Appellant could not present in  mitigation  the
    fact that she took part in the struggle for independence and also  took
    into account the fact that the Appellant had previously claimed  asylum
    in America from the Eritrean authorities and therefore this claim would
    represent essentially a second "offence".

15. In those circumstances the judge was entitled to look  at  all  of  the
    above facts and to have regard to the circumstances that he  summarised
    in paragraph 28 to reach the conclusion that applying  the  appropriate
    standard of proof in asylum cases it was  reasonably  likely  that  she
    would face persecution if returned to Eritrea.   That  was  a  decision
    open to him on the evidence and does not disclose a material  error  of
    law.

16. As First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox stated it may well be that  the  facts
    of this Appellant's case did not fit squarely  or  at  all  within  the
    central considerations and risk categories looked  at  in  MA  and  MO.
    That does not, and  of  course  should  not,  prevent  the  judge  from
    assessing the risk on return in respect of the  individual  before  him
    and in circumstances  where  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing
    conceded the Appellant's circumstances were not  really  covered  by  a
    country guidance case.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error of law made by the judge  in  this  case  and  I
uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity not retained.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
