
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03811/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 31 May 2013 and 7 August 2013              |On 21 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     AS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C. Jacobs, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms H. Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This determination is the culmination of the appellant's  appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       whereby it dismissed his appeal against  a  decision  to  refuse  to
       revoke a deportation order. I had previously found an error  of  law
       in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  after  a  hearing  on  5
       November 2012. That error of law decision  dated  7  November  2012,
       described as "Decision and Directions",  suffices  to  set  out  the
       history and background to  the  proceedings.  That  decision  is  as
       follows:



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
     Introduction

     1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 9 February 1982.  He
        arrived in the UK on 11 April 2001, ostensibly as  a  visitor.  The
        further history of his stay in the UK and the progress  of  appeals
        through the immigration courts is detailed.  For  the  purposes  of
        this decision the following summary suffices.

     2. He was arrested in 2007 for dangerous driving and related offences,
        found to be an overstayer, and  then  claimed  asylum.  The  asylum
        claim was refused but there was no appeal  against  that  decision.
        Subsequent to his convictions for the driving offences, deportation
        proceedings were instituted. The  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        deportation decision was dismissed. He made a fresh application for
        asylum which was also taken to be  an  application  to  revoke  the
        deportation order.

     3. Those applications were refused and an appeal  was  brought  before
        the First-tier Tribunal,  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M.R.
        Oliver. His appeal was dismissed on  all  grounds,  including  with
        reference to Article 8 of the ECHR. Permission  to  appeal  against
        the decision of the First-tier Tribunal having  been  granted,  the
        matter came before me.

     The grounds and submissions

     4.  The  grounds  of  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  include  a
        contention that there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's decision  because  the  judge  had  taken  into  account
        evidence that had  not  been  provided  to  the  appellant  or  his
        representatives,  or  on  which  they  had  not  had  an   adequate
        opportunity to take instructions. That evidence  consisted  of  two
        interviews conducted with the appellant (in relation to his  asylum
        claim in 2007).

     5. However, at the hearing before me, Mr Jacobs very properly informed
        me that he had spoken to counsel who had had conduct  of  the  case
        before the First-tier Tribunal, and he had informed him that he had
        been provided with those documents in the respondent's  bundle  and
        had had time to consider them. In the circumstances, this ground of
        appeal was not pursued before me.

     6. As regards the asylum ground of appeal, it is contended that  there
        was an error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        because the judge decided the case on the basis of  EM  and  Others
        (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC), which was then  the
        current country guidance. However, that decision was quashed by the
        Court of Appeal on 13 June 2012, with the appeal being remitted  to
        the  Upper   Tribunal   for   further   consideration.   In   those
        circumstances, it was submitted by Mr Jacobs that the appeal  ought
        to have been considered in the light of  RN  (Returnees)   Zimbabwe
        CG [2008] UKAIT 00083, to which the position reverts  in  terms  of
        country guidance.

     7. As to whether the decision should be set aside on  that  basis,  Mr
        Jacobs submitted that the error of law was material.  The  decision
        in RN had to be considered in the light  of  the  decision  of  the
        Supreme Court  in  RT  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  UKSC  38.  Although  the
        appellant's credibility  has  been  found  wanting,  the  issue  of
        adverse credibility was said in RT not to  be  a  matter  of  great
        significance. It is also important to consider the  fact  that  the
        appellant's mother and his aunt have been granted refugee status.

     8. Mr Wilding conceded that it was an error of law for  the  judge  to
        have relied on country guidance which was found  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal to have been in error. He did nevertheless contend that  the
        error of law was not material to the decision  and  thus  does  not
        require the decision to be set aside.

     9. Mr Wilding referred in submissions to the fact that  the  appellant
        had been found not to be credible. His mother's evidence  was  also
        disbelieved, notwithstanding that her appeal  had  previously  been
        allowed. Despite the fact that EM was quashed, that does  not  mean
        that  there  was  any  materiality  in  the  error  of  law.   Even
        considering the appeal on the basis of RN, the appellant's lack  of
        credibility means that he could not have succeeded in  his  appeal.
        The  decision  in  RT  would  not  have   affected   the   outcome.
        Furthermore, the quashing of the decision in EM does not affect the
        evidence that was given in that appeal, for example from  Professor
        Ranger. The background evidence points to a change in circumstances
        since the decision in RN.

    10. Part of the challenge to the First-tier  judge's  determination  in
        relation to Article 8 relates to the "best interests" consideration
        in relation to the appellant's daughter. The  grounds  assert  that
        the judge did not make  a  finding  on  what  his  daughter's  best
        interests are, and had failed to consider those interests first, as
        a discrete issue.

    11. In developing the point before me Mr Jacobs submitted  that  it  is
        evident from [31] that the judge conflated the issues, referring to
        what he regarded as the appellant's efforts to thwart his  removal,
        giving the appearance of being a concerned father.  The  judge  had
        not considered the evidence given by the child's mother  about  the
        level of contact that he has with her. I was referred to  MK  (best
        interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC).

    12. Mr Wilding submitted that the judge's  findings  on  Article  8  go
        wider than a simple reliance on  the  credibility  assessment  made
        with respect to the asylum aspect of the appeal. The appellant  and
        his mother had been found not to be credible in terms of the  level
        of contact. There was little other  evidence  in  relation  to  the
        child's best interests.  The  judge  had  taken  the  child's  best
        interests into account as a primary consideration.

    13. In reply, Mr Jacobs referred me to the decision in EB Kosovo [2008]
        UKHL 41. In addition, the appellant could  have  a  bond  with  his
        daughter regardless of the motive. ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  was
        also relevant.

     My assessment

    14. That there is an error of law in the decision as regards asylum  is
        not disputed. The First-tier judge was bound to consider the appeal
        on the basis of the country guidance that was then  thought  to  be
        applicable. However, it has now been found that that  decision  was
        subject to legal error and has been set aside.

    15. Mr Wilding urged me to find that notwithstanding  that  error,  the
        decision does not require to be set  aside  because  it  is  not  a
        material error. However, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  does
        require setting aside. I do not consider that it could be said that
        the outcome of the asylum appeal would necessarily  have  been  the
        same even though the appellant was found not to be credible. Merely
        because an appellant is found to be lacking  in  credibility,  that
        does not on RN terms automatically lead to the conclusion  that  an
        assertion of inability to show loyalty to the regime will be  found
        to be false. It may on the facts of this  case,  but  that  is  not
        necessarily so. In addition, I consider that there is force in  the
        submission made on behalf of the appellant to the effect that  what
        was said about credibility issues by the Supreme Court in  RT  must
        be considered.

    16. There is another reason why I consider that the decision should  be
        set aside. As the parties are aware,  it  is  expected  that  in  a
        matter of a few  weeks,  there  will  be  a  new  country  guidance
        decision  on  Zimbabwe  chaired  by  the  President  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal, this being the appeal remitted  by the Court  of  Appeal.
        In those circumstances, it is appropriate that the asylum aspect of
        the appellant's appeal be considered in  the  light  of  up-to-date
        country guidance, rather than on the basis of country guidance (RN)
        that is considerably out of date, and on the basis that some of the
        evidence in EM could be taken into account, along with further  up-
        dated evidence. It was on the basis of that suggested  approach  to
        the country background situation  that  Mr  Wilding  suggested  the
        matter could be considered in terms of assessing whether the  error
        of law was material.

    17. Even aside from the question of materiality, it  is  necessary  for
        this appeal to be considered in the  light  of  up-to-date  country
        guidance. 'Materiality' is  not  required  to  be  found  before  a
        decision can be set aside. The word 'material' does not feature  in
        Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  act  2007,  by
        which provision the Upper Tribunal has power, in its discretion, to
        set a decision aside where an error of law is found.

    18. In relation to the challenge  to  the  Article  8  assessment,  the
        grounds suggest that that assessment, based as it was  in  part  on
        the judge's finding that the appellant  was  not  credible  in  the
        asylum claim, was flawed since the  assessment  of  credibility  in
        relation to asylum was itself  flawed.  However,  this  appears  to
        relate to the issue concerning the interviews said not to have been
        made available to the  appellant's  representatives.  As  indicated
        above, that ground was not pursued  and  the  related  argument  in
        relation to the Article 8 findings must in the  circumstances  also
        fall away.

    19. I am however, persuaded that there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
        judge's decision in relation to Article 8. It is not that the judge
        has not considered  his  daughter's  best  interests  first;  I  am
        satisfied that  he  has.  Although  he  referred  in  [31]  to  the
        appellant giving the "appearance" of a concerned father,  what  the
        judge was doing there was putting the Article  8  issue,  including
        with reference to the child's best interests, into context.

    20. There is a finding at [32] that the appellant's removal would  mean
        a separation of him from his daughter. However, having stated  that
        the child's best interests must be taken into account as a  primary
        consideration, the judge does not set out  what  he  considers  her
        best interests to be. I do not consider that it could be said to be
        implicit that he found that her best interests  are  to  remain  in
        contact with the appellant. There is no finding to that effect  and
        the judge does focus on the appellant's  lack  of  credibility  and
        what he finds to be his cynical motives for remaining  in  contact,
        or establishing regular contact  with  her.  As  was  submitted  on
        behalf of the appellant, those motives do not in themselves reflect
        what is in his daughter's best  interests,  whatever  may  be  said
        about his motives. It was open to the judge to have found that  the
        appellant was not likely to remain in contact with her if  he  were
        to succeed in his appeal; but there was no  such  finding.  It  may
        even have been open to a judge to find that it is not in a  child's
        best interests to maintain a relationship with a father  who  could
        be said to be a poor role model or a bad influence. Again, there is
        no such finding in this case.

    21. I am satisfied therefore, that there is an  error  of  law  in  the
        Article 8 assessment  in  terms  of  the  assessment  of  the  best
        interests of the appellant's daughter. For that reason the decision
        in respect of Article 8 must also be set aside.

    22. Neither party suggested, in the event that I decided to  set  aside
        the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error of law,  that  it
        was appropriate to remit the matter for re-hearing before the First-
        tier Tribunal. In any event, I do not consider that this  would  be
        appropriate taking into account paragraph 7.2  of  the  President's
        Practice Statement. The hearing will be adjourned for the  decision
        to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal after the promulgation  of  the
        forthcoming country guidance case on Zimbabwe.

    23. There appears to me to be no reason why, in the  re-making  of  the
        decision, the findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal  on
        the asylum  aspect  of  the  appeal  cannot  stand.  There  was  no
        challenge to those findings in the appeal  against  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's decision,  or  none  that  was  pursued.  Similarly,  in
        relation to Article 8, in so far as the judge's  findings  are  not
        affected by the error of law, those findings are to stand.

    24. I was invited by Mr Jacobs to indicate that I would  allow  further
        evidence to be called both on the asylum and Article 8  aspects  of
        the appeal at the resumed hearing. That is a decision that  can  be
        deferred until the resumed hearing in  the  light  of  any  further
        written or documentary evidence that is served.

    25.  The  parties  must  be  prepared  at  the  next  hearing  to  make
        submissions on the effect, if any, of the 'new'  Immigration  Rules
        on the decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order.

    2. On 31 May 2013 the appeal only proceeded so far as hearing  evidence
       from the appellant's former partner, SH, the mother of his  daughter
       K. This was because the appellant's solicitors had not complied with
       directions involving the service of witness statements.

The hearing on 31 May 2013

    3. SH adopted her witness statements.  In  cross-examination  she  said
       that their daughter K stays with the appellant at weekends. She  has
       been with him since last Friday since she broke up from  school  for
       half term. Prior to that she had stayed with him about  three  weeks
       earlier.

    4. K staying with him every other weekend is a fixed arrangement unless
       she has to cancel it for some reason. She would definitely stay with
       him every holiday. Those weekend visits began when he came out  from
       detention. Sometimes it is a  bit  of  a  struggle  because  of  the
       appellant's mother's working hours. The  appellant  does  not  drive
       since his licence was  taken  away  as  a  result  of  the  criminal
       convictions. The appellant's mother collects K,  although  sometimes
       she has done so herself. On the first day of the school holidays she
       would usually go to stay with the appellant.

    5. Sometimes K is  collected  on  Saturday  morning  depending  on  his
       mother's work, for example if she  comes  straight  from  the  night
       shift. It varies between Fridays and Saturdays. K sees the appellant
       generally twice a month; every other weekend.

    6. Her son, M, has been staying with the appellant every other  weekend
       for about the last eight months or longer. That was during the  time
       that she was pregnant with her daughter P and they used to take care
       of M, to help her (during her pregnancy).

    7. M is not the appellant's child. She does not live with  M's  father.
       M's father is happy for him to stay at weekends with the  appellant.
       M's father lives in Northampton. She is not in a  relationship  with
       P's father who is not the same father as that of M. Their respective
       fathers do not  really  help  out  with  them  although  M's  father
       sometimes takes him overnight. He also takes K.

    8. She lives with her three children and her sister who stays three  or
       four times a week as she helps her with the school  runs.  M  is  at
       nursery half day and K is at school. After she had her daughter  (P)
       she was struggling to get them to school and nursery as they  go  to
       different places. At that time her sister  was  not  around  so  the
       appellant asked for his bail conditions to be  changed  so  that  he
       could live at her address. Within the coming year her  sister  would
       be starting a college course so she would not be around.

    9. The appellant's relationship with K is not motivated by a desire  to
       remain in the UK; he is interested in  K  as  his  daughter.  As  to
       whether she could rely on him to continue that level of  contact  if
       he is allowed to remain in the UK, she has a lot of  trust  in  him.
       She can see how much he does for K.

   10. In answer to my questions she said that M's  date  of  birth  is  20
       April 2009 and P's is 6 January 2013.

   11. She thinks that the last time that the appellant got in trouble with
       the police was in 2007 when she was  pregnant  with  K.  He  was  in
       prison when she was in labour. As far as she knows he has  not  been
       in trouble since then.

The hearing on 7 August 2013

   12. The appellant adopted his various witness statements in examination-
       in-chief. He said that the date of birth given on the  OASys  report
       is incorrect. His daughter K and his former  partner's  son  M  have
       been staying with him for about two weeks, since  the  last  day  of
       school.

   13. Asked about his attitude  to  his  offending  he  said  that  it  is
       something which he really regrets and which has put him and everyone
       in his family  behind.  He  teaches  his  younger  brother  and  the
       children not to do things that are wrong.

   14. In cross-examination he said that K and  M  stay  with  him  at  his
       mother's house. They are going back to their mother's  home  at  the
       end of the summer holidays in September. Her mother  wants  to  take
       them on holiday although he does not know where.

   15. He gave evidence about K staying with him at weekends, how  that  is
       done, who collects her and when she goes back. When  K  and  M  stay
       with him he is the one who mostly looks after  them  as  his  mother
       does shift work.

   16. If he is deported K would live with her mother.  He  would  keep  in
       contact with her by phone and letters but he would not  be  able  to
       provide material support because of the economy in Zimbabwe.

   17. If he were allowed to  remain  in  the  UK  he  would  increase  his
       involvement with K in terms of  her  education  and  well-being.  If
       possible he would like to live with her. He would work if he  could.
       In the school holidays, if he was at  work,  arrangements  could  be
       made with his mother. It was only the opinion of the judge  (in  the
       First-tier) that his contact with his daughter was motivated by  the
       aim of remaining in the UK. The day he went to prison  was  the  day
       that she was born, and that was the biggest mistake of his life. She
       is the only child that he has.

   18. In answer to my questions he said that his surname is a common  name
       in Zimbabwe. He was last convicted of an offence in 2007 and has not
       been arrested for anything since then.

   19. In further cross-examination he  said  that  he  was  released  from
       detention in June or July 2011.

   20. MS, the  appellant's  mother,  adopted  her  witness  statements  in
       examination-in-chief. K has been at her home since the  end  of  the
       last school term.

   21. As to the appellant's attitude to his criminal behaviour, he is  now
       a father and has changed totally. Culturally,  he  is  a  father  to
       everyone in the family. He cares about her if she is not well and is
       so loving.

   22. She is a CIO deserter. The appellant would be identified if he  goes
       back. They would know him because he used to stay with her  and  she
       sent him to the UK. She did not want him to become a  Green  Bomber.
       The authorities would have a record of him as her son.

   23. In cross-examination she gave evidence about K's weekend stays, when
       she comes to stay and who collects her and brings her back home.

   24. If the appellant is deported she would still have contact with K.

   25. In answer to my questions she said that she came to the UK in  2001.
       The relatives she has in Zimbabwe are her brother  and  sister.  Her
       brother is out of work but buys and sells what he can. He lives with
       his wife. She is not sure whether or not he is involved in politics.
       She does not know if he has had any trouble from the authorities  as
       he lives somewhere else from where she used to live. Her sister is a
       housewife. She does not know if she has had  any  trouble  from  the
       government but she is an invalid and suffering from cancer.

   26. In re-examination she  said  that  her  surname  (the  same  as  the
       appellant's) is her married name. As to why the appellant  would  be
       at risk despite her brother and sister not being at risk, he has her
       marriage surname and her former workmates and people around her know
       him.

Submissions

   27. Ms Horsley relied on the refusal letter dated 27 March  2012.  Judge
       Oliver did not find the appellant credible as to his  asylum  claim.
       His lack of credibility is relevant to the risk on return. He  would
       not in any event have to demonstrate loyalty to the regime. He would
       be returning to Bulawayo. He had no problems  with  the  authorities
       whilst he was there and so his mother having left the CIO would  not
       give rise to any risk. He had remained in the family home after  she
       left the country.

   28. Judge Oliver had made an adverse credibility finding in relation  to
       the appellant's mother, although he accepted that  she  had  been  a
       member of the CIO. Her appeal was allowed on facts specific to  her.
       She appears to have left the country on her own passport and left on
       one occasion before the appellant had himself left the country.  The
       appellant has no profile in Zimbabwe and there is no  evidence  that
       the authorities would have a record of him as her son.

   29. In relation to Article 8, the First-tier judge had made a finding in
       relation to the appellant's motives for maintaining contact with his
       daughter, being to prevent his removal. In  an  earlier  appeal  the
       judge had concluded that the appellant would say anything to prevent
       his removal. The issue of whether he would continue his relationship
       with his daughter should be approached with  great  caution  in  the
       circumstances. That issue is also relevant to  his  daughter's  best
       interests. The evidence  of  the  weekend  and  holiday  visits  was
       however, accepted.

   30. There was no independent evidence of the affect on his  daughter  of
       the appellant's removal. There is a strong family network that would
       support her. Even if it was in her best interests for him to  remain
       here, those best interests are outweighed by his offending, the fact
       that he had false stamps in his passport, that he is  an  overstayer
       and that his family life was established when he knew that he had no
       right to remain in the UK.

   31. It was submitted that the 'new' immigration rules on deportation  at
       paragraph 398-399 apply and I  was  referred  to  the  decisions  in
       Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  00045  (IAC)  and  Nagre
       [2013] EWHC 720, as well as the current guidance in relation to  the
       Article 8 rules.

   32. Mr Jacobs submitted that it  did  not  matter  whether  or  not  the
       appellant left Zimbabwe after his mother. Given the findings in  her
       appeal it is clear that she has a high profile,  having  deserted  a
       government position. He would be at risk  as  being  the  son  of  a
       deserter. The situation is different for his  mother's  brother  and
       sister as they do not have his name. The appellant  had  lived  with
       his mother and had been known to her colleagues. It  would  come  to
       light that he is the  son  of  a  deserter.  His  situation  can  be
       distinguished from the current country guidance.

   33. Even though his mother left 12 years ago, it has been found  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal that she would be at risk now.  Her  other  sons
       were not at risk because the authorities were  satisfied  that  they
       did not know her whereabouts. He could not be  expected  to  lie  if
       asked as to her whereabouts. His mother is a deserter and a  traitor
       and he is a failed asylum seeker

   34. In relation to Article 8, there is significantly more  evidence  now
       than there was before Judge Oliver. There is evidence of  a  genuine
       and subsisting relationship and there has now been  regular  contact
       over two years. It would be in K's best  interests  to  remain  with
       both parents. The appellant would be excluded from  the  UK  for  10
       years by which time his daughter would be 15 years old.

   35. There has been no offending since his release  and  his  convictions
       are not such as require the need to express society's revulsion. The
       Article 8 rules are not retrospective and thus have no application.

Conclusions: asylum, humanitarian protection and Article 3

   36. The asylum ground relies on  the  fact  of  the  appellant's  mother
       having been a member of the CIO  in  Zimbabwe,  a  matter  that  was
       accepted by First-tier judge Oliver who, coincidentally, also  dealt
       with her asylum appeal  as  well  as  that  of  this  appellant.  As
       explained at [26] of the determination in this  appellant's  appeal,
       the Secretary of State had accepted that the appellant's mother  had
       worked for the CIO. That is also apparent from the determination  of
       her appeal. A copy of the determination in her appeal is at page  67
       of the appellant's bundle that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       That appeal was heard on 17 February 2010.

   37. Judge Oliver did not find the appellant's mother  to  have  given  a
       credible account of having left Zimbabwe in fear of persecution.  At
       [26] of the determination in her son's, this appellant's, appeal  he
       explained that he had made an adverse  credibility  finding  in  her
       case. Her appeal was allowed on the basis that she  would,  in  'RN'
       terms, have been unable to demonstrate loyalty to the regime.

   38. When I decided that there was an error  of  law  in  Judge  Oliver's
       decision the Upper Tribunal had not by then promulgated the decision
       in CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
       00059 (IAC), which was promulgated  on  31  January  2013.  In  that
       decision, EM and Others (Returnees)  Zimbabwe   CG  [2011]  UKUT  98
       (IAC) was affirmed.  Thus  in  fact,  before  Judge  Oliver  EM  did
       represent  the  appropriate  country  guidance.  Nevertheless,   his
       decision has been set aside and needs to be re-made.

   39. Neither party put before me any background  material  additional  to
       that set out in CM. I did canvass with the parties the relevance  of
       the publicly known fact that there have very recently been elections
       in Zimbabwe which Zanu-PF won. It was agreed on a minimum basis that
       I could take judicial  notice  of  the  fact  that  there  had  been
       elections which resulted in victory for  Robert  Mugabe.  Mr  Jacobs
       urged that I should go further  and  also  take  into  account  that
       concerns had been expressed by the British Foreign  Secretary  about
       the election process. What are  the  terms  of  that  expression  of
       concern is not in evidence before me. Suffice to say, it  is  common
       knowledge that concerns have been expressed in some  quarters,  both
       within and outside Zimbabwe in relation to the election.

   40. However, that does not do much, if anything, to inform the  decision
       to be made about the claimed risk to the appellant on return.  There
       is no evidence before me as to whether the fact of the elections has
       increased or decreased any possible risk,  for  example  because  of
       heightened or lessened tensions. In the circumstances, I proceed  on
       the basis that this is not a matter that has any proven  bearing  on
       the issues I have to determine.

   41. In his determination Judge Oliver stated at [26] that he  could  not
       rely on anything the appellant said. At  [27]  he  found  that  "The
       inconsistencies and contradictions belie his claim at  every  turn."
       The adverse credibility assessment is unaffected  by  the  error  of
       law. At [27] he referred to the appellant's evidence to  the  effect
       that he had not been targeted in any way whilst he was in  Zimbabwe.
       At [27] he found that both the appellant and his mother  lied  about
       the appellant's situation in Zimbabwe in terms of whether or not  he
       had lived with his father and whether his mother arrived in  the  UK
       before or after his mother.

   42. At [4] there is reference to the refusal letter dated 23  July  2007
       which itself refers to the appellant's interview in  which  he  said
       (at question 24) that he lived in his  mother's  (government)  house
       for between four and six months after his mother left the CIO. There
       was no evidence that he suffered any problems from  the  authorities
       in that time.

   43. There is reference in the determination at [12] to  the  appellant's
       oral evidence to the effect that he had one  brother  and  an  uncle
       who, at that time, still lived in Zimbabwe. There is nothing in  the
       evidence to indicate that they  have  experienced  any  problems  on
       account of the appellant's mother having left the CIO.

   44. At [30] of his mother's determination Judge  Oliver  concluded  that
       she had not established that any member of the family, including two
       of her sons or her brother, had been subjected to  ill-treatment  on
       account of her. There is some ambiguity in his conclusions  in  that
       paragraph in terms of whether the CIO did make enquiries  of  family
       members as to her whereabouts, but the fact remains that there is no
       evidence that any of them were ill-treated.

   45. In evidence before me the appellant's mother said  that  she  has  a
       brother and sister in Zimbabwe. Whilst it may be that  they  have  a
       different name from her, hers being her married name, there is again
       a lack of evidence that those family members have been  the  subject
       of any adverse attention on account  of  the  appellant.  Given  the
       reliance by  the  appellant  on  the  intelligence  led  process  of
       investigation by the CIO, it is reasonable  to  assume  that  family
       members of the appellant's mother present in Zimbabwe would be  able
       to have been located by the CIO.

   46. The country  guidance  in  CM,  in  essence,  affirmed  the  country
       guidance in relation to the situation at the point of return as  set
       out in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094,
       although in CM the Tribunal expressly stated that it was not  giving
       country guidance on that issue. The guidance in HS from [264] is  to
       the effect that the intelligence led process at the  airport  is  to
       identify those who may be of interest to the regime. The  mere  fact
       of returning as a failed asylum seeker would not  be  a  basis  from
       which to conclude that an individual would be at risk.

   47. The appellant left Zimbabwe in 2001, as it seems did his  mother.  I
       was not referred to any country background material or any aspect of
       any country guidance case which would support the  proposition  that
       the appellant would be targeted on account of his  association  with
       his mother, still less having regard to the length of time  that  he
       has been out of the country. The evidence particular to  his  family
       circumstances and to which I have referred does  not  indicate  that
       any family member has been the subject of any adverse  attention  by
       the authorities in Zimbabwe on account of his mother having left the
       CIO.

   48. Notwithstanding that Mr Jacobs suggested that a distinction could be
       drawn between other family members who had not left the country  and
       the appellant  who  had,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence
       establishes a reasonable likelihood  that  the  appellant  would  be
       subjected to any adverse attention leading to ill-treatment,  either
       at the point of return or subsequently. Even if  I  were  to  accept
       that a connection would be made between the appellant and his mother
       on return, I am not satisfied that there would  be  a  risk  to  him
       given that lack of evidence that the appellant, or any family member
       have experienced such problems in the past.

   49. Indeed, the  appellant  has  not  established  that  any  connection
       between him and his mother is reasonably likely to be  made  on  his
       return.  Aside  from  the  fact,  accepted  in  evidence,  that  the
       appellant's surname is a common one in Zimbabwe, I was not  referred
       to any evidence in terms of the intelligence gathering process which
       would indicate that after 12 years the CIO would make  a  connection
       between the appellant and his mother, the appellant being much older
       than when he left aged 19.

   50. In any event, as I have indicated,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
       evidence establishes that there would be any adverse interest in the
       appellant as his mother's son, even if such a connection was made.

   51. More generally, it is significant to note that the appellant is from
       Bulawayo, where it was concluded in CM that an individual would  not
       in general suffer adverse attention.

   52. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the evidence  establishes  that
       the appellant would be at risk of  persecution  on  return  for  any
       reason.  It  follows  that  he  is  not  entitled  to   humanitarian
       protection and his removal would not  breach  his  human  rights  in
       respect of Article 3.

Conclusions: Article 8 and paragraph 390

   53. Mr Jacobs submitted that there had  been  no  consideration  by  the
       Secretary of State of Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
       Immigration Act 2009. Ms  Horsley  suggested  that  there  had  been
       sufficient  consideration  of  'section  55'  as  reflected  in  the
       respondent's summary (formerly known as the 'PF1') which shows  that
       letters had been written to the appellant's solicitors  and  to  K's
       mother requesting information about K and her  relationship  to  and
       with the appellant.

   54. It has to be said that Mr Jacobs position on this issue was to  some
       extent ambiguous, on the  one  hand  suggesting  that  the  lack  of
       consideration of section 55 rendered the decision not in  accordance
       with the law, yet also accepting that there was sufficient  evidence
       before me from  which  I  could  determine  the  Article  8  ground,
       including with reference to the best interests of K.

   55. The question of whether this appeal should be allowed on the limited
       basis that the decision is not in accordance with the law  for  want
       of a consideration of section 55 can be  answered  shortly.  In  the
       first place, I was not directed to any evidence which suggested that
       the Secretary of State had received any information in  response  to
       her enquiries about K, in particular the  request  for  confirmation
       that K is the biological daughter of  the  appellant.  Secondly,  AJ
       (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191, suggests that where the  Tribunal  has
       sufficient information from which to make  a  determination  of  the
       relevant issues, it should go on to do so, rather than finding  that
       the decision is not in accordance with  the  law  and  allowing  the
       appeal on that limited basis.

   56. So far as Article 8 is  concerned,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
       Article 8 rules have any application to this  appeal,  either  in  a
       direct sense, or as a factor in the proportionality  assessment.  In
       MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012]  UKUT  00393(IAC)  it  was
       decided that the 'new' Article 8 rules are  not  retrospective.  The
       decision in this case was taken before those rules came into effect,
       on 9 July 2012. Neither the decision in Izuazu nor  that  in  Nagre,
       relied on by Ms Horsley, undermine the correctness of  the  decision
       in MF on this point. Thus, I am not satisfied that paragraphs  A362,
       398 or 399 of HC 395 (as amended) apply.

   57. As to Article 8 proper then, I adopt the structured approach set out
       in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. It is sufficient at this stage  simply  to
       state that I am satisfied that the appellant has  family  life  with
       his daughter K, aged 5. It is not disputed that she is his  daughter
       and it is accepted that he has the contact with her  that  has  been
       claimed.

   58. Since arriving in the UK in 2001 he will have established a  private
       life, although there is  little  evidence  of  the  extent  of  that
       private life. In any event, the focus for the Article  8  ground  is
       his family life with his daughter.

   59. The respondent's decision amounts to an interference with his family
       life with his daughter. It was accepted in submissions on behalf  of
       the respondent before me that K is a British citizen and  could  not
       be expected to return to Zimbabwe with him. The decision would  also
       amount to an interference with his private life.

   60. The  interference  with  his  family  and  private  life  will  have
       consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the  operation
       of Article 8, applying the  second  principle  in  Razgar.  It  does
       however, pursue a legitimate aim namely the prevention  of  disorder
       and crime. A further aim is the economic well-being of  the  country
       expressed as the maintenance of effective immigration control, given
       that the appellant has been an overstayer  in  the  UK  since  2001,
       having initially been granted leave to enter for  six  months  as  a
       visitor. The decision to refuse to revoke the deportation  order  is
       in accordance with the law.

   61. The analysis of the Article 8 ground turns  on  proportionality.  In
       that context I take as a primary consideration the best interests of
       the appellant's daughter, K.

   62. The evidence of the contact that the appellant has with his daughter
       was accepted on behalf of the respondent at the hearing  before  me.
       In summary, he sees her every two weeks when she stays with  him  at
       his mother's home. She is staying with him  for  the  summer  school
       holidays. The written evidence in the statements  of  the  appellant
       and his mother  also  says  that  she  stays  during  other  holiday
       periods. In his witness statement dated 29 July 2013  the  appellant
       refers to his having attended school meetings and a  Christmas  play
       in 2012. He states at [8] that he intends to be even  more  involved
       with her school life once term resumes in September 2013 and that he
       contributes to the purchase of uniform and so forth.  The  statement
       also refers to the things that they do together  when  she  and  her
       step-brother M come to stay  and  his  joint  involvement  with  her
       mother in decisions about her daily life.

   63. The witness statements from SHD, the  mother  of  K,  refer  to  the
       closeness of the relationship between the appellant and K as do  the
       witness statements from the appellant's mother. I note that in about
       January 2013 the appellant had asked the UKBA to allow him  to  move
       from his mother's address in Luton to SHD's address in  Northampton.
       She had then just had  a  baby  and  the  appellant  suggested  that
       because she was unwell he felt that K needed  him,  for  example  to
       take her to school. There is a letter from the UKBA dated 10 January
       2013 confirming the request made in the  appellant's  letter.  SHD's
       witness statement dated 20 May 2013 also refers to the request  that
       he made, stating that with her new baby it  was  difficult  to  look
       after three children on her own.

   64. There are significant credibility issues that arise  in  respect  of
       both  the  appellant  and  his  mother,  as  is  apparent  from   my
       conclusions and reasons in the determination of the  asylum  appeal,
       as well as from further matters set out below.  However,  given  the
       acceptance of the evidence of the contact between the appellant  and
       his daughter it is likely that at that  age  she  will  have  become
       closely attached to the appellant.

   65. That this is the case is apparent from the oral evidence of SHD  and
       from  her  manuscript  witness  statement.  No  concerns  have  been
       expressed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  in   relation   to   her
       credibility. She refers to K being jealous for  his  attention,  and
       that she has difficulties at school but  listens  to  the  appellant
       whom, she says, K has respect for. She refers  to  K  being  a  very
       emotional person who is very close to the appellant. SHD states that
       if the appellant was deported K would feel his loss deeply.

   66. The appellant's mother states in her witness statement dated 29 July
       2013 at [10] that it has been decided not to tell K that there is  a
       possibility that her father will  be  deported.  I  am  prepared  to
       accept this, given K's age and the evidence as to  her  relationship
       with the appellant.

   67. It is important to have regard to the fact that Judge  Oliver  found
       at [31] that the relationship between the appellant and K  has  been
       tenuous and that the appellant "had tried to give the appearance  of
       a concerned father, involved in  the  upbringing  of  his  daughter"
       going on to conclude that because of the lies he had  told  and  the
       "quite extraordinary efforts he had made to thwart his removal  from
       the United Kingdom that the latter has been his  primary  motive  in
       seeing more of his daughter."

   68. Ms Horsley reminded me of what I said in my error of law decision at
       [23], namely that in so far as not affected by the error of law, the
       findings of fact by Judge Oliver  in  his  Article  8  consideration
       could stand. The error of law related to K's best interests but  not
       to his distinct findings of fact in relation to Article  8  and  his
       contact with his daughter.

   69. However, as was pointed out by Mr Jacobs, there is  evidence  before
       me which was not before Judge Oliver when he determined  the  appeal
       over a year ago now. Nevertheless, that evidence  does  not  detract
       from the conclusions that Judge Oliver came to as to the appellant's
       cynical motives for keeping in contact with her at the time  of  his
       assessment of the evidence.

   70. An issue to be decided is, is that still his motive for  keeping  in
       contact with his daughter and is  it  likely,  as  suggested  by  Ms
       Horsley, that if the appellant succeeds  in  his  appeal,  he  would
       cease contact with her. His motive for keeping in contact  with  her
       is relevant to her best interests for that reason,  although  it  is
       not determinative. From his  daughter's  perspective,  the  question
       purely of motive is  probably  irrelevant  in  so  far  as  she  has
       developed a close bond with him. It becomes  relevant  to  her  best
       interests in terms of his future intentions.

   71. The appellant has a propensity to deceive. So much is  evident  from
       Judge Oliver's determination, as well as from the  determination  of
       his deportation appeal in May 2008 before Immigration  Judge  Fisher
       and Mr T.A Jones MBE. In that determination at [16] it was concluded
       that he was a person who would say anything to his advantage.

   72. The appellant said in evidence before me that K was his only  child,
       and he confirmed his answer to me. In the OASys report  (at  section
       6) he refers to having two children, one of whom at the date of  the
       report in November 2011 was aged 1� months. That could not be K, who
       was born in 2007. There are other  references  to  two  children  in
       other parts of the report.

   73. At [16] of the determination of May 2008 it  is  recorded  that  the
       appellant said that he had  three  children,  two  with  a  previous
       partner and one with his then current partner  in  Northampton.  His
       evidence to that effect is recorded at [5]  of  that  determination.
       The Panel noted that in the screening interview at that time he said
       that he had no children and confirmed in evidence that that was what
       he had said, stating that he said that because he did not think that
       they were important. In the then pre-sentence report he said that he
       had two children. These  aspects  of  the  evidence,  amongst  other
       matters, led the Panel to make the observation referred  to  at  the
       end of [71] above.

   74. The evidence suggests that the appellant has more children  than  he
       was prepared to admit in evidence.  Certainly  he  has  referred  to
       other children in evidence before  a  Tribunal,  in  a  pre-sentence
       report and in the OASys report. I have come to the  conclusion  that
       his evidence before me that K is his  only  child  was  a  deceitful
       attempt to maximise the claimed impact on him of a  separation  from
       his daughter by his removal.

   75. Whilst the evidence does, in terms of the facts, support the  amount
       of claimed contact that the appellant has with K, there is little if
       anything to displace the negative assessments that have been made as
       to the appellant's propensity to be deceptive. This is  relevant  to
       the point made by Ms Horsley in terms of what continuing contact the
       appellant could be expected to maintain if he were to succeed in his
       appeal.

   76. In the circumstances of this appeal, notwithstanding the lack of any
       professional evidence of K's best interests,  it  is  reasonable  to
       conclude that her best interests would be  for  her  to  maintain  a
       close relationship with the appellant, continuing at  least  on  the
       basis of the contact at present. It has not been suggested that  her
       best  interests  are  directly  compromised  by  his  character   or
       criminality.

   77. The appellant's lack of credibility is such that I have  significant
       reservations in relation to his assertions that  he  would  maintain
       the present contact and indeed, build on it. He was not prepared  to
       admit in evidence before me that he has another  child  or  children
       when other evidence establishes that it  is  likely  that  he  does.
       There is no evidence that he sees his other child or children. There
       may be many reasons for that but as a matter of evidence what  would
       appear to be his lack of contact with his  other  children  has  the
       potential to raise doubt about what he says will be  the  extent  of
       his future commitment to K.

   78. Nevertheless, there is evidence  that  the  appellant's  mother  has
       contact with K. Although she too has previously  been  found  to  be
       lacking in credibility, it does seem to me to be likely that as  K's
       grandmother she would want to maintain contact with her and I accept
       that she would; she  has  significant  contact  at  present  with  K
       staying with her and the appellant on a  regular  basis.  There  are
       several photographs of them all  together.  Furthermore,  given  the
       extent of the appellant's present contact  with  K,  notwithstanding
       the reservations I have expressed it is likely  that  he  will  have
       formed a bond  with  her  which  would  encourage  him  to  maintain
       significant contact with her  in  the  future.  Contact  significant
       enough to mean that his removal would adversely affect  her.   I  do
       not believe the evidence of his deceitfulness  goes  so  far  as  to
       indicate that his regular contact with her has all been 'for  show',
       as it were, although the evidence suggests that that  is  likely  to
       have been at least a factor in his contact with her.

   79. His removal would therefore  adversely  affect  her  best  interests
       given that the only contact she could have with  him  from  Zimbabwe
       would be by phone, letter, perhaps Skype, or the occasional visit. I
       accept the evidence in the witness statements which suggest  that  K
       has formed a close bond with the appellant,  and  such  would  be  a
       reasonable conclusion in any event.

   80. However, whilst K's best interests are a primary consideration, they
       are not the only  consideration.  The  offences  which  led  to  the
       decision to make a deportation  order  were  offences  of  dangerous
       driving, driving with excess alcohol, failing to stop at the request
       of police, no insurance and no licence. He received  a  sentence  of
       nine  months'  imprisonment  for  dangerous  driving,  four  months'
       imprisonment concurrent for failing to  stop  and  was  disqualified
       from driving for four years. The offences were committed in May 2007
       and he was sentenced in November 2007.

   81. The sentencing remarks  illustrate  just  how  bad  the  appellant's
       driving was on that occasion. He drove at speeds reaching 113 mph on
       a motorway having consumed  excess  alcohol.  He  swerved  at  times
       towards a police car, lost control and hit the central  barrier.  He
       resisted arrest.

   82. He had been convicted of other offences previously. According to the
       letter dated 10 April 2008 from the UKBA  to  the  appellant,  on  1
       February 2006 he was convicted  of  two  offences  of  assaulting  a
       police constable and one offence of possession of cannabis  and  was
       sentenced to six  months'  imprisonment.  On  the  other  hand,  the
       refusal letter dated 7 February 2012 states that for those  offences
       he received three months imprisonment.  The  sentencing  remarks  in
       2007 state that he had been convicted of a driving offence involving
       excess alcohol in December 2004. The OASys  report  at  2.12  states
       that he was disqualified from driving for three years  in  2005.  It
       also refers to an offence of assaulting a police officer.

   83. The decision letter of 27 March 2012 at [13] refers to stamps in the
       appellant's passport showing extensions of  stay  and  a  "no  time-
       limit" stamp having been found to be counterfeit.  Ms  Horsley  made
       reference to this in submissions and it has  not  been  disputed  on
       behalf of the appellant that his passport did have those counterfeit
       stamps in them.

   84. The OASys report in November 2011 described the risk of reoffending,
       and the risk to the  public,  as  medium.  Given  that  he  has  not
       offended since November 2011 it is reasonable to conclude  that  the
       risk has diminished to some degree. Mr Jacobs  relied  on  the  fact
       that the  appellant  has  not  committed  any  offence  since  being
       released from (what was presumably immigration)  detention  in  July
       2011. Those are relevant matters although it has not been  suggested
       on his behalf that the category of  'medium'  risk  does  not  still
       apply to him.

   85. I have taken into account the decision in N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA  Civ
       1094 and what was said there about the public policy need  to  deter
       and to  express  society's  revulsion  at  the  seriousness  of  the
       criminality. At [65] it was said that the risk of reoffending  is  a
       factor in the balance but not the  most  important  public  interest
       factor in  the  case  of  very  serious  crimes.  The  principle  of
       deterrence  expressed  in  N  (Kenya)  is  again  reiterated  in  RU
       (Bangladesh) [2011] EWCA Civ 651 at paragraph 43  in  which  it  was
       said that:

         "The point about "deterrence" is not whether the deportation  of  a
         particular "foreign criminal" may  or  may  not  have  a  deterrent
         effect on other prospective offenders.  It  concerns  a  much  more
         fundamental concept which is explained by Judge LJ at [83]  of  his
         judgment in N (Kenya). The UK operates  an  immigration  system  by
         which control is exercised over non-British citizens who enter  and
         remain in the UK. The operation of that system must take account of
         broad issues of social cohesion in the UK. Moreover, the public has
         to have confidence in its operation. Those requirements are for the
         "public good" or are in the "public interest". For both of those to
         requirements to be fulfilled, the  operation  of  the  system  must
         contain an element of deterrence to non-British  citizens  who  are
         either already in the UK (even if refugees) or who are thinking  of
         coming to the UK, "so as to ensure  that  they  clearly  understand
         that, whatever  the  circumstances,  one  of  the  consequences  of
         serious crime may well be deportation".  That  element  of  "public
         interest" or "public good" is a part  of  the  legislative  policy,
         declared by Parliament in section  32(4)  of  the  UKBA,  that  the
         deportation of "foreign  criminals"  is  conducive  to  the  public
         good."

   86. In Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano -  Dereci)  [2012]
       UKUT 00048(IAC), at [48] the Upper Tribunal said this:

             "It  is  long  established  that  the  legitimate  aim  of  the
             prevention of disorder or crime does not depend on a person who
             has been convicted of  a  particularly  serious  offence  being
             likely to further threaten the public interest by re-offending.
             As the decisions of the Court of Appeal in  N  (Kenya)  and  OH
             (Serbia) demonstrate, the maintenance of respect for  the  law,
             public indignation at past conduct, the deterrence of others by
             the adoption of the supplementary  measure  of  deportation  in
             addition to the criminal sentence may  all  contribute  to  the
             legitimate  aim   and   justify   deportation   providing   the
             interference is proportionate in all the circumstances  of  the
             case. The more serious the offending, the stronger is  the case
             for deportation, but  Parliament  has  not  stated  that  every
             offence serious enough  to  merit  a  custodial  penalty  or  a
             penalty of twelve months or more imprisonment, for that  reason
             makes interference with human rights proportionate."

   87. This, of course, is  not  an  automatic  deportation  under  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007. No doubt in many deportation appeals the offending
       is more serious than the offences for which this appellant has  been
       convicted and which resulted in the decision to make the deportation
       order. Certainly  in  N  (Kenya)  itself  that  appellant  had  been
       convicted of far more serious offences involving abduction,  threats
       to kill, three counts of  rape  and  false  imprisonment,  resulting
       ultimately in a sentence of 11  years'  imprisonment.  Nevertheless,
       the principle of deterrence applies to this appellant  in  the  same
       way, as set out in the decisions to which I have referred.

   88. So what is the  answer  to  the  proportionality  question  in  this
       appeal? On the one hand the appellant is an overstayer, and has been
       since 2001. His passport contained counterfeit stamps,  albeit  that
       no evidence was before me as to whether he was  prosecuted  for  any
       offence in relation to those stamps. As Ms  Horsley  suggested,  his
       family and private life have been established in circumstances  when
       he knew of his illegal status in the UK. He has  committed  criminal
       offences, including a serious offence of dangerous driving. There is
       a risk that he will commit further offences,  although  he  has  not
       committed any offences since his last conviction in 2007.

   89. He has developed a close bond with his 5 year old daughter  whom  he
       sees on a regular basis. His deportation would mean their separation
       in a physical sense for a period of at  least  ten  years,  and  the
       contact they could have in the interim would be  no  substitute  for
       the close contact they have at present.  The  period  of  separation
       would constitute a very significant  portion  of  K's  developmental
       years.

   90. I do not consider that the appellant's  private  life,  about  which
       there was little evidence beyond the non-family  life  relationships
       evident from the facts evident in this determination, weigh much  in
       his favour in the balancing exercise.  Likewise, whilst  it  may  be
       that his removal may have an effect on his relatives in the  UK,  in
       particular his mother, that again is of little weight on  the  facts
       of this appeal.

   91. That the appellant would prefer  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  would
       himself be affected by the loss of direct contact with his  daughter
       are similarly not matters that attract much weight. The  appellant's
       feelings are of very little significance  set  against  the  factors
       which weigh in favour of deportation. He has only himself  to  blame
       for the situation that he faces.

   92. In submissions Mr Jacobs emphasised what was said at  [46]  by  Lord
       Kerr in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, as follows:

     "It is a universal theme of  the  various  international  and  domestic
             instruments to which Lady Hale has referred that,  in  reaching
             decisions that will affect a child,  a  primacy  of  importance
             must be accorded to his or her best interests. This is not,  it
             is agreed, a factor of limitless importance in the  sense  that
             it will prevail over all other considerations. It is a  factor,
             however, that must rank higher than any other. It is not merely
             one consideration that weighs in the  balance  alongside  other
             competing factors.  Where  the  best  interests  of  the  child
             clearly favour a certain course, that course should be followed
             unless countervailing reasons of  considerable  force  displace
             them. It is not  necessary  to  express  this  in  terms  of  a
             presumption but the primacy of this consideration needs  to  be
             made clear in emphatic terms. What is determined  to  be  in  a
             child's best interests should customarily dictate  the  outcome
             of cases such as the present, therefore, and  it  will  require
             considerations of substantial  moment  to  permit  a  different
             result."

   93. I do consider that it is in K's best interests for the appellant  to
       remain in the UK, continuing as a  father  to  support  her  in  her
       development. He would not be able  to  provide  anything  like  that
       level of support if he were to leave the UK. She would not doubt, as
       suggested on behalf of the respondent, be provided with  support  by
       the appellant's mother and other family  members  in  the  UK.  That
       however, is plainly no substitute  for  having  and  being  able  to
       develop a close relationship with her father.

   94. Balancing all the  completing  factors,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
       decision to remove the appellant does amount to  a  disproportionate
       interference with his right to family life with  his  daughter.  Her
       best interests are of such importance in  this  case  that  they  do
       outweigh the factors militating in favour of removal. Thus, I am not
       satisfied that the respondent has established that  the  appellant's
       removal is a proportionate response to the legitimate aims  pursued.
       The appeal is therefore allowed under Article 8.

   95. Both parties agreed that the immigration decision in this case is  a
       decision to refuse to revoke a deportation order. It was also agreed
       that paragraph 390 of HC 395 (as amended) applies. Whilst  paragraph
       390 requires distinct consideration, the matters  set  out  in  that
       paragraph are subsumed within my  consideration  of  Article  8.  It
       follows that the appeal is also to be allowed under the  Immigration
       Rules, with reference to paragraph 390.

   96.   However,   in   concluding   that   his   deportation   would   be
       disproportionate, the appellant must be  in  no  doubt  that  if  he
       commits any further offences there is every prospect  that  he  will
       again face deportation proceedings which  may  well  result  in  his
       removal, with all that that entails for his  relationship  with  his
       daughter. Further offending will be an indication that he  has  made
       the  choice  of  returning  to  Zimbabwe  and  separation  from  his
       daughter. Such offending would probably require  a  reassessment  of
       whether it was any longer in K's best interests for the appellant to
       remain in the UK.

   97. I make those observations in the expectation that if  there  is  any
       further offending which results  in  deportation  proceedings,  this
       determination will be put  before  any  Tribunal  dealing  with  any
       future appeal.

Decision

   98. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law and is set aside. The decision is re-made as
       follows:

       the appeal on grounds of asylum, humanitarian protection and Article
       3 of the ECHR is dismissed;

       the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR  and  under  the  Immigration
       Rules with reference to paragraph 390 is allowed.

Anonymity

Given that these proceedings involve children, I make an order (pursuant  to
rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008).
Consequently, this determination identifies the appellant's child and  other
children, and the adults associated with them, including the  appellant,  by
initials only in order to preserve the anonymity of those children.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 15/08/13


