
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03615/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                ALKETA BRATI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malik promulgated on 8  May  2015  which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 13 April 1985 and is a national of Albania.

 4. On 16 October 2012 the Appellant applied for asylum with her child as a
    dependent on the basis that she  had  been  trafficked  to  the  United
    Kingdom to work as a prostitute.

 5. On 1  April  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

 6. The Appellant's account that she was forced by a male called Festin  to
    work as a prostitute and returned to Albania to have  an  abortion  was
    not accepted as there were inconsistencies in the account.

 7. The NRM concluded that the Appellant was not a victim of trafficking.

 8. Even if the Appellant's account were accepted at its highest  there  is
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation would be an option.

 9. There was no basis for a grant of discretionary leave.

The Judge's Decision

10. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malik ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found :

11. The Judge considered  the  guidance  in  the  CG  case  of  AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked Women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80.

12. She noted that the NRM had assessed the Appellant's case and determined
    that she was not a victim of trafficking but it was for her to make her
    own assessment of the evidence.

13. The Judge did not find  the  Appellant's  account  to  be  credible  or
    plausible and set out her reasons at 19 1-V.

14. She considered the case in the alternative at 19 VI and by reference to
    the  COIS  and  the  Appellant's  circumstances  as  a  well   educated
    university graduate that there was sufficiency of protection in Albania
    for the victims of trafficking or that she would be able to relocate.

15. She did not find that there was a basis for allowing the  appeal  under
    Article 8 taking into account the best interests of the child.

16. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the  Judge's  assessment  of
    credibility was flawed as it was based on plausibility rather  than  on
    internal inconsistencies or conflict with other evidence and  that  her
    assessment of the risk on return was flawed  in  relation  to  internal
    relocation in that she  had  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant was a single woman and that internal relocation was  unlikely
    to be effective for most victims of trafficking.

17. On 2  June  2015  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  gave
    permission to appeal.

18. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Bonavero  and  Ms  Johnstone
    and I took those into account.

Finding on Material Error

19. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

20. The Appellant's case is underpinned by her assertion that she  came  to
    the United Kingdom as a victim of trafficking. Her case  was  therefore
    referred via the National  Referral  Mechanism  (NRM)  as  a  potential
    victim of trafficking. The decision of the NRM was that she was  not  a
    victim of trafficking. The Judge in this case rightly  recognised  that
    it was nevertheless for her to make her own assessment of the claim.

21. The first argument advanced by Mr Bonavero was that the Judge was wrong
    to find against the credibility of the Appellant's case  on  the  basis
    that she did not find the Appellant's account to be plausible and  that
    such an approach required 'extreme caution'.

22. I agree of course that a proper approach to credibility  is  essential,
    and that this required the assessment of the Appellant's  evidence  and
    of her claim in the round.  In the case of a claim for asylum, at least
    three factors will normally be relevant.  The first of  these  is  the
    internal consistency of the  Appellant's  claim.   The  second  is  the
    inherent plausibility of that claim as I am satisfied that the inherent
    probability or improbability of the events described is a  matter  that
    the Judge must take into account when looking at the  evidence  in  the
    round and weighing up the likelihood of  the  events  described  having
    occurred.  The third is the consistency  of  the  claim  with  external
    factors, of the sort that is typically found in  country  guidance  and
    background material.

23. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge  was  entitled  in  determining
    whether the Appellant account was credible to carry  out  the  detailed
    examination of the Appellant's evidence and identify aspects of it that
    she found implausible but I  am  also  satisfied  that  she  identified
    inconsistencies that also contributed  to  the  overall  assessment  of
    credibility.

24. In relation  to  the  evidence  that  the  Judge  found  implausible  I
    satisfied that it was open to the Judge to find against the  background
    of the accepted  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was  a  well  educated
    graduate and saw a number of customers over the period of  her  alleged
    captivity that she would have known the name  of  the  town  in  France
    where she was held for some months.(19.II)

25. The Judge was also entitled to find it implausible that  the  Appellant
    would have chosen to flee from Albania when she was 9  months  pregnant
    and this was inconsistent with her claim to have remained with a friend
    for 2-3 months and been in possession of 2000 Euros .(19.IV)

26. The Judge was also entitled to  find  it  implausible  that  given  the
    nature of the work she did Festin would  not  have  realised  that  she
    would be given tips and could thus build a fund that she  was  able  to
    use in her escape.

27. I do not accept Mr Bonavero's contention  that  she  did  not  identify
    discrepancies. Thus in paragraph 191 the Judge  found  the  Appellant's
    claim that the she was never left alone and so could not seek help  was
    inconsistent with the fact that the Appellant was left alone  for  some
    time in her hospital room prior to her escape and also found her  claim
    that Festin could find her anywhere in Albania  was  inconsistent  with
    her being able to remain living with a friend that  Festin  knew  about
    for some months before she left Albania.(19.I)

28. I also remind myself  that  the  Judge  had  the  opportunity  to  hear
    evidence from the Appellant and reach conclusions  after  hearing  that
    evidence. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this  in
    relation to challenging credibility findings:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

29. I am satisfied that the Judge looked at the evidence in the  round  and
    indentified both inconsistencies and implausibility in the  Appellant's
    evidence in reached  a  balanced  view  of  her  credibility.  She  was
    entitled to reject the Appellant's claim that she had  been  trafficked
    and forced to work as a prostitute and reject her claim that her  child
    was born as a result of prostitution.

30. I have considered the argument that the Judges assessment  of  risk  on
    return was flawed in relation to both  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation. I am satisfied that any error made in relation  to
    this aspect of the claim was not material given that I have upheld  the
    Judges findings in relation to her claim to have been trafficked.

31. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

32. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

33. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed      Date 27 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
