
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03707/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 28th July, 2016                            |On 9th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     J K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk of Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on [ ]  1976.   On
    20th January, 2015 the Secretary of State made a decision to remove the
    appellant as  an  illegal  entrant  and  the  appellant  appealed  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna sitting in Manchester on 1st July, 2015.

2.   The appellant's claim was  that  some  eighteen  years  previously,  in
    1997, he was questioned by Sri Lankan soldiers and believed that he was
    about to be arrested to prevent him  joining  the  LTTE.   He  went  to
    Colombo where he suffered abuse because of his ethnicity.  He  returned
    home after six months, but finding no improvements,  he  went  back  to
    Colombo.  He claims that he was arrested in 1998, detained for two days
    and ill-treated and released on payment of a bribe.  Two months  later,
    with the assistance of an agent, he left Sri Lanka.

3.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  18th  October,  1998  and
    claimed asylum on 29th November, 1998.  His claim was initially refused
    on 28th June, 2000, but he claims not to have received a notice of  the
    decision.  He claimed asylum again on 13th August, 2013.  Since  having
    entered the United Kingdom the appellant was married and has a wife and
    two children both of whom were born in the United Kingdom.

4.   The judge found the appellant to be  wholly  lacking  credibility.   He
    claims that he was unaware of the Secretary of State's  first  decision
    in 2000.  He notified his then  solicitors  in  1999  of  a  change  of
    address and awaited notification as to the outcome of  his  claim.   He
    claims to have waited two or three years only to discover that his then
    solicitors had closed down.  He asserted that he was unable to make any
    contact with the Home Office because he had no reference  number.   The
    judge did not believe the  appellant's  account.   He  thought  it  was
    simply lacking in credibility that he would wait  two  or  three  years
    before making enquiries as to the process of his claim were  he  to  be
    genuine.  He noted that the appellant's uncle  had  made  a  successful
    asylum appeal and thought it defied belief that  the  appellant  should
    not wish to secure his status and show an  active  concern  as  to  his
    progress.  He also thought it lacked  credibility  that  the  appellant
    believed that he was prevented from making enquiries to the Home Office
    because he had no reference number.

5.   The judge noted that the appellant was encountered  by  the  police  on
    29th May, 2005 arising from a suspected fraudulent use of a bank  card.
    No charges were brought, but the appellant was bailed with a  reporting
    condition having been served with notices as to his immigration status.
     He simply failed to report and made no attempt at  all  to  regularise
    his position.

6.   The appellant met his wife in April, 2010.  She had entered the  United
    Kingdom on 24th August, 2008 and claimed asylum on  27th  August.   She
    was arrested on 2nd September, 2008 and charged with seeking  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom by deception and  failing  to  produce  an
    immigration document at an asylum interview.  She was convicted on  7th
    November,  2008  and  sentenced  to  twelve  months'  imprisonment  for
    deception.  She served six months of that sentence  and  a  deportation
    order was made.

7.   The appellant and his wife were married on 3rd June, 2010 and  had  two
    children, one born on 20th December, 2010 and  one  on  27th  February,
    2013.  Notwithstanding these developments and his relationship  with  a
    partner who had experience with asylum procedures, the judge noted that
    the appellant did not seek to regularise his status  until  he  claimed
    asylum for the second time on 13th August, 2013. The judge  found  that
    the appellant's behaviour throughout his stay in the United Kingdom had
    been a deliberate and sustained attempt to  remain  without  reasonable
    belief that he had the right to do so.  He found  that  such  behaviour
    was designed and was likely to mislead the immigration authorities.

8.   The judge went on  to  consider  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account, however,
     it was not until after he had made  the  majority  of  his  credibility
    findings that the judge considered medical evidence relied upon by  the
    appellant.  At paragraph 47 the judge examined the expert's report from
    Dr A Izquierdo-Martin.  He said:-

         "I accept his credentials and acknowledge his  expert  opinions  on
         matters which are at the heart of this appeal.  I observe, however,
         that his opinions are predicated on an acceptance of the  truth  of
         the appellant's claim.  I have, for the reasons given above,  found
         that there is no merit in the  appeal.   I  find  that  the  expert
         report does not assist the appellant's case."


9.   The appellant challenged the judge's  decision  raising  five  discrete
    issues.  Permission to appeal was granted in respect of  one  of  them,
    namely the assertion that the judge had made a fundamental error of law
    in reaching her credibility findings first  and  then  considering  her
    medical report detailing the scarring.  It was asserted that the author
    of the report did not simply accept the appellant's  account  as  being
    true, but also examined the scars and came to conclusions as to whether
    they were  highly  consistent  with  the  manner  in  which  they  were
    inflicted and the position of the scars including considerations as  to
    whether or not they were self-inflicted injuries or caused by  a  third
    party.  The judge had erred in law by stating that the report  did  not
    assist the appellant's case.

10.  At the hearing before me Mr  Schwenk  wished  to  raise  a  preliminary
    issue.  He reminded me that permission was granted on limited  grounds,
    but there was no evidence that the administrative staff of the Tribunal
    had sent out the proper notices.

11.  Under Rule 34(5) notice should have been given of the right to make  an
    application to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal and the time
    within which and the method by which such application must be made.  Mr
    Schwenk relied on Ferrer (limited appeal  grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT
    00304 (IAC).  He suggested that the grounds of appeal made reference to
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules and in the fourth  ground
    on which permission to appeal was refused, it  was  asserted  that  the
    appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) by  virtue
    of the fact that he had been out of the country  for  nearly  seventeen
    years and none of his family members resided there anymore to give  him
    support and he had no property to live  in  or  employment  to  support
    himself and his wife and  two  children.   Having  heard  Mr  Schwenk's
    submission I decided that I would  not  hear  any  submission  from  Mr
    McVitie on this point.

12.  I invited Mr Schwenk  to  explain  to  me  where,  in  the  appellant's
    statement, he had indicated that there would be  significant  obstacles
    to his integration in Sri Lanka.  Mr Schwenk told me that the appellant
    had no relatives left in Sri Lanka.  His mother and siblings are now in
    a refugee camp in India.  It would be difficult for him to live in  Sri
    Lanka after having been in the United Kingdom for so long.  Mr  Schwenk
    suggested to me that if the appellant had been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for twenty years he would satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I pointed out to Mr Schwenk that  nowhere  in  the  appellant's
    statement did he raise anything which suggested  that  there  would  be
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  into  Sri  Lanka.
    He confirmed that his client spoke Tamil and was aged in his late  30s.
    There was no reason for him to need family support.  I told Mr  Schwenk
    that I was not satisfied that there was any properly arguable error  of
    law identified in the fourth challenge raised in the grounds and  would
    not be granting permission to argue this point.

13.  He reminded me that permission was granted in respect  of  the  judge's
    failure to consider the medical evidence until after making findings on
    credibility.  He criticised the judge for not referring to the  medical
    report as a medical report but simply  referring  to  it  as  being  an
    expert report.  I pointed out to Mr Schwenk that  medical  reports  are
    expert reports.  He suggested that  the  judge  had  erred  because  he
    believed that the author's opinions were predicated on an acceptance of
    the truth of the appellant's claim.   Mr  Schwenk  suggested  that  the
    judge had not considered  the  medical  report  carefully  because  the
    author of the report does not make his opinions on an acceptance of the
    truth of the appellant's claim.

14.  Responding, Mr McVitie suggested that the judge  had  not  erred.   The
    author of the report  very  clearly  has  accepted  the  truth  of  the
    appellant's account and based his report on it.  He says:-

         "Scars 1, 2 and 3 - [the appellant]  said  that  these  scars  were
         caused after being  burnt  with  hot  cigarette  butts  during  his
         detention in  1998.   The  appearance  of  these  scars  and  their
         distribution and pattern  is  highly  consistent  with  intentional
         injuries caused with a hot round object such as a cigarette butt as
         described by  the  claimant.   Dermatological  conditions  such  as
         abscess could result in similar scars, but would lack  the  regular
         narrow zone in the periphery,  corresponding  to  the  inflammatory
         zone appearing around the necrotic tissue in the  acute  phase,  in
         particular, at a deep burn; also  their  appearance  is  homogenous
         with similar size and widespread pattern.  An accidental injury  is
         possible but less likely as  the  duration  of  exposure  with  the
         source of injury necessary to produce this type of round homogenous
         deep burns is significantly longer than the reflex withdrawal  time
         needed to remove the affected part of the body after, for  example,
         accidental brushing against a hot surface, unless the  mobility  of
         the affected part of the body is impaired as it would  be  expected
         with an intentional injury.  The only accidental injury which could
         be confused with a cigarette burn is a burn from  molten  metal/oil
         such as from welding or cooking; [the appellant]  denies  any  such
         event; furthermore the appearance of the scars is  homogenous  with
         nearly identical features and on different anatomical areas  (arms,
         legs); which makes an accidental cause less likely" [my emphasis].


    Mr McVitie also drew my attention to what the author of the report  had
    said in relation to the second scar.  Here, the doctor refers  to  what
    the appellant had actually told him and said that the appearance of the
    scar and the distribution on the wrist is consistent with the mechanism
    of injuries described by the claimant of  tight  ligatures  around  the
    wrist.  Mr McVitie suggested, therefore, that the judge had not  erred;
    the author's report was written on the basis  that  the  appellant  had
    given a truthful account, but in any event the  doctor  had  given  the
    scarrings  the  lower  Istanbul  Protocol  categorisation   of   highly
    consistent and consistent.  In respect of the  first  three  scars  the
    judge cannot rule out the fact  that  self-infliction  of  injuries  by
    proxy is a possible cause.


15.  Mr Schwenk suggested that if the  judge  had  properly  considered  the
    medical report and accepted the appellant's case at its  highest,  then
    the appellant would fall within two risk categories.  The first is that
    he might be perceived to be a threat to Sri Lanka  as  someone  with  a
    significant role in Tamil opposition and secondly because his uncle was
    a significant figure in the LTTE.  I reserved my determination.

16.  Any expert report presented in evidence before a  judge  deserves  very
    careful examination and this is no less true with a medical report.

17.  The judge  starts  making  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    account in his determination before  considering  the  medical  report.
    That amounts to a clear error of  law.   Medical  reports  have  to  be
    considered in the round with all the other evidence placed  before  the
    judge, not after the judge has made clear findings of  fact,  which  is
    what happened in this determination.

18.  For all these reasons I have concluded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did materially err in law and consequently his  determination  is
    set aside.

19.  Given the difficulties and consequential resulting delays in  arranging
    a further hearing in Manchester before me, I have concluded that it  is
    in the interests of justice and will avoid  unnecessary  delay  if  the
    appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal.  I therefore remit  this
    appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for hearing  afresh  before  a  judge
    other than Judge Mulvenna.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal to be heard de novo  by  a
judge other than First Tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First Tier Tribunal the appellant is  granted  anonymity.   I  have  not
been asked to interfere with that direction, so that it stands.   No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to
the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable or paid and there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

