
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03195/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17 September 2015                 |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     PJ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, instructed by BHT Immigration Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, an Afghan national, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 2 May 2014 to refuse
    his application for asylum in the  UK.  His  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  Manuell.  The  appellant  appeals
    with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the appellant has  been  assessed
    as having a notional date of birth of 1 January 1994. He entered the UK
    illegally and claimed asylum on 28 December 2007, when he was 13  years
    old. The basis of  his  claim  was  that  his  father  worked  for  the
    intelligence services in Afghanistan  and  his  brother  was  a  doctor
    working for the Swedish Committee for Afghanistan. He claims  that  his
    brother was captured by the Taliban along with some colleagues and that
    his father led the operation to free them in which several  members  of
    the Taliban were killed. The appellant claims that 15-20 days later his
    father was killed when his car was blown up. About a  month  later  the
    family home was attacked and his mother was shot and died. He  believes
    that his family were targeted  by  the  Taliban.  Six  days  later  the
    appellant's brother arranged for the family to  leave  Afghanistan  and
    they went to Pakistan. He stayed  in  a  refugee  camp  there  for  2-3
    months. He was threatened because of his father's work for  the  Afghan
    government. The appellant's brother arranged for the appellant to leave
    Pakistan with an agent. The agent took him  to  the  UK  via  Iran  and
    France. The appellant's asylum application was refused on 18 March 2008
    and the appellant appealed against this decision but later withdrew his
    appeal. He was granted Discretionary leave to remain until 1 June  2011
    because he was under 18.  The  appellant  was  cautioned  for  criminal
    damage in July 2009 and received a reprimand for theft in May 2011.  He
    was arrested for shoplifting in June  2013  and  received  a  12  month
    conditional discharge. The appellant has a daughter born on 4  February
    2011 who has been adopted. The appellant is no longer in a relationship
    with the mother of the child who  is  serving  a  prison  sentence  for
    stabbing him in the back. The appellant says that his brother moved  to
    Iran but he has lost contact with him. He claims that he is  in  a  new
    relationship  with  a  British  citizen.  The  appellant  suffers  from
    depression.

 3. The Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    testimony in relation to past events in Afghanistan was credible.   The
    Judge expressed some reservations as to whether the appellant's brother
    and mother were specifically targeted by the Taliban but said that  the
    summary of the appellant's evidence set out at paragraph [9] to [13] of
    the determination stands as the Tribunals' essential findings of  fact.
    The Judge identified the issues to be determined as being  whether  the
    appellant will  enjoy  a  sufficiency  of  protection  if  returned  to
    Afghanistan and whether he can reasonably relocate to  Afghanistan.  He
    went on to find that there would be a sufficiency of protection for the
    appellant in Afghanistan based  on  the  family's  experiences  of  the
    police in the past and on the current background information. He  found
    that there is no satisfactory  evidence  to  show  that  the  Taliban's
    resources are anywhere near sufficient to keep track of persons such as
    the appellant let alone that the appellant would be  capable  of  being
    recognised and that  in  any  event  the  appellant's  father  who  the
    appellant believed was the focus of Taliban interest is long dead [30].
    The Judge also found that it would be reasonable for the  appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul to avail himself of the  greater  level  of  security
    there and because he comes from a situation of sufficient means for him
    to have been able to pay for his passage to  the  UK  [32].  The  Judge
    considered Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  and
    found that the appellant's moral and physical  integrity  will  not  be
    placed at real risk of serious harm or of  suicide  by  his  return  to
    Afghanistan.

 4. The appellant's application for permission to appeal was refused by the
    First-tier Tribunal but granted on renewal to the Upper  Tribunal.  The
    renewed application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relies on four grounds. The first ground is that the  Judge  failed  to
    properly  or  adequately  consider  the  psychiatric   report   of   Dr
    Fairweather dated 15 August 2014 and the report  from  the  appellant's
    counsellor as part of  the  assessment  of  reasonableness  of  return.
    Secondly, it is contended that the Judge failed  to  properly  consider
    the country expert report of Dr  Schuster  dated  10  August  2014  and
    failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting  the  report.  The  third
    ground contends that the Judge failed to make clear findings of fact as
    to risk profile on return to Kabul.  It is  contended  that  the  Judge
    erred in failing to make findings of fact as to risk, and in particular
    as to whether the appellant's  family  members  were  targeted  by  the
    Taliban, before going on to  consider  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation. Finally, it is contended that the Judge failed  to
    properly consider the issue of Article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human  Rights  and  humanitarian  protection   and   the   respondent's
    discretionary leave policy.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted primarily on the basis that the  Judge
    arguably erred in failing to take account of  the  psychiatric  report.
    The Judge granting permission pointed out that there is an error in the
    numbering of the psychiatric report in the appellant's bundle.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Halim submitted that the psychiatric report
    is material as it goes to credibility and  to  the  appellant's  mental
    health on return to Afghanistan He emphasised that the  issue  here  is
    reasonableness of internal relocation, it is not a  medical  case,  and
    the evidence as to the effect of internal relocation on the appellant's
    health is relevant to the assessment of the reasonableness.

 7. Mr Tufan accepted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge appeared  to  have
    failed to consider the  psychiatric  report  but  submitted  that  this
    failure did not have a material impact on the  decision.  He  submitted
    that the psychiatrist concluded that the appellant might  be  suffering
    from PTSD. He relied on the decision in KH (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 1354 and submitted that the guidance there was relevant to the
    question of internal relocation. He submitted that  this  case  is  not
    exceptional in terms of consideration under Articles 3  and  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights. He relied on the  decision  in  AK
    (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  where  the
    Tribunal pointed out at paragraph 233 that the reasonableness  test  in
    relation to internal relocation remains a stringent one.

 8. In response Mr Halim submitted  that  the  appellant's  credibility  is
    intact, subject to the somewhat  unclear  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge as to who targeted the appellant's  family  members.  He
    submitted that the Judge failed to attach proper weight to Dr Shuster's
    expert report in relation to the plausibility of the appellant's claims
    as it dealt with the issue of who targeted the appellant's  family.  He
    submitted that this case is different from those considered in  KH  and
    AK because the appellant  here  is  credible  and  the  risk  has  been
    established. The issue here is not general risk but  risk  specific  to
    the appellant in light of his credibility. He submitted that in AK  the
    Tribunal was considering relocation within the context of Article 15(c)
    and not the issue of internal relocation in  an  asylum  case.  In  his
    submission the issue here is whether internal relocation is  reasonable
    in all the circumstances taking into account the support  available  to
    the appellant and the  impact  of  return  on  his  mental  health.  He
    submitted that the psychiatric report identifies the risk of suicide if
    the appellant is returned to Afghanistan. He relied on the decision  in
    Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362  and  submitted  that  the
    appellant has a subjective fear and no capacity  to  avail  himself  of
    services in Afghanistan and that he meets al of the criteria set out by
    Sedley LJ.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  an
    error of law in failing to consider the report of Dr Fairweather. It is
    clear from his consideration of the medical evidence  at  paragraph  34
    that the Judge did not consider Dr Fairweather's report. This may  have
    been due to the misnumbering of the appellant's bundle. I am  satisfied
    that the error is material because, in light of the  finding  that  the
    appellant's account is credible, and the finding at paragraph  25  that
    the appellant is at risk in  his  home  area,  which  is  described  as
    'volatile', the issue for the Judge was whether it  is  reasonable  for
    the appellant to relocate to Kabul. In this context it is necessary  to
    consider all of the relevant facts. "The decision-maker, taking account
    of all relevant  circumstances  pertaining  to  the  claimant  and  his
    country of origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to  expect  the
    claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to expect  him
    to do so" (per Lord Bingham in Januzi v SSHD [2006]UKHL 5, 21).

10. I am satisfied that the contents of the psychiatric report are relevant
    factors  and  are  capable  of  impacting  on  the  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of internal relocation and that the Judge therefore made
    a material  error  in  failing  to  consider  that   report.  In  these
    circumstances I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to asylum. Mr Halim did not  pursue  any  submissions  at  the
    hearing in relation to the Judge's treatment  of  Article  8  and  this
    issue of Humanitarian protection/Discretionary Leave (ground four)  and
    I preserve the Judge's conclusions in relation to these  issues.  There
    is no challenge to the findings of fact and I preserve them.  In  these
    circumstances, with the consent of the parties, I proceed to remake the
    decision in relation to internal relocation on the basis of the factual
    findings made by the Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge, the evidence
    before me and the submissions made by Mr Tufan  and  Mr  Halim  at  the
    hearing before me.

Remaking the decision

11. As set out above there is some lack of clarity in the Judge's  findings
    of fact. Whilst the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    'credible' [24] and 'reliable' and that the summary of the  appellant's
    evidence at [9] to [13] of the determination stands as the findings  of
    fact, he also did not accept that the  appellant's  father  or  brother
    were targeted by the Taliban.  The  Judge  found  that  it  is  unclear
    whether  the  appellant's  mother  was  targeted  by  the  Taliban  but
    considered that he did not need to make further findings on this matter
    given his  findings  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation. The Judge referred to the report  of  Dr  Schuster
    dated 10 August 2014 at paragraph 20 but did not consider  it  in  this
    context.

12. In order to be clearer on this issue in the  context  of  remaking  the
    decision I have considered the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    on this issue. It is recorded that the appellant said in oral  evidence
    that he believed that his father and brother had been targeted  by  the
    Taliban. He said that  he  believed  that  the  Taliban  kidnapped  his
    brother and he believed that his family had  been  the  target  of  the
    attack in which his mother was killed [12].

13. In his email dated 23 April 2008 (I8-I9 of the respondent's bundle) the
    appellant's brother described the events of June and July 2007. He said
    that he was kidnapped by the Taliban. He said that they  did  not  know
    who was responsible for the bomb explosion that killed his  father.  He
    said that unknown people attacked the family's home and his mother  was
    shot and later died. In his email dated 9 April 2008 a doctor from  SCA
    said that the SCA does not know if those who kidnapped the  appellant's
    brother were Taliban or any other criminal group.

14. Dr Liza Schuster prepared a report dated 10 August 2014.  At  paragraph
    14 Dr Schuster said that, as  an  intelligence  officer  known  in  the
    district, the appellant's father would have been  an  important  target
    for insurgent forces and that the attack that  killed  the  appellant's
    father fits with the pattern of  attacks  in  Nuristan.  She  listed  a
    syndicate of at least 9 enemy groups who were operating in the area  at
    the time and said that any one of these groups could have targeted  the
    appellant's father and his family. She said that it  is  unlikely  that
    the appellant's mother would have been targeted directly but  plausible
    that there would have been an attack on their compound, especially with
    the appellant's brother present.

15. The evidence from the appellant's brother and from Dr Shuster does  not
    confirm that the  appellant's  father  was  targeted  by  the  Taliban.
    However  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  father's  role  in   the
    intelligence services and Dr Shuster's report it seems likely that  the
    appellant's father was targeted by opposition forces.  The  appellant's
    brother claims that he was kidnapped by the  Taliban  however  his  SCA
    colleague does not confirm this and Dr Shuster makes no comment on  it.
    The evidence does not establish that the appellant's brother because of
    his family background rather than  his  employment.  It  has  not  been
    established that the  appellant's  mother  was  specifically  targeted,
    albeit the family residence may have been.  I  consider  the  remaining
    issues in light of these findings.

16. The Judge found that the appellant would be at risk in his  home  area.
    There has been no challenge to that finding and it is on that  basis  I
    proceed to consider whether it is reasonable to expect the appellant to
    relocate within Afghanistan.

17. In the case of SSHD v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 Baroness Hale said that
    the Court agreed that the correct approach to internal relocation under
    the Refugee Convention is that set out by Lord Bingham of  Cornhill  in
    Januzi. She went on to draw a distinction  between  the  reasonableness
    test and that to be applied in assessing an Article 43 claim;

         "20.     ...

         As the UNHCR put it in their  very  helpful  intervention  in  this
         case,

         " . . . the correct approach when considering the reasonableness of
         IRA  [internal  relocation  alternative]  is  to  assess  all   the
         circumstances  of  the  individual's  case  holistically  and  with
         specific  reference  to  the  individual's  personal  circumstances
         (including past persecution  or  fear  thereof,  psychological  and
         health  condition,  family  and  social  situation,  and   survival
         capacities). This assessment is to be made in the  context  of  the
         conditions in  the  place  of  relocation  (including  basic  human
         rights,    security    conditions,    socio-economic    conditions,
         accommodation, access to  health  care  facilities),  in  order  to
         determine the impact on that individual of settling in the proposed
         place of  relocation  and  whether  the  individual  could  live  a
         relatively normal life without undue hardship."

         I do not  understand  there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
         approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of  his
         opinion. Very little, apart from the conditions in the  country  to
         which the claimant has fled, is ruled out.

         21.      We  are  also  all  agreed  that  the  test  for  internal
         relocation under the Refugee Convention is not to be equated either
         with a "well-founded fear of persecution" under the  Convention  or
         with a "real risk of ill-treatment" contrary to article  3  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights. By definition, if the claimant
         had a well-founded fear of persecution, not only in the place  from
         which he has fled, but also in the  place  to  which  he  might  be
         returned, there can be no  question  of  internal  relocation.  The
         question pre-supposes that there is some place within  his  country
         of  origin  to  which  he  could  be  returned  without   fear   of
         persecution. It asks whether, in all the circumstances, it would be
         unduly harsh to expect him to go there.  If  it  is  reasonable  to
         expect him to go there, then he can no longer claim to  be  outside
         his  country  of  origin  because  of  his  well-founded  fear   of
         persecution. Mercifully,  the  test  accepts  that  if  it  is  not
         reasonable to expect him to go there, then  his  continued  absence
         from his country of origin remains due to his well-founded fear  of
         persecution.

         22.       Further,  although  the  test  of  reasonableness  is   a
         stringent one - whether it would be "unduly harsh"  to  expect  the
         claimant to return - it is not to be equated with a real risk  that
         the claimant would be subjected to inhuman or  degrading  treatment
         or punishment so serious as to  meet  the  high  threshold  set  by
         article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  As  Lord
         Bingham points out, this is not what was meant by the references to
         article 3 in Januzi, including what  was  said  by  my  noble  and
         learned friend, Lord Hope of Craighead, when he  referred  to  "the
         most basic of human rights that are universally recognised" at para
         54. Obviously, if there were a real  risk  of  such  ill-treatment,
         return would be precluded by article 3  itself  as  well  as  being
         unreasonable in Refugee Convention terms. But  internal  relocation
         is a different question."

18. It is clear from this assessment that  the  appellant's  case  must  be
    considered  holistically  with  specific  reference  to  his   personal
    circumstances including his past  persecution,  his  psychological  and
    health conditions, family and social situations and survival capacities
    in the context of conditions in Kabul.

19. In her report Dr Schuster considered  the  reasonableness  of  internal
    relocation to Kabul in the context of UNCHR guidelines.  She  concluded
    that there is every likelihood that, without social networks in  Kabul,
    the appellant would be in the same situation as IDPs in Kabul and  that
    his situation would therefore be worse than the general population.  In
    her opinion the appellant would be forced to live in certain  parts  of
    Kabul where he would be at greater risk from those who would  recognise
    him and those who would see him as contaminated by his time in the West
    or assume that time spent abroad would mean that he or his family would
    be able to pay a ransom. In her opinion neither the  Afghan  government
    forces nor  the  international  forces  are  in  a  position  to  offer
    protection to him.

20. According to the letter dated 28 May 2014 from the  appellant's  social
    worker the appellant is a vulnerable person  who  continues  to  suffer
    emotionally from his past experiences in Afghanistan.  He  is  said  to
    have suffered difficulties as a result of  losing  his  application  to
    care for his young daughter, who was then adopted.

21. In his report from May 2008 Dr Alec Frank concluded that the  appellant
    had a degree of Post Traumatic stress but did not  have  a  major  Post
    Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (PTSD).  He  said  that  the   appellant's
    psychological health is not robust and  concluded  that  the  appellant
    suffers an adjustment reaction to a new community  and  country  and  a
    bereavement reaction to the traumatic murders of his  parents  and  the
    loss of contact with all of  his  home  life  as  well  as  a  variable
    depression and some symptoms of post traumatic stress.

22. In his email dated 11 December 2014 Hanno Koppel,  a  psychotherapeutic
    counsellor, who said that the appellant attended three appointments and
    found it very difficult to talk about his experiences  in  Afghanistan.
    He said that the appellant had recently arranged to see the  counsellor
    again and that he was hopeful that therapy could begin. In his  opinion
    returning someone with PTSD to  the  environment  in  which  they  were
    traumatised is likely to have a very serious  effect  on  their  mental
    health.

23. In her report of 15 August 2014 Dr Susannah Fairweather noted that  the
    appellant said that he does not speak Pashtu very  well  and  that  the
    interpreter corroborated this saying that the appellant has lost 30-40%
    of his Pashtu vocabulary. She described the appellant's history of self-
    harm and said that he reported a long history of  suicidal  ideas.  She
    described him as having a number of episodes of dissociation during the
    interview which  she  described  as  a  psychological  defence  against
    overwhelming  emotional  states  that  a  person  may  experience.  She
    concluded that the  appellant  presents  with  'complex  mental  health
    difficulties related to the chronic trauma and multiple losses of close
    family members in traumatic circumstances he described'. She  concluded
    that he meets the diagnostic  criteria  for  the  psychiatric  disorder
    F32.1 Moderate  depressive  episode,  International  Classification  of
    Diseases - 10 (ICD-10), on the basis of a number of symptoms  including
    ideas or acts of self-harm. She concluded that he also presents with co-
    morbid or possibly primary post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms. She
    went on to conclude that the appellant meets  the  diagnostic  criteria
    for PTSD arising from numerous episodes of  trauma  (the  loss  of  his
    parents, separation from his  brother  and  loss  of  his  daughter  to
    adoption) which meant that he presents with complex trauma or a chronic
    traumatised state. She said that his difficulties will mean  that  when
    he is faced with stressful situations 'he is more vulnerable that (sic)
    other young  people  and  more  likely  to  find  maladaptive  ways  of
    managing'. In her opinion a return to Afghanistan is unlikely to  allow
    for recovery. She said that  in  her  opinion  the  appellant's  mental
    health is likely to deteriorate significantly if he were to be  removed
    to Afghanistan. She believes that he will be particularly  at  risk  of
    suicide if he cannot remain in the UK due to his fear of  the  loss  of
    his current context of safety and the support he currently has and  the
    loss of the potential for future contact  with  his  daughter  and  his
    belief that his life will be at risk  in  Afghanistan  because  of  his
    family history. Dr Fairweather believes  that  the  appellant's  mental
    health would also  deteriorate  with  it  likely  that  his  depressive
    disorder would become severe requiring urgent psychiatric treatment for
    his physical and mental health  to  be  maintained.  In  her  view  the
    appellant's PTSD symptoms are likely to escalate too  and  that  he  is
    vulnerable  to  self-harm  and   act   impulsively   when   emotionally
    overwhelmed. In Dr Fairweather's  opinion  the  appellant's  risk  will
    escalate significantly throughout the removal process and in  her  view
    it is 'very likely' that he would act on his  suicidal  thoughts  given
    his lack of coping strategies and impulsivity. She also  expressed  the
    opinion that his suicide risk would  remain  high  in  Afghanistan  and
    would be a chronic risk not limited to the initial phase of return. She
    said that  it  is  likely  that  the  appellant  would  be  in  such  a
    deteriorated state, which would require psychiatric treatment, however,
    'he would not be able to access the services, as his state  would  mean
    that he could not look after himself enough to present at a clinic' and
    he is unlikely to have the motivation to access services and  would  be
    unable to proactively self-care by presenting to appropriate  services.
    According to the psychiatrist, if the appellant is in such a  state  he
    is not likely to have the ability to meet his other basic needs such as
    finding a safe and stable home, obtaining education and regular income.
    She  believes  that  he  would  then  be  particularly  vulnerable   to
    exploitation.

24. The parties submitted a number of cases to support their positions.  KH
    can be distinguished from the present case as it concerns an  appellant
    who was not found to be credible in relation to his  asylum  claim  and
    the medical issues he raised, which are  similar  to  the  appellant's,
    were therefore considered within the context of Articles 3 and 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights which, as highlighted  by  Baroness
    Hale above, is a different test. The Court in KH  said  'The  truth  is
    that the presence of mental illness among failed asylum seekers  cannot
    really be regarded as exceptional' [33]. However the appellant in  this
    case is not a failed asylum seeker as his account has been accepted.

25. In the case  of  AK,  where  again  the  appellant's  account  of  past
    persecution was found not  to  be  credible,  the  Tribunal  considered
    return to Kabul in the  context  of  Article  15  (c)  of  the  Refugee
    Qualification Directive. The Tribunal made  the  following  remarks  in
    relation to internal relocation in Kabul (in the context of  subsidiary
    protection);

         "243.    As regards Kabul  city,  we  have  already  discussed  the
         situation in that city and we cannot see that for the  purposes  of
         deciding  either  refugee  eligibility  or  subsidiary   protection
         eligibility (and we are only  formally  tasked  with  deciding  the
         latter) that conditions in  that  city  make  relocation  there in
         general unreasonable, whether considered under  Article  15(c)  or
         under 15(b) or 15(a). We emphasise the words "in  general"  because
         it is plain from Article  8  (2)  and  our  domestic  case  law  on
         internal relocation (see AH (Sudan) in particular) that  in  every
         case there needs to be an inquiry into the  applicant's  individual
         circumstances; and what those circumstances  are  will  very  often
         depend  on  the  nature  of  specific  findings  made   about   the
         credibility of an appellant in respect of such matters  as  whether
         they have family ties in Kabul. But here our  premise  concerns  an
         appellant with no specific risk characteristics and  someone  found
         to have an uncle in Kabul: see above paras 3,5,154, 186 and  below,
         paras 250-254). To summarise our conclusion, whilst when  assessing
         a claim in which the respondent asserts that Kabul city would be  a
         viable internal relocation alternative, it  is  necessary  to  take
         into account (both in assessing "safety" and  reasonableness")  not
         only the level of violence in that city but also  the  difficulties
         experienced by that city's poor  and  also  the  many  IDPs  living
         there, these considerations will not  in  general  make  return  to
         Kabul unsafe or unreasonable, although  it  will  still  always  be
         necessary to examine an applicant's individual circumstances."

26. In considering the appellant's individual  circumstances  I  take  into
    account the fact that the appellant has no  family  in  Afghanistan.  I
    take into account the appellant's family background. Although it is not
    clear who targeted his brother and  father  it  is  accepted  that  his
    father was an intelligence officer and therefore  a  likely  target  of
    opposition forces and his brother worked for an NGO in the  context  of
    which he was kidnapped. The appellant encountered difficulties in Nasir
    Bagh refugee camp because of his family  background.  Dr  Shuster  said
    that it is extremely difficult to remain anonymous in  Kabul  [58].  In
    light of all of this evidence I accept that, in the absence  of  family
    support, it is possible that the appellant will be identified in  Kabul
    and his family background may place him at some risk there.

27. I attach significant weight to Dr Fairweather's report. Contrary to  Mr
    Tufan's submission Dr Fairweather does confirm that the appellant meets
    the diagnostic criteria for PTSD at paragraph 6.2.5 on the basis of the
    several episodes of trauma he suffered. Dr Fairweather gave a  detailed
    assessment of the  likely  impact  upon  the  appellant  of  return  to
    Afghanistan. A particular risk is that of deterioration of  his  mental
    health accompanied by the impact of his lack of coping strategies which
    would mean that  it  is  unlikely  that  he  will  be  able  to  access
    psychiatric treatment and support services.  She  also  identifies  the
    high suicide risk during the removal process and  the  chronic  ongoing
    risk of suicide upon and following his  return  to  Afghanistan.  I  am
    satisfied that Dr Fairweather's assessment  is  detailed  and  reasoned
    based on the appellant's history.

28. I have considered  the  appellant's  individual  circumstances  in  the
    context of the situation in Kabul and the likely  severe  deterioration
    in his mental health, his likely inability to  access  psychiatric  and
    health care services along with the lack of family support and the risk
    of being identified lead me to conclude that it would be  unduly  harsh
    and would not be reasonable to expect  the  appellant  to  relocate  to
    Kabul.

Conclusion:

I remake the decision in this appeal by allowing it on asylum grounds.


Signed      Date: 20 October 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 20 October 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

