

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA037802015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th May 2016                           |On 26th May 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                    [B B]
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Burrett, counsel, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent: Mr C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal a decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal on asylum grounds.


   2. The appellant, a Pakistani national, claimed asylum on the grounds, in
      essence that she was a Christian convert and  that  she  would  be  at
      serious risk of being persecuted if removed to  Pakistan.  Her  appeal
      was dismissed on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
      grounds in a decision promulgated on 9th September  2015  following  a
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 10th August 2015.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds that it  was  arguable
      that in the light of the finding that there had been  threats  against
      the appellant, the enforced clandestine nature of her family  members'
      Christianity and the guidance in AK and SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan
      CG [2014] UKUT 00569 (IAC), the judge had erred in law  in  dismissing
      the appeal. The appellant had also sought permission  on  the  grounds
      that the FIR was wrongly rejected through reliance  upon  an  unsigned
      DVR produced at the hearing, given  the  overall  credibility  of  the
      appellant's claim; that there had been a conflation of conversion with
      forced marriage and a failure to consider the issue  of  the  children
      being considered as Christians.

        Error of law

   4. The respondent produced an unsigned DVR at  the  commencement  of  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  The  appellant  did  not  request   an
      adjournment but submitted that little or no weight should be  attached
      to it. The judge records that although troubled by  the  DVR:  it  was
      produced very late and postdates the respondent's reasons for  refusal
      of asylum letter, he concluded overall that he could attach weight  to
      it.


   5. Before me Mr Burrett submitted that it was difficult to understand why
      the FIR had been rejected on  the  basis  of  the  DVR:  the  DVR  was
      unsigned, the information apparently given to the police officer about
      the FIR was incorrect (an incorrect date was given when  matched  with
      the actual reference number),  the  DVR  was  produced  late  with  no
      reasonable explanation. There had been no consideration by  the  judge
      of the requirement to consider the document  in  the  context  of  the
      evidence as a whole and the appellant had been found to have  given  a
      generally credible account. The  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
      document in line with the Tanveer Ahmed principles.

   6. Nonetheless, Mr Burnett submitted that given the findings of the First-
      tier Tribunal judge overall, the finding in relation to  the  DVR  was
      not substantially significant. The findings were such that the  appeal
      should have been allowed in any event.

   7. He pointed to the following findings:

    . The appellant was threatened on 11th November 2007 after she  attended
      a local church;
    . She was threatened in December 2007;
    . She was threatened in Dubai in August 2013;
    . The appellant's mother is a Christian; her father is Muslim but he did
      not force her mother to convert;
    . The appellant was brought up as a Christian;
    . The appellant was baptised aged 11;
    .  The appellant is married to a Muslim who knows she is a Christian and
      agreed to keep this secret;
    . the appellant  and  her  siblings  were  brought  up  in  Pakistan  as
      Christians but were considered to be Muslims;  their  passports  state
      their religion is Islam;
    . The  appellant's  eldest  daughter's  birth  certificate  records  her
      religion as Islam;
    . The children did not attend church in Pakistan
    . The appellant's father's family and Pakistani society  generally  will
      consider the appellant as a Christian convert;
    . The appellant has never claimed to broadcast her faith or proselytise.
    . The  evidence  of  the  blasphemy  charge  is  unsatisfactory  and  is
      rejected.
    . Any threat to the appellant is localised and she and  her  family  can
      reasonably be expected to relocate to another part of Pakistan.


   8. On the basis of those findings - none of which  were  the  subject  of
      challenge by the respondent- the judge concluded that here was no real
      risk of her being persecuted because of her Christian faith.


   9. The respondent, in her Rule 24 response and orally submitted that  the
      view taken by the judge on the DVR was open to  him  on  the  evidence
      before him, that there  were  some  3  million  Christians  living  in
      Pakistan and that generally internal relocation was a viable option if
      a Christian faces difficulties in their local area; that as  a  family
      they were considered to be  Muslims;  they  had  been  brought  up  as
      Muslims and would be able to live elsewhere. These submissions do not,
      unfortunately, engage with the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      that the appellant would be perceived as a Christian Convert and  that
      there  had  been  threats  levelled  against  her   because   of   her
      Christianity not only in Pakistan but also in Dubai where  the  family
      had gone to avoid the earlier threats.

  10. Both representatives referred me to the COI Pakistan:  Christians  and
      Christian converts. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the
      Home Office guidance was set out in the COI dated February 2015. I was
      not given a copy of that guidance but both representatives agreed that
      although the guidance was re-issued in May 2016 the relevant  guidance
      remained the same, albeit with different paragraph numbering.

  11. The May 2016 guidance reads as follows, in so far as is relevant:

             2.3  Assessment of risk:  Christian converts


             2.3.1     The situation is far more difficult for a person who
             is known to have converted from Islam  to  Christianity,  than
             for a person who was born a Christian. However it is rare,  in
             Pakistan, for a person to convert to Christianity,  especially
             openly. It is likely that the fact of  a  person's  conversion
             will be  well  known  within  the  community,  with  potential
             repercussions.
             2.3.2    ...... people who are  known  to  have  converted  to
             Christianity suffer acts of violence, intimidation and serious
             discrimination from non-State actors, which can in  individual
             cases amount  to  persecution.  Such  treatment  is  prevalent
             throughout Pakistan.
             ....
             2.5.2     As such, Christian converts would not  generally  be
             able to seek and obtain effective protection  from  the  state
             against acts perpetrated against them by non-state actors.
             .....
             2.7.1      Where  a  persons   fear   is   of   ill-treatment/
             persecution at the hands of the state or non-state  actors  on
             the basis that they are a Christian convert, they will not  be
             able to relocate to escape that risk.
             2.7.2     Given that ill-treatment towards Christian  converts
             is  prevalent  throughout  Pakistan,  internal  relocation  to
             escape such treatment is  unlikely  to  be  a  viable  option,
             particularly where the person is known to  have  converted  to
             Christianity.
             .....
             3.1.2     In general, Christians are able  to  practice  their
             faith, attend church, participate in religious activities  and
             have their own schools and hospitals. Although Christians,  as
             with other faiths, may be at risk  of  blasphemy  allegations,
             this in itself is not generally enough to  make  out  a  claim
             under the Refugee Convention unless there is evidence that the
             charge is pursued.
             3.1.3     Some Christians in Pakistan face discrimination  and
             attacks targeted against them by non-state  actors  and  there
             are reports of a general failure by the police to investigate,
             arrest, or prosecute those  responsible  for  societal  abuses
             against religious minorities. Christian women may be  at  risk
             of forced conversion and marriage. There is also some evidence
             of measures taken by the  authorities  to  protect  Christians
             against incidents of violence.
             3.1.4     Internal relocation may be a viable option, where it
             would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to do
             so, unless a person faces an accusation of blasphemy which  is
             being seriously pursued.
             3.1.5     A person who fears persecution in Pakistan purely on
             the basis of their Christian faith is unlikely to qualify  for
             a grant of asylum or  humanitarian  protection  although  full
             account must be taken of the individual circumstances of  each
             case.
             3.1.6      People  who  are  known  to   have   converted   to
             Christianity are likely to face and be at real risk of attacks
             by  non-state  actors.  Effective  protection   and   internal
             relocation  will  generally  not   be   available.   Christian
             converts, depending on their particular circumstances, i.e. if
             they are known to have converted to Christianity,  are  likely
             to be at real risk of persecution on return.


    12. The headnote of AK and SK is referred to by the First-tier Tribunal
        judge but it seems that he has only considered this in the  context
        of the claimed blasphemy charge, which he has found  not  credible.
        The judge refers to the COI but only in the context of whether  the
        appellant would be considered a Muslim or a Christian. It is on the
        basis of that information and  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he
        concludes that  the  appellant  would  be  considered  a  Christian
        Convert. The judge has not gone on to consider the position of  the
        appellant as  a  Christian  convert  as  opposed  to  a  recognised
        Christian. Whether this was because his attention was not drawn  to
        the relevant passages in the COI is not apparent.


    13. It is however plain that the judge should have considered  this  in
        reaching his final conclusions and failed to do so.


    14. I am satisfied that there has been a material error of law  by  the
        judge  failing  to  take  adequate  notice  of  material  evidence,
        irrespective of the position on the DVR.


    15. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


        Remaking of the decision

    16. Ms Johnstone submitted that the appeal should be  remitted  to  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  for  full  re-hearing,  no  findings  to   be
        preserved.  She  submitted  that  there  was  a  conflict   between
        paragraphs 56 and 58 of the First-tier Tribunal decision:


                  56.  In any event,  I  am  satisfied  that,  although  the
                  appellant and her siblings were brought up in Pakistan  as
                  Christians, they were considered Muslims. In particular  I
                  note that the  original  Pakistani  passports  state  that
                  their religion is Islam.
                  57.    Further  I  note  that   the   appellant's   eldest
                  daughter's  birth  certificate  records  her  religion  as
                  Islam. In my view, if the views  of  the  British  Embassy
                  were accurate,  then  the  birth  certificate  would  have
                  recorded   the   appellant's   daughter's   religion    as
                  Christianity.
                  58.   On the totality of the  evidence  and  applying  the
                  lower  standard  of  proof,  I  am  satisfied   that   the
                  appellant's  father's   family   and   Pakistani   society
                  generally will consider her as a Christian convert.


    17. I do not consider there is a conflict between [56] and [58].  Apart
        from the fact that the respondent  has  not  disputed  any  of  the
        findings made by the judge, paragraph 56  states  matters  of  fact
        with which there is no dispute. The decision records  the  accepted
        evidence of threats received, attendance at church and that she  is
        a Christian. That the appellant's official documentation (and  that
        of her daughter) records her as being Muslim and yet she  practices
        her religion is plainly evidence that would be seen  as  indicative
        of conversion. The judge  took  the  whole  of  the  evidence  into
        account including the disputed DVR and FIR and reached the findings
        he reached that were plainly and uncontrovertibly open to him.


    18. I consider the issue of remittal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
        not fall within the Practice Direction. There is no requirement for
        findings of fact to be made - the findings of fact have  been  made
        and there was no evidence or reason to dislodge those findings.

    19. I informed the parties  that  I  would  re-make  the  decision.  Mr
        Burrett confirmed he did not intend to call  any  further  evidence
        and both parties made submissions.

    20. Ms Johnstone submitted  that  the  appellant  willingly  married  a
        Muslim and is still married to him, she was raised by  a  Christian
        mother who was not a convert. The appellant  and  her  husband  can
        continue to live together and seek employment. She  submitted  that
        any threat was localised in  any  event  and  they  could  relocate
        elsewhere in Pakistan. Although AK and SK considered the  issue  of
        evangelical Christians and forced conversion to Islam  it  was  not
        concerned with the issue  of  converts  to  Christianity  (see  for
        example [202]).


    21. Mr Burrett submitted that despite the judge having  erred,  in  his
        view, in his findings as regards the FIR and  the  DVR,  there  had
        been no challenge to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  judge
        by the respondent. The finding that the appellant  is  a  Christian
        convert is not disputed in  the  Rule  24  response.  Although  the
        respondent's case is that the conclusions drawn by the  judge  were
        open to him, Mr Burrett submitted that this is  not  a  case  about
        evidence but the consideration of undisputed findings  of  fact  in
        the context of the  background  material.  He  submitted  that  the
        background material was clear: Christian converts - which  is  what
        this appellant is - are at serious risk of being persecuted  for  a
        Convention  reason  and  internal  relocation  is   not   generally
        available. He submitted that not only is this  appellant  perceived
        to be a convert, she has given evidence which has been accepted  of
        threats being made not only in Pakistan but also in Dubai where the
        family had initially gone to seek safety.

    22. This appellant  is  not  evangelical  and  she  was  brought  up  a
        Christian  despite  the  norm  being  that  children  follow  their
        father's religion. Her documentation indicates that she is a Muslim
        when she is not. She has been found to be a person who is and  will
        be perceived to be a convert.

    23. The factual matrix  for  this  appellant  in  the  context  of  the
        background material before me and in particular  the  COI  is  such
        that, applying the appropriate burden and standard  of  roof,  this
        appellant is a risk of being persecuted for a Convention reasons if
        returned to Pakistan  and  internal  relocation  is  not  a  viable
        option. For the avoidance of doubt I do not overturn the finding of
        the First-tier Tribunal judge that the FIR could not be relied upon
        but, given the overall findings and the background  material,  this
        is of no relevance to the outcome of this appeal.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

     [pic]

                                    Date 23rd May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

