
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 11th June 2014                               |On 3rd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                            LORD JUSTICE MATTHEWS
                   SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                Mr Omar Malik
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The case has a complex history.  The Appeal process  was  initiated  in
    respect of two decisions of the respondent made on  11  February  2013.
    The  first  was  to   refuse,   under   the   Immigration   Rules,   an
    extension/variation of leave to remain, as a spouse and  on  Article  8
    family and private life grounds, and  the  second,  contingent  on  and
    concurrent with the first, was a removal  decision  under  S47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  Appellant  appealed
    both decisions to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  inter  alia  on  Asylum
    grounds. The First Tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal on  all  grounds.
    The Appellant appealed the dismissal to the Upper Tier.  At  the  Upper
    Tier his appeal in respect of the S47 decision  was  allowed  outright.
    The respondent has no t contested  that  Upper  Tribunal  decision.  In
    respect of the Immigration Rules decision Upper Tier Judge Kekic  found
    a material error  in  the  consideration  of  the  Asylum  ground,  and
    remitted the appeal to the First  Tier,  with  specific  directions  to
    resolve particular evidence.  On remittal Judge  Pedro  in  a  decision
    dated 19th December 2013  instead  decided  that  there  was  no  valid
    Appeal.

 2. Permission was granted on grounds  raising  concerns  about  the  Judge
    taking a jurisdictional point not advanced by the Respondent at such  a
    late stage and in the light of the Upper Tribunal express direction  to
    resolve the Asylum issue.

 3. The argument before us centred on the very narrow issue.

 4. We noted the Respondent's decision dated 11 February 2013 refers to  an
    "in-time" application to vary existing leave, made  in  December  2012,
    and in he context of a previous grant of leave to remain  as  a  spouse
    issued on 07 October 2010 and expiring on 07  January  2013.  As  such,
    both  of  the  representatives  were  in  agreement,  the  Respondent's
    decision was a refusal to vary extant leave which gave rise  to  an  in
    country right of appeal. The Respondent's decision was coupled  with  a
    S47 removal decision with a reference to a statutory extension of leave
    through out any appeal process.

 5. It is not clear on its face why the Respondent made the  decisions  she
    did. She had earlier decided to curtail the Appellant's leave and so it
    was open to her to make a decision on the basis that as she had already
    curtailed his leave   the decision was not a variation  decision  which
    resulted in the Appellant having no leave to remain. If she had done so
    the Appellant would have had no in country right of appeal.  There  was
    no evidence before the First tier tribunal or before us as to the  whys
    and wherefores of that decision outside  of  the  reasons  letter.  The
    representatives briefly speculated as to how it came  to  be:  Mr  Khan
    asserted that the Respondent must have considered fresh representations
    as reopening the original consideration, the reasons for refusal letter
    referring to the 2012 application.  If  that  is  right  then  the  new
    decision amounts to  a  re-making  of  the  original  decision  with  a
    consequent in country right  of  appeal.   Mr  Tarlow  thought  it  was
    entirely possible that the  Respondent  had  overlooked  that  she  had
    already curtailed leave.  However as  Mr  Khan  pointed  out,  and   Mr
    Tarlow accepted, if so, it was not simply a question  of  a  caseworker
    mistakenly advising someone of an in-country right of appeal where none
    lay, the notice was correct in terms of the   actual decision made, the
    possible error was the decision itself. We note that if that were to be
    correct then the Appellant  has  no in-country right of appeal  against
    the decision of the 11th February, but would  have had to   make  a  an
    application to submit a late  appeal against the earlier decision.

 6. As the case is there is no evidence as to why the Respondent  chose  to
    make this decision as opposed to one which would not give right  to  an
    in-country right of appeal.

 7. As Mr Tarlow accepted before us, although it may have been open to  the
    Respondent to make a different decision   the one in fact made was,  as
    per the notice, a refusal to vary leave with the result that  no  leave
    remained. We find that it follows that the Respondent  having  made  an
    immigration decision  within  S82  (1)  (2)  (d)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the Appellant is afforded an in-country
    right of appeal. Anything beyond that position in the context  of   why
    the Respondent  decided  as  she  did  or  what  other  decisions  were
    available to her amounts to speculation.

 8. We find the judge failed to appreciate that even if  the  Secretary  of
    State could have taken a different decision, and one  which would  have
    restricted the Appellant to an out of country appeal right, the  actual
    decision/s made did attract in-country appeal rights.

 9. We also find merit in the alternative ground that  even  if  the  point
    were not, as we have found it, speculative, the judge fell  into  error
    taking the jurisdictional point, not relied on by  the  Respondent,  so
    late in the Appeal process, and  exceeding the terms of  the  remittal.
    The appeal had been remitted for the particular purpose  of  correcting
    the earlier found error in the assessment of the Asylum ground, and the
    matter had been considered in some depth in the  Upper  Tribunal,  with
    clear directions made by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic.

10. It follows that we find that the First tier tribunal made an  error  of
    law requiring the decision to be set aside.  The matter is remitted  to
    the First Tier for the  asylum  ground  requires  being  determined  in
    accordance with the remittal direction previously given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

