
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03650/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Dictated at North Shields                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd August, 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                          Hossein Noori-Shorabolia

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Harrison, an assistant solicitor with Haliday
Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 11 September,  1985.
     He arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 March, 2013 and was arrested  by
    police after exiting a  vehicle  at  the  M60  northbound  services  in
    Staffordshire.  He claimed asylum on the same day.
2.   The Secretary of State  decided  on  28  March,  2013.  to  remove  the
    appellant as  an  illegal  entrant  and  the  appellant  appealed  this
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard at  Bradford
    on 6th June, 2013, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson.

3.   At paragraph 25 of the judge's determination  the  judge  records  what
    the appellant said during the  course  of  his  asylum  interview.   He
    claimed that he was a plasterer and a customer approached him to design
    a cross.  This was in January or February of this  year.   He  and  his
    worker were at the customer's house making a mould.   He  was  upstairs
    and his customer was downstairs.  The authorities raided the customer's
    house, they beat the appellant's co-worker who  was  shouting  for  the
    appellant.  The appellant claimed that the police came upstairs, but he
    escaped.

4.   The judge noted that during the course of  his  asylum  interview,  the
    appellant gave an entirely different account.  He  claimed  during  his
    asylum interview that he was on his way to work and from the top of the
    street he saw the security forces at a house belonging  to  a  customer
    and he saw his employee being arrested.  When it  was  put  to  him  at
    interview, the appellant denied that this had happened during the month
    of Bahman, January or February 2013.  He said that the version given in
    the screening interview was not correct.  During cross-examination, the
    appellant explained the inconsistency as being due  to  an  interpreter
    error.  The judge did not accept that.

5.   The judge found that the appellant is a  citizen  of  Iran.   He  found
    that the appellant may or may not be a plasterer by trade but  that  he
    was not commissioned to construct crosses for his customer Mr  Reza  as
    he had claimed.  At paragraph 32 the judge went on  to  find  that  the
    authorities did not arrest the appellant's employee or raid the  family
    home, seizing incriminating religious  material.   He  found  that  the
    appellant did not have a genuine interest in Christianity or a  genuine
    intention to convert and that the appellant's interest in  Christianity
    was a simple attempt to bolster his asylum claim.  The judge went on to
    find that the appellant had not told the truth in any  material  aspect
    of his claim and found that the appellant was an economic  migrant  who
    had come to the United Kingdom to have a better life.  At paragraph 32,
    subparagraph 8, the judge said "I find that  the  appellant  is  of  no
    interest to the Iranian authorities and would not be at risk of harm by
    returning to Iran as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  per  se".   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell  granted  permission  to  appeal  and
    said the second ground complained that the determination is  silent  as
    to the risk to a failed asylum seeker on return to Iran.  That  is  not
    in fact correct; the judge specifically  recorded  at  paragraph  32(8)
    that the appellant would not be at risk as a failed asylum  seeker  per
    se.  The judge did not, however, give any reason for  that  conclusion.
    The Record of Proceedings shows that a submission was made on the  risk
    on return, even if the appellant were found not to be  credible.   That
    argument has not been properly addressed.

7.   Addressing me today, Ms Harrison for the  appellant  pointed  out  that
    detailed evidence of risk on return  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  was
    highlighted in a skeleton argument in the appellant's bundle.  At  page
    19 of that skeleton argument, the Country of Origin Information  Report
    is quoted and it is suggested that Iranians are likely to face  charges
    for violations of Iranian law committed outside Iran, and  that  failed
    asylum seekers could be prosecuted for making up  accounts  of  alleged
    persecution.  She submitted that that evidence was more recent than the
    country guidance case of SB (risk on return -  illegal  exit)  Iran  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 53.  As a result the judge should have dealt with it,  but
    did not.

8.   Mr Dewison, who appeared on behalf of the  Home  Office,  relied  on  a
    Rule 24 response which suggested that the finding on risk on return  is
    supported by the country guidance, and having found that the  appellant
    was not a witness of truth it was implicit that any  error  that  there
    might be would not be material, because it could not affect the outcome
    of the appeal in any event.  He suggested that the authorities  clearly
    were found to have no interest in the appellant and that the judge must
    have had SB in mind when he made his findings.  The skeleton  argument,
    which in fact is nothing  less  than  a  written  submission  contained
    within the appellant's bundle, does  rely  on  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report, which does appear to contain evidence published  in
    a daily newspaper by the Iranian government on 17th February, 2011.  It
    does not appear in the Appendix of background material set out  by  the
    Tribunal in SB and should I believe therefore have been dealt  with  by
    the judge.

9.   In this respect I believe that the judge's determination  does  contain
    a material error of law.  I believe that it was an error on the part of
    the judge not to give reasons for finding that the appellant would  not
    be at risk as a failed asylum seeker and for not having dealt with  the
    evidence contained in the Country  of  Origin  Information  Report,  an
    extract of which was set out in the written  submissions  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf.

10.  I understand it is the practice of the appellant's  solicitors  not  to
    put before the judge full copies of the  reports  that  they  rely  on.
    That, it seems to me, is a dangerous practice.

11.  The judge had before him a written submission which, starting  at  page
    17, contained an extract from the Country of Origin Information Report.
     It refers to paragraph 32.27 of the  report,  as  quoting  an  Amnesty
    International report, where an article was written by a former  Supreme
    Court judge in Iran, published in a  daily  newspaper  by  the  Iranian
    government in February, 2011,  suggesting  that  existing  laws  enable
    Iran's  judiciary  to  bring  charges  against  Iranians  for   alleged
    violations of Iranian law committed whilst outside Iran.   The  article
    stated that failed asylum seekers could be  prosecuted  for  making  up
    accounts of alleged persecution.  I believe that the judge should  have
    dealt with this.  I preserve the judge's findings since  they  are  not
    challenged.

12.  At paragraph 33  of  SB  the  Tribunal  quote  from  the  2001  Amnesty
    International report.  They say:-

         "33. Mention should also be made of a  2001  Amnesty  International
             report entitled 'Iran: A legal system that  fails  to  protect
             freedom of expression and association', discussing  laws  used
             in Iran to silence dissent. Although now an old report, it  is
             still seen by Dr Kakhki and leading reports as reflecting  the
             current position. It states:


                  'At least nine laws, many of which are vague and  overlap,
                  deal with criticism,  insult  and  defamation  notably  of
                  state  officials;  and  at  least  one  deals   with   the
                  dissemination of "false information". The punishments  for
                  such charges include imprisonment and the  cruel,  inhuman
                  and degrading punishment of flogging ....


                  The Penal Code  addresses  the  issues  of  criticism  and
                  insult in the vaguely worded Articles 514,  608  and  609.
                  Article 514 singles out "insults" made  against  the  late
                  Ayatollah Ruhollah  Khomeini,  the  first  Leader  of  the
                  Islamic  Republic  of  Iran,  Article  608  provides   for
                  flogging and a fine as punishment for  "insulting  others,
                  such as using foul language or indecent words..."  Article
                  609 states  that  criticism  of  a  wide  range  of  state
                  officials in connection with carrying out their  work  can
                  be punished by a fine, 74 lashes or between three and  six
                  months' imprisonment for insult.  Once  again,  the  Penal
                  Code  provides  no  guidance  regarding  what   determines
                  "criticism" or "insult".


                  Article 697 of the Penal Code considers  defamation.    It
                  states that if an individual makes allegations of  an  act
                  that "can be considered an offence according to law",  but
                  cannot  prove  that  it  is  true,  that  person  will  be
                  sentenced to between one month and one year's imprisonment
                  or 74 lashes or a sentence combining the two. However,  if
                  the statements are proven, but the judge concludes that it
                  is a "propagation of obscenities", the person will also be
                  sentenced.


                  Article  698   concerns   the   dissemination   of   false
                  information or  rumours  with  the  intention  of  causing
                  anxiety or unease in the public's mind. This is punishable
                  by flogging or imprisonment.   In  October  2001,  Fatemeh
                  Govar'i [f], a  journalist  and  member  of  the  Dr  'Ali
                  Shariati Cultural Studies Centre (Daftar-e  Pajohesh-ha-ye
                  Farhangi-ye Doktor 'Ali Shari'ati), was sentenced  to  six
                  months' imprisonment and 50 lashes by a General  court  in
                  Qazvin, in central Iran, for charges including  "spreading
                  falsehood" in connection with an interview she gave to the
                  weekly journal, Velayat-e-Qazvin...'"


13.  The Tribunal did consider Article 697 of the Penal Code,  which  states
    that if an individual makes  allegations  of  an  act  which  could  be
    considered an offence according to law, then he commits an offence.

14.  The extract of the Country of Origin Information Report  which  appears
    at page 18 of the skeleton argument quotes Section 32.27 of the Country
    of Origin Information Report, which records the  Amnesty  International
    report.  The report suggests that the Iranian authorities are concerned
    to see whether or not appellants have been political activists in  Iran
    or abroad.  It also suggests that they will be detained for a few  days
    until the police are satisfied that they  have  not  been  involved  in
    political activity.  The article written by the  Supreme  Court  judge,
    which appeared in the newspaper on 17th  February,  2011,  referred  to
    Iran's existing laws, and I believe that this is a reference to Article
    697 which was considered by SB.  The  article  does  not  suggest  that
    there have been any new laws which might be used  to  prosecute  failed
    asylum seekers.  The judge is highlighting the situation under existing
    laws in Iran. The authorities may very well decide to prosecute  failed
    asylum  seekers  for  making  up  accounts  of  'alleged  persecution'.
    However, this appellant has never been persecuted in Iran.  His account
    was found to be false.  The judge had found that he had  not  told  the
    truth in any material aspect of his claim, and that he would not be  of
    any interest to the Iranian authorities.

15.  The skeleton argument  submitted  for  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal suggests that in the context of HJ the appellant will  not  be
    expected to lie about details of his asylum claim.   If  questioned  on
    return by the Iranian authorities about his asylum claim the  appellant
    will be able to say,  without  telling  any  untruths,  that  in  Great
    Britain he made up a false account of having converted to Christianity,
    but was not believed.  The Iranian authorities will have no  reason  at
    all to prosecute the appellant because he has not alleged that  he  was
    persecuted in Iran.

16.  The Tribunal in SB clearly did consider Article 697 of the  penal  code
    and considered the objective evidence following events in  2009.   They
    said at paragraph 51:

         "Given that the government has demonised  Britain,  we  would  have
         expected that if returnees from the UK generally were meeting  with
         difficulties, there would have been  significant  documentation  in
         background  sources.   If  the  diplomatic  editor  of  Kayhan   in
         June/July  was  investigating  claims  that  a  number  of  British
         Iranians have 'disappeared' since the elections in June,  it  seems
         to us significant that several months  later  nothing  further  has
         come to  light  to  indicate  that  those  investigations  produced
         anything of note.  The evidence afforded by the above  examples  is
         far more consistent with an interference that it  is  only  persons
         who are considered to have some political  profile  connected  with
         recent events who now face a greater risk  on  return.   For  these
         reasons we do not think it would be justifiable to describe  'being
         a returnee from the UK' or  some  such  category  even  as  a  risk
         factor."

17.  At paragraph 53 the Tribunal said:

         "53.     We  do  not  seek  in  this  determination  to  conduct  a
             comprehensive review of existing Tribunal country guidance  on
             Iran. However, we are satisfied from the ground we have had to
             traverse in order to deal with the appellant's case,  that  it
             is possible to say the following, by way of summary on  issues
             of risk on return:


             (i)               Events in Iran following the  12  June  2009
                   presidential elections have led to a government crackdown
                   on persons seen to be opposed to the  present  government
                   and  the  Iranian  judiciary   has   become   even   less
                   independent. Persons who are likely to  be  perceived  by
                   the authorities in Iran as being actively associated with
                    protests against the June 12 election results  may face
                   a real risk of persecution  or  ill  treatment,  although
                   much will depend on the particular circumstances.


             (ii)           Iranians  facing  enforced  return  do  not  in
                   general face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment.
                   That remains the case even if they exited Iran illegally.
                   Having exited illegally Iran is not  a  significant  risk
                   factor, although if it is the case that  a  person  would
                   face difficulties with the authorities for other reasons,
                   such a history could be a factor adding to the  level  of
                   difficulties he or she is likely to face.


             (iii)         Being a person who has  left  Iran  when  facing
                   court proceedings (other than ordinary civil proceedings)
                   is a risk  factor,  although  much  will  depend  on  the
                   particular facts relating to the nature of the offence(s)
                   involved and other circumstances. The more  the  offences
                   for which a person faces trial are likely to be viewed as
                   political, the greater the level of risk likely to  arise
                   as a result. Given the emphasis placed both by the expert
                   report from Dr Kakhki and the  April  2009  Danish  fact-
                   finding report's  sources on the degree of  risk  varying
                   according to the nature of the court  proceedings,  being
                   involved in ongoing court proceedings is  not  in  itself
                   something  that  will  automatically   result   in   ill-
                   treatment; rather it is properly to be  considered  as  a
                   risk factor to be taken into account along with others.


             (iv)     Being a person involved in court proceedings in  Iran
                   who has engaged in conduct likely to be seen as insulting
                   either to the judiciary or  the  justice  system  or  the
                   government or to Islam constitutes  another  risk  factor
                   indicating an increased level of risk of  persecution  or
                   ill treatment on return.


             (v)      Being accused of anti-Islamic conduct  likewise  also
                   constitutes a significant risk factor.


             (vi)     This case replaces AD (Risk-Illegal  Departure)  Iran
                   CG [2003] UKAIT 00107."

18.  There was no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  there  had  been  any
    prosecutions of failed asylum seekers for making up accounts of alleged
    persecution.

19.  I am satisfied on the evidence before me that  simply  having  made  up
    the accounts he gave during his screening interview and  the  different
    account he gave at his asylum interview, will not cause  the  appellant
    to be at any risk on return  for  alleged  violations  of  Iranian  law
    committed while outside Iran.  The appellant has not made up an account
    of alleged persecution.

Conclusion

20.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson made an error on a point  of  law  in
    his determination by failing to  give  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk as a failed asylum seeker on  return  to
    Iran.  I set aside that decision  and  substitute  it  with  mine.   My
    decision is that the appellant will not be at risk as a  failed  asylum
    seeker on return to  Iran  for  the  reasons  I  have  given.   I  have
    preserved the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  appeal  is
    dismissed.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
