
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03748/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th August 2015                  |On 11th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                      mr Mostafa Omar Ibrahim Albourini
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1995 claimed to be a Palestinian from
    Gaza.  The Appellant was represented  by  Mr  Brown  of  Counsel.   The
    Respondent was represented by Miss Johnstone a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in  June  2011  and
    claimed asylum the next month.  His asylum claim had  been  refused  by
    the Respondent  on  1st  March  2012  but  the  Appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 1st June 2012 given his  age.   The
    Appellant then made a fresh asylum claim in May 2012 which was  refused
    by the Respondent on 21st May 2014.  The Appellant  had  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ransley
    sitting at Manchester on 29th January 2015.  The judge had refused  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was lodged in  February  2015  and
    permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    on 4th March 2015.  Essentially permission to appeal was granted on one
    basis that being it was arguable that the judge had made  no  reference
    to  the  Appellant's  birth  certificate  and  that  failure  may  have
    constituted an arguable error of law.  Directions were issued directing
    the Upper Tribunal to first consider whether an error of law  had  been
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and  the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    accordance with those Directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Brown submitted that the birth certificate was central to the  place
    of birth of the Appellant and that findings needed to be  made  by  the
    judge in respect of that document.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. Miss  Johnstone  relied  upon  the  Respondent's  letter  opposing  the
    application to appeal and pointed to the findings made by the judge  in
    respect of other matters and also her reference to Tanveer  Ahmed.   It
    was also noted that what was said to be the original was only  produced
    at the hearing.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. There were a number of issues raised that needed to  be  considered  by
    the judge.  Firstly there was the disputed nationality of the Appellant
    largely focused on competing language analysis reports produced by  the
    Appellant and the Respondent.  Secondly there was  the  credibility  or
    otherwise of the Appellant's account of events allegedly  having  taken
    place in Gaza.  Thirdly there was an issue raised under Article  1D  of
    the Refugee Convention relating to whether or  not  the  Appellant  had
    received  protection  or  assistance  from  the   UNRWA.    Finally   a
    significant part of the Appellant's  case  was  based  on  his  claimed
    Article 8 rights because of a relationship formed whilst in the UK.

 8. A photocopy of the Appellant's alleged birth certificate together  with
    a translation appeared at pages 12 to 13 of the Appellant's bundle.  On
    the day of hearing only, the Appellant's representative presented  what
    was said to be an original birth  certificate.   On  the  face  of  the
    translation of the birth certificate within the Appellant's bundle that
    birth certificate had been produced in 2004 and accordingly would  have
    been in  theory  available  to  the  Appellant  from  that  date.   The
    Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2011.  The only reference given
    by the Appellant to a birth certificate at that point was that  it  was
    allegedly with his brother but he did not know the whereabouts  of  his
    brother.  In his witness  statement  produced  within  the  Appellant's
    bundle he simply said at paragraph 6 that he had his birth certificate.
     However at paragraphs 7 and 9 of that same witness  statement  he  had
    referred to both his brothers as being killed in Gaza and  provided  no
    other clue or evidence in respect of that birth certificate.

 9. The judge made clear and detailed  findings  upon  the  central  issue,
    whether or not the Appellant was from Gaza as claimed  and  whether  or
    not events that he claimed had taken place within  Gaza  were  true  or
    not.  The judge maintained a typed  Record  of  Proceedings  consistent
    with  the  summary  and  matters  raised  within  the  decision.   That
    demonstrates that  both  representatives  dealt  exclusively  with  the
    competing views within  the  expert  language  reports  and  issues  of
    credibility in respect to the Appellant's account of events in Gaza and
    the issue of Article 1D of the Geneva Convention.

10. The judge gave clear  reasons  why  she  found  the  language  analysis
    produced  by  Sprakaab  to  be  preferable  to  that  produced  by  the
    Appellant's expert on language analysis, at paragraphs 27 to 42 of  her
    decision.  Indeed the judge had noted that the Appellant's  expert  had
    produced "a heavily qualified conclusion" (paragraph 41) and had found,
    as she was entitled to so do, that was material and that  for   reasons
    given the language analysis produced by the Sprakaab Reports  were  far
    more reliable in terms of conclusions reached.

11. Separate to the issue of  language  analysis  she  had  considered  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account at paragraphs  43  to  49.   She
    noted that even the Appellant's Counsel conceded that he had been vague
    and inconsistent in his evidence (paragraph 46).  She took the  trouble
    of considering the reasons  put  forward  by  Counsel  as  to  why  the
    Appellant may have been  vague  and  inconsistent  and  rejected  those
    suggestions for reasons given at paragraphs 46 and 47.

12. In respect of both central strands of evidence relating to the question
    of the Appellant's nationality and credibility, namely language and the
    internal credibility of his own account the judge had found  for  clear
    and proper reasons given very persuasive evidence to find  against  the
    Appellant.

13. In respect of the birth certificate  and  translation,  the  judge  had
    noted that that was within the Appellant's bundle and the original  was
    handed in at the hearing (paragraph 15).  She was clearly aware of  the
    existence of the birth  certificate.   That  document  played  no  part
    within the hearing other than being  referenced  in  Counsel's  closing
    submissions.

14. The judge had specifically stated at paragraph 13:

         "The position regarding documents is that it is for  the  Appellant
         to show that any document on which he seeks to rely is reliable.  I
         have to look at the documents as a whole and assess it in the light
         of the rest of the evidence before me (Tanveer Ahmed)".

15. That was a correct assertion of the law.  She did not thereafter  refer
    to the birth certificate within the decision.  It is difficult to  know
    what she could say of any value.  She  had  acknowledged  she  had  the
    documents.  She had made a clear assessment of credibility based on all
    the evidence before her,  documentary  and  oral,  including  competing
    expert reports.  She had  made  adverse  findings  based  on  the  main
    strands of evidence produced and argued within the hearing.   In  terms
    of the birth certificate the Appellant  had  produced  no  evidence  to
    support the veracity of that birth certificate.  His witness  statement
    gave no clue  as  to  the  circumstances  in  which  he  produced  that
    certificate, not unimportant given that in his interview record he  had
    asserted that that certificate had  been  held  by  his  brother  whose
    whereabouts were unknown but within his witness statement had  referred
    to his brother having  been  presumed  killed  in  Gaza.   The  alleged
    original was produced as late  as  the  day  of  hearing  and  was  not
    supported by any expert report to confirm its veracity or otherwise and
    there was no adjournment request in that  respect.   That  is  all  set
    against the background of the Appellant having been  in  the  UK  since
    2011 and there having been previous adjournments for the  obtaining  of
    other expert reports.  It is highly unlikely the judge had any specific
    expertise on Palestinian birth certificates even if it had been  deemed
    appropriate for her to use such expertise.  In  summary  the  Appellant
    had failed to show that that document was reliable when assessed in the
    round against the highly unreliable evidence as a whole  and  had  even
    failed to  produce  any  evidence  as  to  how  he  had  obtained  such
    certificate set against the earlier background referred to above.

16. Whilst the judge may have made a  comment  in  respect  of  that  birth
    certificate within her decision against all that  background  all  that
    the judge could have realistically said was that  either  in  assessing
    the evidence in the round she found that document  to  be  reliable  or
    unreliable.  The judge was clearly aware of the birth  certificate  and
    her decision is sufficiently careful and detailed that it  is  entirely
    clear that had she found that birth certificate  to  be  of  sufficient
    reliability to overcome the wholly unreliable evidence  emanating  from
    all other sources then that would have been said.  The absence of  such
    comment merely demonstrates that the judge  had  considered  the  birth
    certificate within the terms set out by  her  in  paragraph  3  of  the
    decision.  That is not only a proper inference but it is  in  light  of
    the evidence and the circumstances generally,  extremely  difficult  to
    reach any other inference or conclusion.

17. Whilst as a Counsel of perfection it may have been preferable  for  the
    judge to have made some passing comment the absence of  such  does  not
    disclose a material error of law in that it  could  not  be  said  when
    reading the decision as a whole, and in particular  paragraph  13,  the
    judge could possibly have arrived at any other conclusion.

18. For the sake of completeness the  judge  dealt  with  the  issue  under
    Article 1D of the Geneva Convention and assertions raised under Article
    8 of the ECHR in a proper manner  and  reached  conclusions  that  were
    entirely open to her on the evidence available.

Decision

19. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

20. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

