
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03811/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 1 December 2015                   |on 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     BL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T D Ruddy, of Jain Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kempton, promulgated  on  14  May  2015,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against refusal of recognition as  a  refugee  from  Afghanistan.   The
    judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  are  Sikhs  from
    Afghanistan, and that he and his family suffered persecution there, but
    found that the appeal failed because of the  option  of  relocation  to
    Kabul.

 2. Mr Ruddy referred to paragraph 37 of the determination, where the judge
    found that internal flight the appellant exercised previously "was to a
    cellar where he did not see the light of  day.   There  is  nothing  to
    suggest that he could do anything different if he went  to  Kabul.   If
    that is the best he could expect to do to save himself, it is not a way
    to live in the long term"; to paragraph 38, where she found that  there
    was "really no genuine prospect of protection within the community"  in
    Kabul; and to paragraph 40, where she found that  Sikhs  did  not  feel
    safe in Kabul and would feel even less secure if they had to move to  a
    new settlement out of the city.  Mr  Ruddy  said  that  these  findings
    appeared to foreshadow that the appeal would be allowed.   However,  at
    paragraph 42 the judge found that an expert report by  Dr  Ballard  was
    "not sufficiently robust" on internal relocation and that it  was  "not
    totally impossible to live in Kabul as a Sikh,  difficult  may  be  and
    sometimes with discrimination".  At paragraph  44  she  said  that  the
    "background evidence, taken as a whole, does not justify a finding that
    internal flight to Kabul is impossible."

 3. Mr Ruddy submitted that the judge applied the wrong test  for  internal
    relocation, and that the determination should  be  set  aside  and  the
    decision remade, applying  TG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)
    Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595.

 4. That case is headnoted as follows:

    Risk to followers of the Sikh and Hindu faiths in Afghanistan:

      i) Some members of the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in  Afghanistan
         continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots.

     ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan  do  not
         face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as to entitle
         them to a grant of international protection on the basis  of  their
         ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be  said  that
         the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by  the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities in general reaches the threshold of persecution.

    iii) A consideration of whether an individual member  of  the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities is at risk real of  persecution  upon  return  to
         Afghanistan is fact-sensitive.  All the relevant circumstances must
         be  considered  but  careful  attention  should  be  paid  to   the
         following:

          a.  women  are  particularly  vulnerable  in   the   absence   of
             appropriate protection from a male member of the family;

          b. likely financial circumstances and  ability  to  access  basic
             accommodation bearing in mind

                - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member  of  the
                  Sikh and Hindu communities

                - such individuals may face difficulties (including threats,
                  extortion, seizure  of  land  and  acts  of  violence)  in
                  retaining property  and  /  or  pursuing  their  remaining
                  traditional pursuit, that of a shopkeeper / trader

                - the traditional source of support  for  such  individuals,
                  the  Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to  provide  adequate
                  support;

          c.  the  level  of   religious   devotion   and   the   practical
             accessibility to a suitable  place  of  religious  worship  in
             light of declining numbers and the  evidence  that  some  have
             been subjected to harm and threats to  harm  whilst  accessing
             the Gurdwara;

          d. access to appropriate  education  for  children  in  light  of
             discrimination  against  Sikh  and  Hindu  children  and   the
             shortage of adequate education facilities for them.

     iv) Although it appears there is a willingness at governmental level to
         provide protection, it is not established on the evidence that at a
         local level the police are willing, even if able,  to  provide  the
         necessary    level    of    protection    required    in    Refugee
         Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to those members  of  the
         Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who  experience  serious   harm   or
         harassment amounting to persecution.

      v) Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of the  Sikh  or  Hindu
         communities  to  relocate  is  a  fact  sensitive  assessment.  The
         relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at  (iii)
         above.  Given their particular circumstances and declining  number,
         the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of  the  Sikh
         and Hindu communities must be carefully considered.  Those  without
         access to  an  independent  income  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.

    (vi)   This replaces the county guidance provided in  the  cases  of  K
         (Risk - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057 and SL  and
         Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus)  Afghanistan  CG  [2005]  UKAIT
         00137.

 5. The argument was that that the appellant falls within the last sentence
    of headnote (v).

 6. In a Rule 24 response dated 23 June 2015  the  respondent  accepts  the
    judge used too stringent a test at paragraph 42 and fell into error  of
    law.  However, the response argues that the determination  might  stand
    given the indications in  the  determination  of  "the  facilities  and
    assistance given to Sikhs in Kabul".   Mrs  Saddiq  (correctly,  in  my
    view) accepted that the decision had to be remade.  She maintained that
    there were inadequate findings on the financial aspect of the  case  to
    enable the appellant to succeed without a further hearing.  She pointed
    out that it was plain that he came from a  relatively  wealthy  family.
    His account was of part of an interest in  the  family  business  being
    realised to pay his ransom, and of difficulties  in  resisting  further
    demands.  He also spoke of having to realise remaining family assets in
    order to flee the country.  However, it had  not  been  fully  explored
    whether there remain assets in Afghanistan  which  might  amount  to  a
    sufficient support mechanism and access to an independent income.

 7. I observed that the appellant and his wife are dependent on NASS in the
    UK.  That involves a declaration that they are destitute.   Mrs  Saddiq
    submitted (also correctly, in my view) that receipt  of  NASS  was  not
    conclusive.  She said that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for further decision by another judge.

 8. Mr Ruddy in reply said that the evidence and findings in the First-tier
    Tribunal were sufficient for a decision to be substituted in favour  of
    the appellant.  Alternatively, the matter could be resolved by  further
    evidence being taken in the Upper Tribunal, or by remit to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  If that latter course were to be  adopted,  he  had  no
    difficulty with the case being remitted to the same judge for a further
    decision based on the correct criteria for internal relocation  and  on
    applying TG and Others.  He accepted that  financial  matters  had  not
    been explored at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  in  such  full
    detail as  they  might  have  been  in  light  of  the  issues  as  now
    identified.

 9. I reserved my determination.

10. There was a basis for Mrs Saddiq's final argument about the remaking of
    the decision.  The appellant's family had a  Muslim  partner  in  their
    business.  It was not examined how any remaining family interest in the
    property and business may stand.  However, the  gist  of  the  evidence
    from the appellant and his wife was clear.  The family was squeezed for
    everything it had, firstly to pay off the Taliban and secondly  to  pay
    for their flight from  Afghanistan.   If  there  remain  realisable  or
    income-producing assets in Afghanistan, then of  course  the  appellant
    and his wife should not have accessed support in the UK on the basis of
    destitution; but it appears to me exceedingly unlikely that any further
    exploration of the evidence might flush out a finding  that  there  are
    such assets in  Afghanistan  to  provide  a  support  mechanism  or  an
    independent income. There is no point in  extending  procedure  further
    when the outcome is inevitable.

11. The test for internal relocation is  not  whether  it  is  "impossible"
    (paragraph  44)  or  "totally  impossible"  (paragraph  42)   to   live
    elsewhere.  It is whether it is unreasonable or unduly harsh to  expect
    the appellant to relocate, comparing the home area not with the country
    of asylum but with the proposed place of relocation.  The criteria  are
    so well known in this jurisdiction that it should not readily be  found
    that a very experienced judge has gone wrong  on  such  a  point.   The
    determination  does  use  other  expressions,  "difficult  may  be  and
    sometimes with  discrimination",  which  are  more  suggestive  of  the
    correct test, but that is not  enough  to  remove  the  difficulty.  As
    pointed  out  by  Mr  Ruddy  the  earlier  findings  (paragraph  37  in
    particular) suggest that the case would not  be  defeated  by  internal
    relocation.  That implies that in the end the judge has gone  wrong  by
    applying the wrong standard.   The  decision  must  be  set  aside  and
    remade.  For the reasons given above, I do not think that requires  any
    further procedure.  The evidence does not disclose  that  the  internal
    relocation option is excluded on the basis of  support  mechanisms  and
    independent income available to the appellant if he were to relocate to
    Kabul.  Applying country guidance, he is entitled to  protection.   The
    following decision is substituted: the appeal, as originally brought to
    the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed on Refugee Convention grounds.

12. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           3 December 2015
