
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03985/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 20 November 2015                    |             On 7 December 2015     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                        gayani niluka manikkaarachchi
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Tamil Welfare
                    Association
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant, a national of  Sri  Lanka,  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg (Judge Beg),  promulgated
    on 25 August 2015, in which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  That
    appeal was against the  Respondent's  decision  of  20  February  2015,
    seeking to remove the Appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

Judge Beg's decision

 2. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant's case was based  upon  a
    claim for international protection and Article 8.

 3. Judge Beg dealt with the protection claim and, for reasons set  out  in
    paragraphs 25-36 of her decision, found  the  Appellant  to  be  wholly
    incredible. The appeal was dismissed on this basis.

 4. In considering Article 8, Judge Beg concluded, for the same reasons  as
    set out in the Respondent's reasons letter, that  the  Appellant  could
    not satisfy the relevant Immigration Rules (paragraph 37). She went  on
    to consider the Article 8 claim outside of the Rules, directing herself
    to Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74, SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27, Huang [2007] UKHL 11, ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4,  and
    EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, amongst  other  authorities.  She
    also directed herself to section 55 of the BCI Act 2009. It  was  found
    that the Appellant had a genuine relationship with her husband,  a  Sri
    Lankan national with Discretionary leave in this country, and that  the
    couple had two children, born in 2012 and 2015.  Having  concluded  (at
    least implicitly) that there was family life and that the  Respondent's
    decision would interfere with that life, section 117B of the  2002  Act
    was applied to the  Appellant's  circumstances.  The  judge  took  into
    account the precarious nature of  the  Appellant's  status  during  the
    relevant time.  Judge  Beg  found  that  the  Appellant's  husband  and
    children could all go to  Sri  Lanka  together,  bearing  in  mind  the
    childrens' young ages and the husband's circumstances. It was said that
    the husband had a "choice" as to whether he would in fact travel to Sri
    Lanka (paragraphs 46 and 49). Thus, the appeal was dismissed on Article
    8 grounds.



The grounds of appeal

 5. It is right to say that the grounds of appeal focus  on  the  husband's
    position.  It  is  said  that  Judge  Beg  failed   to   consider   his
    circumstances adequately or at all. There is a secondary issue taken in
    respect of whether the Respondent should have included the Appellant as
    a dependent upon her husband's application  for  further  Discretionary
    Leave.

 6. There was (and is) no challenge  to  the  judge's  conclusions  on  the
    protection claim.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on 18
    September 2015.



The hearing before me

 8. Mr Gilbert relied on the grounds of appeal. In respect of  the  central
    issue of the husband, Mr Gilbert submitted that essentially, Judge  Beg
    had failed to consider the question of whether it was "reasonable"  for
    him to leave the United Kingdom. In respect of the  point  relating  to
    the Appellant as a dependent  on  the  husband's  application,  it  was
    submitted that the judge should have taken into account the  fact  that
    the Respondent had acted unfairly or irrationally in refusing to accept
    her in this capacity. In other words, the  judge  herself  should  have
    reached a conclusion, based upon public law grounds that the Respondent
    had acted unlawfully. In fact, the judge did not deal with  this  issue
    in her decision at all.

 9. Ms Fijiwala submitted in essence that Judge Beg had taken all  relevant
    matters into account. Use of the word "choice" clearly  amounted  to  a
    conclusion that the husband could reasonably be expected to  return  to
    Sri Lanka.



Decision on error of law

10. I find that there are no material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of
    Judge Beg.

11. The first thing to say is that the judge directed herself impeccably in
    law, both in respect of relevant case-law and statutory provisions. She
    was plainly fully aware of the appropriate legal framework within which
    she was conducting her assessment of the Article 8  claim  both  inside
    and outside of the Rules. This is relevant to the challenge before  me,
    as it is a strong indicator that  the  judge  applied  the  very  legal
    framework  to  which  she  had  directed  herself.  This  includes  the
    'reasonableness' question which can be found in  Huang,  amongst  other
    leading decisions.

12. Second, the judge clearly, and correctly, took account of the husband's
    own status in this  country,  and  that  of  the  Appellant,  when  the
    relationship began and thereafter (paragraph 44). The position of  both
    was precarious throughout the relevant period (the husband having  only
    Discretionary Leave, and the Appellant being  a  student  and  then  an
    overstayer). The judge considered the fact that the husband was never a
    refugee and would not face a risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka  (paragraph
    46). She had previously found that the  husband's  own  family  in  Sri
    Lanka would be in a position to provide support  on  return  (paragraph
    36). There is a clear finding that both children could readily adapt to
    life in Sri Lanka, and that a move for them would not  be  contrary  to
    their best interests (paragraph  48).  This  conclusion  has  not  been
    challenged by the Appellant at any stage.

13. Third, whilst it is correct that Judge Beg did not state in terms  that
    it would be "reasonable" for the husband to return to Sri Lanka, it  is
    clear to me that on a sensible reading of the decision as a whole,  she
    was in substance reaching this precise conclusion when stating, on  two
    separate occasions, that it was entirely a matter  of  "choice"  as  to
    whether he went or not. There is simply no error here at all.

14. Fourth, even if the judge had erred in not using the word "reasonable",
    on the unchallenged  findings  made  there  was  only  one  sustainable
    outcome; that it was reasonable for the husband to return to Sri Lanka.
    Thus, any error was clearly not material.

15. Fifth, the  point  made  in  the  grounds  about  the  Appellant's  own
    immigration history is without merit. It is right that her  record  was
    not "appalling". However, the only leave she ever had  was  a  student,
    and she had then overstayed. Judge Beg was fully conscious of this, and
    specifically applied section 117B(4) and (5), as she was bound to do.

16. Sixth, the issue concerning  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  treat  the
    Appellant  as  a  dependent  upon  her  husband's  Discretionary  Leave
    application is misconceived. It is clear from the  evidence  before  me
    that the Respondent applied her policy  on  dependents  in  this  case.
    There was a discretion as to whether or not any  particular  individual
    should be treated as a dependent. I  appreciate  that  judicial  review
    proceedings were contemplated by  the  Appellant  in  respect  of  this
    particular decision, and that legal aid was refused. It  is  also  true
    that Judge Beg does not expressly deal with the matter in her decision,
    although the point was made in the Appellant's skeleton argument before
    her.

17. However, in the first instance,  such  matters  are  for  the  judicial
    review jurisdiction, not that of statutory appeal. The refusal of legal
    aid could itself have been challenged.

18. More importantly for the purposes of the judge's decision, It  is  very
    to see how Judge Beg would have been entitled to make her  own  finding
    on an issue in respect of which she had no inherent jurisdiction.  Even
    if she had been, having regard to the terms of the policy in  question,
    the nature of public law grounds as they apply in judicial review,  and
    the evidence before the judge, there was no  realistic  prospect  of  a
    favourable conclusion being reached. Even if I was wrong about this,  I
    can see no conceivable way in which a conclusion  that  the  Respondent
    had acted irrationally in respect of the dependent issue would have, in
    itself, outweighed all the other factors set out in  the  decision  and
    the high threshold applicable to Article 8 cases  assessed  outside  of
    the Rules. Thus, at every stage of the analysis, the judge's failure to
    expressly address the point was not an error at all or  was  immaterial
    to the outcome of the appeal.

Anonymity

19. I make no direction. I note  that  none  was  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Decision
The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.
The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                       Date: 2 December 2015


H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date: 2 December 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

