
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03693/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2015                            |On 23rd April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     RL
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lane of Counsel, instructed by Coventry Law
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Cox promulgated following a hearing on 7th August 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female national of Albania born  18th  November  1991
    who claimed asylum on 17th September 2013.  The application was refused
    on 22nd May 2014, and a decision made to remove the Claimant  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. The appeal was heard by Judge Cox (the judge) on 7th August 2014.   The
    judge heard evidence from the Claimant and her partner.  There  was  no
    cross-examination.  The Secretary of State did not  dispute  the  facts
    that had caused the Claimant to claim asylum  but  contended  that  she
    could safely return to Albania as  there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection, and a reasonable option of internal relocation.

 5. The judge found otherwise and allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, and with reference  to  Article  3  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 6. This caused the Secretary of State to apply for  permission  to  appeal
    relying upon two grounds.  In summary it was contended firstly that the
    judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  material
    matters and reliance was placed upon MK [2013] UKUT  00641  (IAC).   It
    was contended that the judge had provided no reasons at all as  to  why
    the submissions of the Claimant's Counsel were accepted  and  preferred
    to the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   It  was
    contended that the judge's findings amounted to no  more  than  a  bare
    statement of acceptance of the Claimant's case, which according  to  MK
    did not satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

 7. Secondly it was contended that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account, or resolve conflicts of fact or opinion on  material  matters.
    It was submitted that the judge had failed to take into account any  of
    the submissions or arguments put forward by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    The judge had failed to take into account any of the issues in dispute,
    in relation to sufficiency of protection and internal flight.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Heynes  who  stated  in  the  concluding  paragraph  of  his  grant  of
    permission to appeal;

         "It is arguable that adopting the submissions  of  the  Appellant's
         representative without explanation as to the basis upon which  they
         must prevail over the stance taken by the Respondent amounts to  an
         error of law.  It is also arguable that  the  judge  did  not  give
         sufficient reasons for concluding that the Appellant, individually,
         did not have an internal flight option."

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Secretary  of  State  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  This contended, in summary, that the judge had not  simply
    adopted the submissions made on behalf of the Claimant,  but  had  made
    additional findings of his own.  The Respondent's  case  had  not  been
    ignored and the judge had set out a summary of  that  case,  and  taken
    into account all of the evidence and submissions made by both  parties.
    The Claimant relied upon Shizad [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)  in  contending
    that the judge had given adequate reasons for his findings.

10. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision should be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

11. Mr Smart relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  I was asked to note that in paragraph 16 of  his
    decision, the judge had not specified which paragraphs  of  AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) had been relied upon
    by  the  Presenting  Officer.   I  was  provided  with  the  Presenting
    Officer's notes, which recorded her submissions,  and  which  confirmed
    that she had relied upon paragraphs 61, 109, 120, 181, 173, and 187  of
    AM and BM.

12. In relation to paragraph 173 Mr Smart pointed out  the  conclusion  was
    that a woman on her own, returned to Albania, would not face  treatment
    contrary to her rights under Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

13. In relation to paragraph 181, this confirmed that the issue of risk was
    fact specific.

14. In relation to paragraph 187 it was accepted that Albania is a  country
    where there is a real fear that traffickers  might  be  able  to  trace
    those who have escaped them, but whether they would be motivated to  do
    so is another matter.

15. Mr Smart submitted that the judge had not analysed the points  referred
    to above and made findings upon  them.   With  reference  to  paragraph
    22(vi) of the First-tier Tribunal decision, the judge had set  out  one
    of the submissions made by Counsel for the  Claimant  and  referred  to
    paragraph 170 of AM and BM.  Mr Smart pointed out  that  paragraph  170
    while  accepting  that  victims  of  trafficking  are   psychologically
    vulnerable and  that  single  women  without  protection  may  well  be
    harassed, also stated that the profile of women who are  trafficked  is
    changing, and that kidnapping or abduction is now rare, and victims  of
    trafficking who had been previously duped were unlikely to be duped  in
    the same way again.

16. As the judge had not provided reasons why the arguments put forward  by
    the Secretary of State were not accepted, I was asked to conclude  that
    he had erred in law.

The Claimant's Submissions

17. Mr Lane relied upon the rule 24 response and his skeleton argument.  In
    summary I was asked to note that the Claimant's  factual  account  was
    accepted, and therefore the task of the judge was not the same  as  the
    task of the judge in MK, as in this case the  judge  had  to  assess  a
    country guidance decision on an accepted set of facts.

18. Mr Lane submitted that the judge had had  regard  to  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter issued by the Secretary of State, and had adequately set
    out the Secretary of State's case.  The judge had identified  that  the
    issues to be decided related to sufficiency of protection and  internal
    relocation.

19. Mr Lane pointed out that the submissions made on behalf of the Claimant
    before the First-tier Tribunal, were  considerably  more  comprehensive
    than the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State.   I  was
    asked to conclude that if the judge found  the  Claimant's  submissions
    persuasive he was entitled to adopt them without setting  them  out  as
    his own.  The judge had adopted the reasoning given on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant.

20. The judge dealt with sufficiency of protection at paragraphs 25 and  26
    of his decision, noting that the risk to the Claimant, from her family,
    and former traffickers, emanated from Tirana  where  the  Claimant  had
    lived, and that an additional element of risk was that the Claimant was
    going to have an illegitimate child.  Mr Lane submitted the  judge  had
    made it clear throughout his decision, that  he  was  aware  that  each
    appeal needed to  be  assessed  on  its  own  particular  facts.   With
    reference to paragraph 173 of AM and BM Mr Lane pointed  out  that  the
    judge had taken into account that the Claimant was not simply  claiming
    that she would be at risk on return to Albania because she is a  woman,
    as in addition,  it  was  accepted  that  she  had  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking, that she was at risk from her family, that the risk was in
    Tirana, and that she was due to have an illegitimate child.

21. Mr Lane placed reliance upon Shizad, pointing out that reasons need not
    be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense  having  regard  to
    the material accepted by the judge, and in this case there had been  no
    misdirection of law, and the relevant country guidance had  been  taken
    into account, and the conclusions made by  the  judge  were  reasonably
    open to him.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

23. The Claimant's account presented to the First-tier  Tribunal  had  been
    accepted by the Respondent.  The  task  of  the  judge  was  to  assess
    whether there was a reasonable option  of  internal  relocation,  or  a
    sufficiency of protection available to the Claimant.

24. I firstly consider the complaint that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account any  of  the  submissions  or  arguments  put  forward  by  the
    Secretary of State, and the contention in the second ground of  appeal,
    that the decision makes no reference to any of the submissions made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.

25. While it is true that a greater part of the decision  is  taken  up  by
    setting out the Claimant's account and submissions, I do not find  that
    the judge failed to make any reference  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    case, nor do I find that the judge failed to  take  into  account  that
    case.

26. The judge in paragraph 5 specifically confirmed that he had taken  into
    account the Secretary of State's bundle, and in  paragraphs  16-18  set
    out in summary the Secretary of State's  case.   At  paragraph  19  the
    judge confirmed  that  he  had  considered  all  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions before him.

27. It was noted that there was no cross-examination of the Claimant or her
    partner.  At paragraph 20 the judge correctly set out the issues in the
    appeal, those being sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation.



28. The judge observed that both parties relied on AM and BM, and  set  out
    the head note to that decision.  While it is true that  the  judge  did
    not, in paragraph 16, set out the paragraph numbers in AM and BM relied
    upon by the Presenting Officer, these are set  out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.  It is not  an  error  of  law  not  to  record  paragraph
    numbers, if it is clear that the submissions made have been considered,
    and in this case the submissions made on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State were considered.

29. The judge was aware that each case is fact specific, as referred to  in
    paragraph 181 of AM and BM, and made  specific  reference  to  this  in
    paragraph 21(e) and (f) of his decision, with further references  being
    made in paragraphs 25 and 26, which sets out paragraph 182  of  AM  and
    BM.  I have taken into account the principles in MK, relied upon by the
    Secretary of State, and Shizad relied upon by the  Claimant,  and  also
    taken into account the most recent decision  on  adequacy  of  reasons,
    Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC), the head note of which  I  set  out
    below;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

30. It is therefore essential that a party must know  why  the  appeal  has
    been won or lost.  In my view it is apparent from  reading  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision, why the  judge  found  that  the  Claimant  had
    discharged the burden of proof, and why there was no reasonable  option
    of internal relocation or sufficiency of protection available.

31. The judge analysed the country guidance decision, taking  into  account
    the accepted facts.  The judge, having considered  the  submissions  of
    both parties, decided to accept the submissions made on behalf  of  the
    Claimant, but did not fail to give  reasons  for  that  decision.   The
    submissions are comprehensively set out in the  decision,  as  are  the
    reasons for the submissions.  The judge has adopted those reasons,  and
    therefore I conclude that the judge has given adequate reasons for  his
    decision, and those reasons are contained in paragraphs 22 to 28 of the
    decision.  Paragraphs 22 to 24 relate to the submissions made on behalf
    of the Claimant, and paragraphs 25 to  28  are  findings  made  by  the
    judge, based upon his analysis of the  country  guidance  decision,  in
    addition to the submissions made by  Counsel  for  the  Claimant.   The
    judge in paragraph 25 records that it is not disputed that the Claimant
    would be at risk from her parents, and that the risks from the  parents
    and from the former traffickers are Tirana based, and in  paragraph  26
    sets out paragraph 182 of AM and BM which  relates  to  sufficiency  of
    protection, and acknowledges that  the  issue  is  fact  specific.   In
    relation to sufficiency of  protection,  the  judge  records  that  the
    Claimant is from a Muslim family, is  the  bearer  of  an  illegitimate
    child, and is at accepted risk from her family.

32. In relation  to  internal  relocation,  the  judge  sets  out  in  full
    paragraphs 183 and 187 of AM and BM, and I note that paragraph 187  was
    also relied upon by the Secretary of State.   Paragraph  187  concludes
    that the internal relocation is  unlikely  to  be  effective  for  most
    victims of trafficking who have a well-founded fear of  persecution  in
    their home area, although it is important to consider each case  on  an
    individual basis.

33. In my view, the grounds contained within the application for permission
    to appeal indicate a disagreement with the conclusions reached by Judge
    Cox, but they do not disclose a material error of law.  I conclude that
    the Secretary of State's arguments have not been disregarded, and  that
    adequate reasons for the findings made have been given.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision and the appeal of the Secretary of State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  continue
that order pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.






Signed                              Date 20th April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

