
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03912/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   F R M I
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wells, M & K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State in  relation  to  a
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Hollingworth   which   was
    promulgated on 9 December 2014.  The grounds  alleged  in  relation  to
    error of law deal exclusively with the absence of sufficient  reasoning
    pursuant to which an objective reader can be satisfied that  the  judge
    has made clear findings and reasoned conclusions.

2.   Mr Wells who responds to this appeal very fairly and properly  concedes
    that the grounds in this case are made out.

3.   The thrust of the judge's decision  appears  at  paragraph  28  of  the
    determination where the judge states:  "I  find  accordingly  that  the
    necessary degree of  risk  has  been  established".   What  is  plainly
    lacking from that decision are the various steps in his  reasoning  and
    thought process  leading  to  that  conclusion.   The  matter  in  this
    instance was rendered complicated by the fact that at least  two  other
    judges had looked at either this case or a related case concerning  the
    appellant's  husband  and  there  are  repeated   references   in   the
    determination to prior decisions of Judge Osborne and of Judge Juss.

4.   Bearing in mind the  inevitable  conclusion  that  this  case  will  be
    remitted for a rehearing there is no useful purpose in my relating  the
    factual background or what was in dispute in this appeal.

 5.  Suffice it to say the grounds having been made out  I  must  allow  the
    appeal and quash the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and
    order that the matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing de novo where all of these matters can be addressed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal Allowed

Matter remitted to First-tier Tribunal for redetermination


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     2 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
