
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03794/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On  6 January 2014                            |On 8 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                           PARAMALINGAM KIRITHARAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A. Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by A.J. Paterson
Solicitor
For the Respondent: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on  7  June  1970.  He
       arrived in the UK on 6 April 2009 and applied for asylum later  that
       month. His application was refused and a decision was made to remove
       him as an illegal entrant. His  appeal  against  the  decision  came
       before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jhirad  on  2  July  2013.  She
       dismissed the appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds
       but allowed it under Article 3 of the ECHR.

    2. The appellant sought permission to appeal in respect of the  adverse
       decisions on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection.  Permission  to
       appeal having been granted, the  matter  came  before  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Wilson sitting in the Upper Tribunal at  Field  House
       on 25 September 2013.

    3. He found that the First-tier judge had erred in law.  To  summarise,
       he found that the judge erred in refusing to  consider  the  Refugee
       Convention ground because of the appellant's mental health problems,
       and in declining to assess whether there was any correlation between
       his mental state and  his  assertions  as  to  the  cause  of  those
       problems. She also fell  into  error  by  reason  of  a  failure  to
       consider  the  interaction  between  the  Article   3   ground   and
       humanitarian protection.

    4. Consequent upon the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the
       appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR, the appellant was granted  leave
       to remain. Although the period of that leave is not clear to me, and
       was at least initially not clear to the appellant's solicitors  from
       the documentation sent by the Secretary of State, the error  of  law
       decision by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Wilson refers to the  period
       of leave as being in excess of 12 months.

    5.  Ordinarily,  pursuant  to  section  104(4A)  of  the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"),  this  would  mean
       that the appeal  was  to  be  treated  as  abandoned.  However,  the
       necessary statutory notice under s.104(4B) was given indicating  the
       appellant's wish to pursue the appeal.

   The basis of the appellant's claim

    6. In broad terms, the appellant's claim is  as  follows.  One  of  his
       brothers was killed by the Sri Lankan army  in  1994.  In  1997  the
       appellant was questioned in a 'round-up' by the Indian  Peacekeeping
       Force ("IPKF"), but was actually arrested by the IPKF about  a  week
       later because his name was confused  with  that  of  a  senior  LTTE
       member. During his detention he was badly beaten but later released.



    7. Occasionally the appellant's mother would give the  LTTE  money  and
       food from their farms. The farms were run by his  mother  after  his
       father's suicide, although his mother later remarried. The appellant
       and his brothers dug bunkers for the LTTE on a few occasions. During
       the course of the conflict he and his  family  were  displaced  more
       than once. In 1997 he was stopped at a checkpoint by  the  army  and
       assaulted. He was later arrested from his  home  following  an  LTTE
       attack,  detained  for  three  days  and  ill-treated  during   that
       detention. He was made to sign a false confession, photographed  and
       had his fingerprints taken.

    8. He was arrested again in June 1998 by the Sri Lankan  army.  He  was
       again photographed and  fingerprinted.  He  was  severely  tortured,
       including being sexually abused and raped. After five  days  he  was
       released, his mother having paid a bribe. Before being  released  he
       was made to sign a false confession.

    9. In 2006 when he was on his way home he saw two soldiers  carrying  a
       body. He was taken to an area away  from  the  road  and  questioned
       about whether  he  had  seen  the  soldiers  killing  the  man.  The
       appellant said that he had not and told them that he  was  a  farmer
       and where his farm was. He was hit on the  head  which  knocked  him
       unconscious, the blow resulting in his having hearing problems  ever
       since. He regained consciousness  to  find  himself  back  at  home,
       having been brought there by a local farmer. He found that he had  a
       large wound to his left thigh and numerous other injuries, including
       cigarette burns, all of which he believes he sustained whilst he was
       unconscious.

   10. It was later discovered that three men had been killed by  the  army
       and were lying dead at the place where the appellant had been  taken
       to off the road. Those who were killed were known to the appellant.

   11. In December 2006 the army came to the house the appellant  had  been
       staying at and questioned two farm labourers as to  the  appellant's
       whereabouts, beating them in the process. Many soldiers came to  the
       farm and searched the house and land,  apparently  for  weapons  and
       ammunition. The  soldiers  later  claimed  to  have  found  weapons,
       ammunition and communications equipment. The appellant was not there
       when the search was conducted. Subsequently the army were  searching
       for the appellant who was in hiding. Eventually,  arrangements  were
       made for him to leave the country.

   12. Because the appellant was, in effect, a witness to a murder  by  the
       army in 2006 and is implicated in the hiding of weapons on his  land
       he fears that he would be  at  risk  from  the  security  forces  on
       return. He believes that the authorities are still looking for  him.



   Submissions

   13. Mr Avery relied on the refusal letter in which some aspects  of  the
       appellant's account were accepted. However, if the army  had  wanted
       to kill him in 2006, at the time when he says he  was  beaten,  they
       had plenty of opportunity to have done so. There was no  reason  for
       them to have burned him with cigarettes whilst he  was  unconscious.
       Notwithstanding the medical evidence,  his  account  does  not  make
       sense and even the appellant is not really  sure  how  his  injuries
       occurred.

   14. His claim that there was an attempt to 'frame' him  in  relation  to
       the finding of weapons on his land was not credible. His account  of
       the numbers of soldiers that were involved was inconsistent.

   15. Although there had been no cross-examination of  the  appellant,  it
       was accepted that it had previously been found that it was difficult
       for him to give evidence.

   16. There was some difference in the medical reports as to how the burns
       were to  be  categorised  in  terms  of  causation,  and  again  the
       appellant was not able to say how  they  had  been  caused.  In  any
       event, the injuries or scars could have been caused in a ways  other
       than that described by the appellant.

   17. In addition, those events occurred a good few years  ago.  In  those
       circumstances he would not be someone of interest in  terms  of  the
       current country guidance. Notwithstanding that permission to  appeal
       had been granted in the case  of  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
       returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), that  decision  was
       still good law.

   18. Mr Mackenzie submitted that the point made in the European cases, to
       which I was referred, is that it is not enough for a  State  to  say
       that it does not believe that the  scars  were  caused  in  the  way
       described. The State has to put forward some positive case if  there
       is clear  prima  facie  evidence  of  torture.  Although  the  Upper
       Tribunal  is  not  bound  by  those  decisions,  where  there  is  a
       consistent line of reasoning they should be followed  in  the  sense
       that the Upper Tribunal should take account of them.

   19. The appellant personally has not dealt with the issues raised in the
       refusal letter but they are dealt  with  in  the  skeleton  argument
       submitted on his behalf. He does not know that the raid on his  farm
       and the finding of the weapons are linked  to  the  murders  by  the
       soldiers, but they followed quite closely. There is  no  reason  for
       him to exaggerate or invent such a detailed and complicated account.
       It would be unlikely for him to have claimed that he was unconscious
       when he was tortured if that had not happened.

   20. I was reminded of the factual basis of the appellant's claim. It was
       fortunate that the appellant was  found.  It  is  true  that  it  is
       difficult to know why the soldiers treated him as they  did  in  the
       first place but it was close to  the  road  and  there  were  people
       about. It was plausible that they would not have used a firearm  and
       shot him because that would be heard. Perhaps the soldiers were in a
       panic and thought that they had  killed  him,  or  maybe  they  were
       disturbed. All this however, is speculation. It was difficult to put
       one's mind in the place of people who had behaved in  the  way  they
       had, having just killed three people.

   21. It was accepted that it was not logical  to  torture  the  appellant
       with cigarettes when he was unconscious but that does not mean  that
       it did not happen. One has to rely on the evidence  that  there  is,
       and here there is medical evidence.

   22. It is true that Dr Lim is more unequivocal about the  cause  of  the
       injuries, but this is just a difference of emphasis between experts.
       Dr Lim is more qualified than Dr Botting and  the  reasons  for  his
       conclusions are clearer.

   23. The appellant is very likely to be on a wanted or  stop  list  which
       brings him within the fourth category of GJ. He  would  be  mentally
       unable to give an account to deflect suspicion.

   24. There was a detailed witness statement  from  the  appellant's  wife
       that was taken over the phone and the evidence of Professor Good and
       the media reports support his claim. There is therefore some support
       for the claim that there was a raid on a farm at that time, although
       it is true that the reports could be clearer.

   25. Despite having been told that the asylum interview would not go into
       detail, the refusal letter relies on details that were not given  by
       the appellant  in  the  interview,  which  is  grossly  unfair.  The
       appellant was clearly unwell at the time of the asylum interview. Mr
       Patterson's statement (the appellant's solicitor) says that it  took
       32 hours to compile the appellant's witness statement. Permission to
       appeal to the Court of Appeal has  been  given  in  GJ  and  it  was
       submitted that the decision in GJ was wrong.

My assessment

   26. It is plain that no adverse credibility findings, such as they  are,
       made by the First-tier judge can stand, given the error of law  that
       has been  established.  It  was  not  suggested  on  behalf  of  the
       respondent that any such findings can be preserved.

   27. In the error of law decision, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Wilson
       concluded that, on the basis of the  unchallenged  decision  of  the
       First-tier judge that the appellant's appeal under Article 3 of  the
       ECHR was to be allowed, he is entitled to  humanitarian  protection.
       In   relation   to   qualification   for    subsidiary    protection
       ("humanitarian protection" under the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as
       amended)), Article  15(b)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the
       Directive") provides that serious harm consists  of,  amongst  other
       things, "torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  of
       an applicant in the country of origin."

   28. As submitted on behalf of the  appellant,  it  was  decided  by  the
       European Court of Justice in Elgafaji Case  C-465/07,  that  Article
       15(b) of the Directive in essence corresponds to Article  3  of  the
       ECHR.

   29. However, because of Article 2 of the Directive and paragraph 339C of
       the Immigration  Rules  the  appellant  would  not  be  entitled  to
       humanitarian  protection  if  he  qualifies  as   a   refugee.   His
       entitlement to refugee status  is  essentially  the  issue  in  this
       appeal.

   30. Before undertaking an assessment of the facts, it is  convenient  to
       deal with an important argument advanced on behalf of the appellant.
       Summarising the point, it is submitted that  where  there  is  clear
       prima facie evidence of torture,  it  is  not  enough  for  a  State
       considering a claim to refugee status to say that the cause  of  the
       marks/scars/injuries indicating the case for torture, as advanced by
       an appellant, is not believed. It is not enough for the State to say
       that it is not known how those scars were  caused;  the  State  must
       provide some explanation. The appellant's skeleton argument at  [13]
       puts the matter in this way: the burden is on the Secretary of State
       to show that the appellant has not been tortured.

   31. Two cases are relied on, RC v Sweden (App. No. 41827/07, 9 March 10)
       and RJ v France (App. No. 10466/11, 19 September 2013) and  extracts
       from  those  decisions  are  quoted  in  the  appellant's   skeleton
       argument.

   32. I am not  satisfied  that  those  decisions  can  be  relied  on  as
       requiring the approach contended for on behalf of the appellant.  If
       that approach is to be adopted, it would undermine  the  established
       principle that  a  holistic  assessment  of  evidence  is  required.
       Further, the requirement for an appellant  to  establish  his  claim
       would similarly be undermined. In addition, in so far as RC v Sweden
       suggests or implies that the "appellate courts" in that  case  ought
       to have directed that a medical report be obtained, I do not see how
       the UK Immigration and Asylum Tribunals could be required to  direct
       that a report be obtained in these circumstances, or  to  commission
       one for itself. The Tribunal does not itself have evidence gathering
       powers and the resource implications of requiring the  Secretary  of
       State to obtain a report are potentially very  far  reaching,  aside
       from the observation I have already made about the burden of proof.

   33. In support of the appeal a  number  of  medical  reports  have  been
       provided. There is also a witness  statement  from  the  appellant's
       wife, an expert report from Professor Good, and newspaper  articles.
       I refer to these aspects of the evidence in  more  detail  below.  I
       bear in mind that  it  is  essential  not  to  compartmentalise  any
       aspects of the evidence but  to  undertake  a  holistic  assessment,
       bearing in mind  all  the  evidence.  Whilst  I  have  rejected  the
       submissions made in relation to the  significance  of  the  European
       cases in terms of the medical evidence, the medical evidence remains
       a significant feature of this appeal.

   34. Some  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account  are  accepted  by  the
       Secretary of State in the refusal letter.  At [49]  of  the  refusal
       letter there is a further summary of the appellant's  claim  to  the
       effect that he was arrested twice in 1997 by  the  Indian  IPKF  and
       detained and ill-treated on the second occasion, he and  his  family
       were displaced, and that in 1997 he was stopped and  beaten  by  the
       army and on a second occasion ill-treated and detained. The  refusal
       letter states that "These events  are  accepted"  because  of  their
       consistency with objective material.

   35. However, numerous credibility issues are raised in relation  to  the
       appellant's account, which to  some  extent  were  reflected  in  Mr
       Avery's submissions to me.

   36. The appellant underwent screening and asylum interviews. Some of the
       credibility issues relate to  answers  the  appellant  gave  in  the
       asylum interview. I note that at the start of the  asylum  interview
       the appellant said that he was mentally disturbed and he referred to
       the anti-depressant medication that he was taking.

   37. Prior to the asylum interview a detailed witness statement from  the
       appellant had been provided to the Secretary of State. It is dated 8
       December 2009 and consists of 32 typed pages. It is a statement that
       was taken by the appellant's  solicitor,  Mr  A.J.  Paterson,  whose
       witness statement in relation to the taking of the witness statement
       and other matters is dated 25 June 2013.

   38. On behalf of the appellant complaint is made about the Secretary  of
       State's reliance on inconsistency  between  the  appellant's  asylum
       interview and in particular his detailed witness statement. A number
       of points are made in relation to the Secretary of State's  approach
       in this regard. One of the  matters  raised  is  highlighted  in  Mr
       Paterson's witness statement. He states at [22],  in  summary,  that
       the appellant was told  by  the  interviewer  that  because  he  had
       provided a "very, very detailed [witness] statement"  there  was  no
       need to go into too much detail during the  interview.  Mr  Paterson
       has provided his manuscript notes of that interview (and indeed  the
       originals of those notes are in the appellant's bundle).

   39. That comment to the appellant during the interview is not  reflected
       in the Secretary  of  State's  record  of  interview.  I  make  that
       observation not as a criticism of the caseworker; it may not at  the
       time have seemed an important matter to be recorded. It is  also  to
       be noted that the interviewing caseworker was not  the  same  person
       who wrote the refusal  letter.  In  any  event,  I  accept  that  Mr
       Paterson's record of  what  transpired  at  the  interview  in  this
       respect is accurate.

   40. However, that is not to say that the respondent is not  entitled  to
       rely  on  matters  that  are  inconsistent  as  between  the  asylum
       interview  and  the  appellant's  account  elsewhere.  However,   in
       circumstances where the appellant was likely to have been given  the
       impression that he did not need to go into too much detail, I do not
       consider that  it  is  legitimate  for  him  to  be  criticised,  in
       credibility terms, for having failed to give  details  that  perhaps
       otherwise might have been expected. Putting the matter in a way that
       reflects the task I have to undertake, I am not satisfied  that  any
       adverse credibility issues arise because of any alleged or perceived
       failure on the part  of  the  appellant  to  give  a  more  detailed
       explanation of his account in interview than appears elsewhere,  for
       example in his initial witness statement.

   41. When considering what are said to be adverse  credibility  points  I
       bear in mind the evidence in  relation  to  the  appellant's  mental
       state. There is more to this point than the fact that the First-tier
       Tribunal Judge accepted that he suffers from adverse mental  health,
       and that his appeal was allowed on Article 3 grounds. Prior  to  his
       asylum interview a medical report dated 22 December 2009 by Dr Gunam
       Kanagaratnam was sent to  the  Home  Office.  As  has  already  been
       indicated, there was reference to his mental state at  the  time  of
       the asylum interview. Dr Kanagaratnam concluded that  the  appellant
       was suffering from complex PTSD and a major depressive disorder.

   42. In assessing the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  it  is
       important to bear in mind his  mental  state  at  the  time  of  his
       recounting of events, most particularly in the asylum interview.

   43. In relation to the credibility issues that are raised in the refusal
       letter, I do not consider it necessary to deal with each  and  every
       one of them although  I  have  considered  them  all.  I  have  also
       considered the very detailed response to the points raised,  in  the
       initial grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  the
       skeleton argument before me. Where I do not expressly  refer  to  an
       issue raised on behalf of the respondent it is because either  I  do
       not consider that there is merit in the point,  or  I  am  satisfied
       that the response on behalf of the  appellant  deals  satisfactorily
       with the matter.

   44. The appellant has not given oral evidence in the proceedings, either
       before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
       However, it was at least implicitly accepted by the First-tier judge
       that the appellant was not  fit  to  give  evidence  and  there  was
       medical evidence in support  of  that  position.  It  has  not  been
       suggested on behalf of the respondent that the medical evidence  did
       not support the suggestion that the appellant was not  fit  to  give
       evidence.

   45. Whilst the appellant's credibility could  not  be  said  to  damaged
       purely by reason of his having failed to give evidence, it does mean
       that there is no oral evidence from him to explain or  contradict  a
       particular credibility point, and his account  necessarily  has  not
       been tested in cross-examination.

   46. Having said that, some of  the  credibility  issues  raised  in  the
       refusal letter are in fact anticipated in  the  appellant's  witness
       statement. For example, in the refusal letter at  [53]  it  is  said
       that the appellant had not explained why, if the soldiers  that  had
       murdered the three men wanted to  prevent  the  appellant  revealing
       what they had done, they did  not  simply  shoot  him,  rather  than
       knocking him unconscious. However, in the witness  statement,  dated
       well before the refusal letter, the appellant stated at  [171]  that
       the soldiers injured him so badly perhaps intending to leave him for
       dead. At [172] he suggests that they would not have wanted to  shoot
       him in case of attracting attention, and taking  into  account  that
       the three men who had been killed were beaten to death  (although  I
       refer below to evidence which is inconsistent with this claim as  to
       the cause of their deaths).

   47.  The  refusal  letter  suggests  that  the  appellant's  account  is
       inconsistent in relation to his alleged rape during his detention in
       June 2008. His (main) witness statement refers to  one  incident  of
       rape yet in the psychiatric report of Dr Kanagaratnam it  refers  to
       his having been repeatedly raped.  The  witness  statement  is  said
       clearly to differentiate between the  sexual  assault  by  one  army
       officer and the rape by the second.

   48. The response to this in  the  grounds  of  appeal  starts  with  the
       contention that the appellant has  no  recollection  of  telling  Dr
       Kanagaratnam that he was raped more than once. This however, is  not
       evidence from the appellant on the issue. Other matters relied on in
       the grounds of appeal do not explain the inconsistency and I do  not
       regard the reliance on the dictionary definition of rape as helpful.
       Likewise, I do not consider that the skeleton  argument's  reference
       to the definition of  rape  in  the  Sexual  Offences  Act  2003  is
       helpful. The point made by  the  Secretary  of  State  is  that  the
       appellant made a distinction in his account, between sexual  assault
       and rape.  It does seem to me that to state in the grounds of appeal
       that this potentially adverse credibility point is  "feeble"  itself
       overstates the case for the appellant.

   49. I note what Professor Good says about this issue in  his  report  at
       [46]. At [29] he states that he reads Tamil. However,  with  respect
       to Professor Good, regardless of his otherwise undoubted  expertise,
       I am not satisfied that it is established that he  is  qualified  to
       give expert evidence in relation to the Tamil language and  the  use
       or otherwise of the word 'rape'.

   50. Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind the  evidence  in  the
       psychiatric report of the  difficulty  that  the  appellant  had  in
       providing an account of his "trauma-related experiences" because, in
       part, of his emotional distress.

   51. I do not consider that there is much merit in the matter  raised  in
       the refusal letter at [52] in relation to the appellant's account of
       the circumstances of his release from  detention  in  1998,  in  the
       light of the observations I have made about the asylum interview and
       what could have been expected of the appellant.

   52. I have already adverted to the point made in the refusal  letter  at
       [53] about why the appellant was not simply shot by the soldiers who
       are said to have already killed three other people. This is a matter
       that the appellant deals with, in so far as he can, in his first  or
       main witness statement. The response on behalf of the  appellant  in
       the grounds of appeal contains a good deal of  speculation  in  some
       respects, for example suggesting that  the  soldiers  may  have  had
       twinges of conscience and may not  have  wanted  to  kill  a  fourth
       person, or would have been too exhausted to beat  the  appellant  to
       death as they had done with the others.

   53. Having said  that,  I  do  consider  that  there  is  merit  in  the
       contention that the Secretary of State's point  overlooks  that  the
       appellant said in the interview that he found out that the  soldiers
       thought he was dead, and that they did inflict wounds  on  him  (the
       blow to the head, and the cut to his thigh which bled heavily) which
       may have been intended to kill him. In addition, I bear in mind that
       there  is  medical  evidence  which  supports  the  claim  that  the
       appellant was injured in the way that he describes.

   54. It is as well at this point to refer  to  an  inconsistency  in  the
       evidence in relation to the three men that the soldiers are said  to
       have killed. The appellant's case is that they were beaten to death.
       Information came from the man, Arul, who found  the  appellant  (see
       [172] of the main witness statement). The appellant relies on a news
       report from a newspaper called Valampurii dated  22  September  2006
       relating an incident in which three men are said to have been killed
       ( translated at page 229 of the  appellant's  bundle).  That  report
       does not state how  the  individuals  were  killed.  In  his  report
       Professor Good refers to the article from Valampurii but also states
       that he  has  located  a  further  report  from  Tamilnet  dated  22
       September 2006. In that report it refers to three men  with  gunshot
       injuries.

   55. I accept that news reports are not always  accurate,  and  that  the
       appellant was relying on what he was told by another as to the cause
       of death of the three men. Nevertheless, their cause of  death  (not
       having been shot) is a matter that he relies on. The news report  in
       Tamilnet is inconsistent with his account as to how they died.

   56. Mr Avery suggested that it makes no sense for the soldiers  to  have
       inflicted a number of cigarette burns, and other  injuries,  on  the
       appellant whilst he was unconscious. To some  extent  I  agree  with
       that suggestion. On the other hand, I consider that one  has  to  be
       cautious  in  trying  to  interpret  the  actions  of   an   abuser,
       particularly in the context of a country and  a  conflict  in  which
       gross human rights abuses are known to have occurred. The context of
       the appellant's account does not make this  aspect  of  his  account
       impossible to accept as has been suggested, given that the claim  is
       that soldiers beat three apparently innocent men to death.

   57. I do not consider that the  appellant's  credibility  is  undermined
       because of apparent inconsistency in terms of the number of soldiers
       that are said to have attended the farmhouse, ostensibly  to  search
       for weapons. The main point here,  it  seems  to  me,  is  that  the
       appellant was reporting what he had been told. The grounds of appeal
       suggest that the appellant had been given a different figure for the
       number of soldiers by his wife,  with  whom  he  had  re-established
       contact prior to the asylum interview. However, that does  not  take
       the place of evidence from the appellant on the issue, and  he  does
       not deal with the inconsistency in his  witness  statements.  Having
       said that I bear in mind the observations I  have  already  made  in
       relation to the appellant's mental state and the effect that is said
       to have had on his ability to give his account of events.

   58. The refusal letter at [62] expresses scepticism about the ability of
       three soldiers who were responsible for killing the  three  men,  to
       mobilise hundreds of soldiers to search  the  appellant's  farm  and
       farmland.  The appellant's  account  is  that  the  army  wanted  to
       silence him for what he witnessed. In his witness statement at [197]-
       [198], and [163],  he  makes  an  arguably  credible  case  for  the
       suggestion that the killing of the three men  was  ordered  by  more
       senior officers, thus explaining the presence of, or the ability  to
       mobilise, a large number of soldiers. In passing, I  note  that  the
       appellant explains why only a relatively small  number  of  soldiers
       were involved in the physical search of the  farmland,  they  having
       brought with them some sort of ploughing vehicle.

   59. It is said in the refusal letter that there is inconsistency in  the
       appellant's account in terms of whether the soldiers actually  found
       anything during the search of the  appellant's  farm.  In  his  main
       witness statement at [202] he said  that  as  far  as  he  knew  the
       soldiers did not find anything during their search because there was
       nothing to find. However, in the asylum interview at question 69  he
       said that they found  weapons,  communication  equipment,  guns  and
       "rounds".

   60. In fact, the appellant also said in answer to question 69 that there
       was nothing to find, before then  stating  what  was  shown  to  the
       workers. I also note that in  the  witness  statement  at  [205]  he
       stated that there was a story that appeared in a newspaper  (a  copy
       of a newspaper report is produced), which refers to the findings  of
       weapons and so forth. It seems to me that the real point that  could
       be made in favour of the respondent here  is  that  the  appellant's
       witness statement does not refer to the soldiers presenting  to  the
       workers what they  had  'found',  albeit  that  on  the  appellant's
       account there was nothing to find. The absence of that part  of  the
       narrative must be seen in the context of a witness statement that is
       extremely detailed.

   61. The various medical  reports  support  the  appellant's  account  to
       varying degrees. I have already  referred  to  the  report  from  Dr
       Kanagaratnam. There is a further psychiatric report, from a Dr  Mala
       Singh, dated 24 June 2013. She diagnosed the appellant as  suffering
       from PTSD and Severe Depression with psychotic symptoms. She  states
       that her diagnosis is no different from  that  of  Dr  Kanagaratnam,
       although I note that the latter diagnosed Complex PTSD. There may be
       some clinical significance in these diagnoses of PTSD but it is  not
       explained in the report of Dr Singh. It would not be appropriate for
       me to speculate as to the potential significance, if  any,  of  this
       apparent difference, in the absence of expert evidence on the point.

   62. There is no dispute about the fact of the appellant  suffering  from
       mental disorder. The psychiatric reports attribute  the  appellant's
       state  of  mental  health  to  the  traumatic  experiences  that  he
       describes. I bear in mind however, that to a degree the reports rely
       on the appellant's account of events, not so much in terms of making
       the diagnoses, but  in  terms  of  the  attribution  of  his  mental
       disorder to the events that he describes. In this context however, I
       note that at page 11 of her report Dr Mala states that over the  two
       sessions and  three  and  a  half  hours  with  the  appellant,  she
       concluded that he had been frank and honest about his  mental  state
       and symptoms. His presentation given was consistent with the history
       he gave.

   63. I nevertheless bear in mind that even on what  is  accepted  of  the
       appellant's account he had experienced traumatic events  even  prior
       to 2006; he comes from a country which has suffered  from  years  of
       armed conflict; he was displaced, and had been detained and  beaten.
       His immigration status is still not settled and he is separated from
       his wife and children. It seems to me that these are features of his
       life which could be potentially relevant to his  mental  state,  and
       which are  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent  referred  to  in  the
       psychiatric reports.

   64. There are  two  medical  reports  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
       physical condition and scarring that he has. The first is from Dr J.
       Botting and is dated 25 August 2009 and was sent to  the  respondent
       prior to the asylum interview and as part of his asylum  claim.  The
       report details a number of scars that the appellant has. In summary,
       Dr Botting concludes that the scars are variously consistent, highly
       consistent or in one  case  typical,  of  the  mechanism  of  injury
       described by the appellant.

   65. The refusal letter  at  [58]  suggests  that  that  report  has  not
       explored other possible causes for the  scarring,  noting  that  the
       appellant had been a farmer for many years. I consider that there is
       some merit in that observation. Dr Botting's consideration of  other
       possible causes for the scars in the penultimate  paragraph  of  his
       report is  rather  scant.  In  addition,  his  comment  that  it  is
       difficult to work out how else the  scars  could  have  been  caused
       seems to relate only to what are said to be cigarette  burns.  I  do
       take the view that the weight to be attached to  the  report  of  Dr
       Botting is reduced in  the  light  of  his  not  having  given  more
       detailed consideration to the possible causes  of  the  scars  other
       than the cause ascribed to them by the appellant.

   66. There is a further medical report, from Dr Soon Lim, dated  22  June
       2013. His report states that he specialises in  the  field  of  skin
       surgery. His report details the marks or scars that he found on  the
       appellant,  including  colour  photographs  within  the  report  and
       commenting on the scars. In passing, I note that he states  on  page
       14 that there are no scars on the  appellant's  abdomen  whereas  Dr
       Botting describes five scars over the left mid-abdomen.

   67. I summarise Dr Lim's conclusions as follows. He describes a scar  to
       the scalp behind the left ear (which the appellant says  was  caused
       when hit with a gun butt during the incident in September  2006)  as
       being typical of the blunt injury described although there are other
       possible but less likely causes. In relation to an 80mm thin  curved
       scar on the  appellant's  left  thigh  he  concludes  that  this  is
       diagnostic of a full thickness laceration of  the  skin.  He  states
       that self-infliction is unlikely. Deliberate infliction  by  consent
       by a third party cannot be completely ruled out but is  less  likely
       given the depth and length of the injury required to cause the scar.
       It is not clear what Dr Lim is referring  to  when  he  states  that
       infliction by a third party by consent is  "less likely"; i.e.  less
       likely than what? I infer that he means that it is less likely  than
       self-infliction. In  any  case,  he  does  not  appear  to  consider
       infliction by consent as a reasonably likely cause of the injury.

   68. In terms of what the appellant  says  are  cigarette  burns  Dr  Lim
       states that most of these scars are on the appellant's  back,  which
       are not therefore accessible for self-infliction. There are a  large
       number of these scars which are said to be third  degree  burns  and
       which therefore cannot be the result of natural  causes.  Infliction
       by consent by a third party is ruled out because of the large number
       of scars. Dr Lim does not explain why  the  large  number  of  these
       scars makes infliction by consent "very unlikely",  although  it  is
       reasonable to assume that this is because of the pain that it  would
       cause. He concludes that these scars  are  diagnostic  of  cigarette
       burns that have been deliberately inflicted by  another  person  for
       the purposes of maltreatment or torture.

   69. Dr Lim expresses some disagreement with Dr Botting, for  example  in
       relation  to  the  'cigarette  burns',  with  Dr  Lim  finding   the
       'diagnostic' attribution more appropriate than Dr  Botting's  highly
       consistent, and he gives an explanation as to why he comes  to  that
       view. He also states that  the  overall  pattern  of  the  cigarette
       scarring  is  diagnostic  rather  than  Dr  Botting's  "entirely  in
       keeping".  On  the  other  hand,  in  relation  to  a  scar  on  the
       appellant's right knee, his view is that this is consistent with the
       suspected injury of a burn that subsequently became infected  rather
       than the "typical appearance of  a  superficial  injury  such  as  a
       burn", giving his reasons.

   70. Mr Avery sought to highlight differences between the  views  of  Drs
       Botting  and  Lim.  Mr  Mackenzie  submitted  that  these  were  not
       different views but simply differences in emphasis.

   71. I consider that there is nothing in the reports of  Drs  Botting  or
       Lim which undermines the appellant's  account.  To  varying  degrees
       both reports support his  claim  to  have  been  subjected  to  ill-
       treatment in the ways that he described. Similarly,  whilst  on  the
       basis of the reports some  of  the  scars  could  have  been  caused
       accidently, taking an overall view of the medical evidence  it  does
       support the appellant's account. Dr  Lim  rules  out  infliction  by
       consent by a third party, but in any event I do  not  have  evidence
       before me as to how such  infliction  by  consent  could  have  been
       undertaken in terms of opportunity or mechanism. In  addition,  that
       issue is not the  subject  of  detailed  medical  evidence  in  this
       appeal.

   72. There are two newspaper reports that are relied on by the appellant.
       The first is from a newspaper, Valampurii, dated 22 September  2006,
       to which I have already referred. It refers to three men having been
       abducted and killed. It gives the names of the men  and  where  they
       were from. It does not state how they were killed.  In  the  refusal
       letter at [59] it is observed that the news report  does  not  state
       how the bodies were discovered or make any reference  to  the  army.



   73. The second news report comes from "Uthayan" dated 5  December  2006.
       It refers to the finding of weapons, ammunition and other  items  by
       the army in Periyavilan, Kalviyankadu and the  Siruppiddy  areas  in
       the Jaffna peninsula. Again, in the refusal letter it is  said  that
       the article does not mention specific details  about  the  locations
       and does not mention the appellant or his farm.

   74. In relation to Valampurii, the appellant refers at [181] in his main
       witness statement to that news report, and explains the relationship
       between the three people he knew and those named in the report.  The
       appellant also gives the shorter version of the names earlier in the
       witness statement at [131]. The witness statement also explains  the
       locations from which the men are said to have originated.

   75. As regards the Uthayan news report, contrary to what is said in  the
       refusal letter, it does mention the locations of the finds, although
       it is true to say that  it  does  not  refer  to  the  appellant  or
       expressly reveal any connection to the appellant.

   76. I  have  referred  to  inconsistency  between  the  Tamilnet  report
       referred to in the report  of  Professor  Good  and  the  Valampurii
       report. This has the potential to undermine the appellant's account.

   77. On the other hand,  in  varying  degrees  both  the  Valampurii  and
       Uthayan news reports are  mainly  consistent  with  the  appellant's
       account and thus support it. It is the case that in relation to both
       reports it could  be  said  that  more  detail  would  have  further
       supported the appellant's claim but that does not detract  from  the
       value of the reports.

   78. Professor Good's report is  dated  24  June  2013.  I  have  already
       expressed my view as to the extent to which regard can be had to his
       report in so far as it concerns the Tamil language. In addition,  it
       does seem to me that in many instances  Professor  Good  does  stray
       into the  illegitimate  territory  (in  relation  to  his  field  of
       expertise) of commentary on subjective matters of interpretation  of
       the appellant's account and its  credibility.  An  example  of  this
       occurs at [47] of his report where it is said that the Secretary  of
       State has misquoted the appellant's witness statement.

   79.  As regards the general  background  situation  in  Sri  Lanka,  the
       appellant's account is consistent with it, Professor Good concludes.
       The ill-treatment that the appellant describes  is  also  consistent
       with the information that Professor Good provides in the report.

   80. There is a witness statement from the appellant's wife, Vijayakumari
       Kiritharan, dated 7 June 2013.  The  statement  refers  to  her  now
       living in India. At [78] it says that the statement was given to the
       appellant's  solicitor,  Mr  Paterson,  over  the  phone  with   the
       assistance of  Tamil  interpreters  in  Mr  Paterson's  office.  The
       statement consists of 8 pages and is consistent with the appellant's
       account of events. At [88]  it  states  that  her  husband's  uncle,
       Sivasubramaniam, lives in Manipay in Sri Lanka and  sees  neighbours
       of theirs from Siruvilan, where the appellant is  from.  She  states
       that Sivasubramaniam has reported to her that he had  been  told  by
       neighbours that the army still goes to their house from time to time
       to make enquiries about where the  appellant  and  the  family  have
       gone.

   81. The witness statement of the appellant's wife, again,  supports  his
       account although the weight to be attached to her evidence  is  less
       than it would be were  her  evidence  tested  in  cross-examination.
       Having said that, given that she is living in  India  it  would  not
       have been possible for her to give evidence in person.

   82. I also note the written statement of the appellant's  sister-in-law,
       Yashoda Ragutharan. Her evidence however,  does  not  deal  directly
       with events that occurred in Sri Lanka, and concerns the appellant's
       situation in the UK, his mental state and some evidence of what  the
       appellant has told her as to events in Sri Lanka. It also refers  to
       the circumstances in which the appellant re-established contact with
       his wife. In relation to events in Sri Lanka it does not  carry  any
       significant weight, given that it relies on an account given to  her
       by the appellant and about which she has no first hand knowledge.

   83. I have referred to aspects of the evidence that have  the  potential
       adversely to affect the credibility of the appellant's account,  for
       example in relation to his claim to have been raped whilst detained;
       inconsistency between  the  Tamilnet  news  report  referred  to  by
       Professor Good and that in Valampurii, and whether the arms find was
       or was not shown to the workers.

   84. However, taking into account the supporting  evidence  from  various
       sources which I have referred to in detail, and applying  the  lower
       standard of proof, I am satisfied that the  appellant  has  given  a
       credible account of events in Sri Lanka  and  of  the  circumstances
       which led him to come to  the  UK.  Accordingly,  highlighting  what
       could be said to be the most significant  features  of  his  account
       (but not rejecting the other  aspects  of  it)  I  accept  that  the
       appellant was detained by the IPKF and by the  Sri  Lankan  security
       forces on the occasions that he describes. I am  satisfied  that  he
       has given a credible  account  of  the  ill-treatment  that  he  was
       subjected to, that he was photographed and fingerprinted and that he
       was forced to sign 'confessions'.

   85. I accept as reasonably likely that in 2006  he  was  encountered  by
       soldiers who had been responsible for killing three men and that  he
       was beaten and knocked unconscious. It is reasonably likely that the
       injuries  he  is  found  to  have   sustained   when   he   regained
       consciousness were inflicted whilst he  was  under  the  control  of
       those soldiers.

   86. I am satisfied that his land was searched and that he  was  accused,
       or held responsible for,  what  were  said  to  have  been  weapons,
       ammunition and other equipment ostensibly 'found'  on his land. That
       the authorities in the form of the security forces had searched  for
       him is reasonably likely to be true and that his wife has been  told
       by her husband's uncle that he has been told that the army still  go
       to their house from  time  to  time  to  make  enquiries  about  the
       appellant. Whilst this is not direct evidence of continuing interest
       in the appellant by the authorities, no  basis  for  rejecting  that
       evidence has been suggested on behalf of the respondent, aside  from
       the implicit suggestion that  it  should  be  rejected  because  the
       appellant's account is not credible.

   87. It is against those findings therefore, that I assess  the  question
       of risk on return. In relation to the  decision  in  GJ  and  Others
       (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC),
       the "alternative" position on behalf of the appellant is  that  that
       decision is wrongly decided. I deal with that contention first.

   88. It is true that permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal has been
       granted to appellants in the case of GJ but it nevertheless  remains
       authoritative country guidance. Furthermore, as is  acknowledged  in
       the  appellant's  skeleton  argument,  the  reported  case   of   KK
       (Application of GJ) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00512 (IAC) considered the
       arguments now advanced (in  the  alternative)  in  relation  to  the
       correctness of GJ and rejected them, including in  relation  to  the
       significance of  the  UNHCR  guidelines.  Accordingly,  it  is  with
       reference to the existing country guidance of GJ that I  assess  the
       potential risk to the appellant.

   89. In his report Professor Good considers that  it  is  almost  certain
       that no record exists of the appellant's detention by  the  IPKF  in
       1987 and that there would be no record on a national database of his
       detentions in 1997 or 1998.

   90. In terms of the events of 2006 however,  he  concludes  that  it  is
       almost certain that there would  be  a  record  of  the  search  for
       weapons by hundreds of soldiers, although the details  contained  in
       such records "would not routinely be known to all relevant personnel
       at the airport."

   91. It is contended that the appellant comes within  the  first  of  the
       risk categories set out in GJ, namely "Individuals who are,  or  are
       perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single
       state because they are, or are perceived to have a significant  role
       in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism  within  the  Diaspora
       and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka."

   92. It is not suggested that the appellant has undertaken  any  role  in
       terms of post-conflict separatism whilst in the UK. However, he  has
       been implicated in a large arms find on his land in 2006.  The  fact
       that the authorities still make  enquiries  as  to  the  appellant's
       whereabouts indicate that he is still of interest to them.  Although
       he has not taken part  in  any  Tamil  separatist  activities  since
       leaving the country, because of his mental state  he  would  not  be
       able to give a coherent account of himself when questioned so as  to
       avoid suspicion, as is evident from the report of Dr  Mala  on  page
       23. I am satisfied that he is reasonably  likely  to  be  questioned
       when he returns to his home area, given the continuing  interest  in
       him. In his case that would bring with it the risk of detention  and
       ill-treatment.

   93. Naturally, any country guidance  decision  requires  to  be  applied
       taking into account the particular circumstances of each  appellant.
       In relation to  this  appellant  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to
       establish a reasonable likelihood that he would be at  risk,  coming
       within this first category of risk set out in GJ.

   94. It is submitted that the appellant would be on a  'stop  list',  and
       thus comes within the fourth of the risk categories in GJ, namely "A
       person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list  accessible
       at the airport, comprising a list of those against whom there is  an
       extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals  whose  name
       appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the airport  and  handed
       over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such
       order or warrant".

   95. However, there is no evidence that there is a court order or  arrest
       warrant for the appellant. Accordingly, he does not come within that
       risk category.

   96. When dealing with  the  correctness  of  the  decision  in  GJ,  the
       appellant's skeleton argument at [53] suggests  that  the  appellant
       comes within the risk category of persons who are witnesses  to  war
       crimes. Reliance is placed on the evidence of Professor Good in  his
       report from paragraph [87]. However, the risk category described  in
       GJ is:

             "Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned and
             Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri  Lankan  security
             forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities  in  alleged
             war crimes.  Among those who  may  have  witnessed  war  crimes
             during the conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones  in  May
             2009, only those who  have  already  identified  themselves  by
             giving  such  evidence  would  be  known  to  the  Sri   Lankan
             authorities and therefore only they are at real risk of adverse
             attention or persecution on return as potential or  actual  war
             crimes witnesses."

   97. The appellant has not given evidence to the Commission and  has  not
       identified himself by giving such evidence, although I  accept  that
       he has been identified as someone who is a witness to the killing of
       one, if not three, men by the army. Nevertheless, I am not satisfied
       that he does come within this risk category.

   98. For the reasons I have  given  however,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
       appellant has established that there is a real risk  of  persecution
       on return on account of an imputed political opinion.

   99. In the light of that conclusion, he is not entitled to  humanitarian
       protection, which he would otherwise have been entitled to  for  the
       reasons explained in the opening paragraphs of my assessment.

Decision

  100. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
       relation to the asylum  ground  of  appeal  is  set  aside  and  the
       decision re-made, allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 25/04/14











