
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03846/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2016                            |On 3 February 2016            |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between


                                   Mrs M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Doerfel, Counsel instructed by International
Care Network
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a  protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lamb
    promulgated on  17  August  2015  ("the  Decision")  finding  that  the
    Appellant had no in country right of  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent had certified the immigration claim so that an appeal  could
    be brought only from outside the UK.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on
    3 November 2015.  The Secretary of State has conceded in  her  Rule  24
    statement that  there is an error of law in the  Decision  and  she  is
    right to do so.  The decision against which the  Appellant  appeals  is
    contained  in  the  notice  which  is  given  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 ("the Notices Regulations").

 3. As the Judge observed at [4] of the Decision, the notice indicated that
    the Appellant's appeal was exercisable in country.  As he  noted,  this
    was inconsistent with the reasons for refusal  Letter  which  certified
    the claim.  However, he erred in finding that the reasons  for  refusal
    Letter takes precedence in those circumstances.  It is  the  notice  of
    decision  which  under  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations   2003
    specifies whether there is a right of appeal  and  the  forum  of  that
    appeal.

 4. I note also that the Secretary of State had no  power  to  certify  the
    appellant's claim on the basis she purported to do in the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  She indicated that the  claim  was  certified  on  the
    basis that it is one to which Section  94(3)  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 applies and therefore is  certified  under  Section
    94(2).  The appellant is from Iran and Iran  is  not  on  the  list  of
    countries specified in Section 94(4).  The certification  decision  was
    also therefore in error.

 5. I am therefore satisfied that the Decision contains an  error  of  law.
    The Judge did not go on to consider the merits of the appeal because he
    thought he had no jurisdiction  to  do  so.   In  accordance  with  the
    guidance and the practice statement, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal to be heard by a different Judge.  Mr
    Kotas on behalf of the Secretary of  State  agrees  that  this  is  the
    appropriate course.

 6. The Appellant's grounds raise another point in relation to  costs.   At
    the hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal Judge the  Appellant  sought
    costs under Rule 9(2) of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-Tier  Tribunal)
    Rules 2014.  It appears  from  the  Decision  that  this  was  also  an
    application under rule 9(1) but it is rule 9(2) on which the  focus  of
    this ground has been presented before me this morning  by  Mr  Doerfel.
    Mr  Doerfel  says  that  the  Respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the
    directions  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  by  failing  to  supply  the
    Respondent's bundle.  He says that, if she had done so, it  would  have
    been evident that a point was being taken on certification at  a  point
    prior to the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  I disagree that this had any
    causative effect in relation to the costs which have been incurred as a
    result of the Judge's  error  of  law  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    mistake.  The decision to certify was  evident  from  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and the Appellant's representatives were on notice of it
    prior to the hearing.

 7. However, there is a further point  in  relation  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's original decision and the fact that the Presenting  Officer  at
    the hearing when asked whether she maintained the certificate indicated
    that she did indeed do so.  The original mistake, as I say, is  between
    the inconsistency in the notice of decision and the reasons for refusal
    Letter.  There is also an error,  as  I  have  already  noted,  in  the
    certification as the Secretary of State had no power to certify on that
    basis.  It should have been  evident  to  the  Presenting  Officer  who
    appeared before the Judge firstly that Section 94(3) could not apply to
    an Iranian case and secondly that under  the  Notices  Regulations  the
    notice of decision takes precedence.

 8. However, in this case the Appellant was legally represented by Counsel.
     Counsel says that he  did  not  have  the  opportunity  to  carry  out
    research on the day when he became aware of the  inconsistency  between
    the  notice  of  decision  and  reasons  for  refusal  letter  and  the
    certification of the claim in the latter.  However, I note from [7]  of
    the Decision that the Judge permitted further  argument  later  on  the
    morning of the hearing so that both representatives had the opportunity
    to consider the point.

 9. Had the Appellant been unrepresented I would have been minded  to  find
    that there was an error of law in the Decision in  relation  to  costs.
    The Judge when dealing with costs said this at (second paragraph)[4]:

         "It  is  apparent  from  this  history  that  there   were   missed
         opportunities on the part of all those involved.   The  appellant's
         advisers overlooked the statement in the reasons for  refusal  that
         the claim had been certified.  The respondent failed  to  write  to
         the  appellant's  advisers  and  the  Tribunal  stating  that   the
         jurisdictional point would be taken at the prehearing review or the
         hearing.  Until the hearing the Tribunal did not  take  account  of
         the reference to certification in the letter from  the  respondent,
         which was on the Tribunal file."

10. I concur with that statement.  It  should  have  been  evident  to  the
    Judge, to the Presenting Officer and to  Counsel  who  represented  the
    Appellant at the hearing that the point, which is  a  very  short  one,
    when properly considered, should have led to the opposite conclusion to
    that reached by the Judge. If  the  Judge  had  been  directed  to  the
    Notices Regulations, as should have happened,  and  to  the  fact  that
    Section 94(3)  cannot  apply  to  an  Iranian  case,  the  Judge  would
    undoubtedly have taken the opposite course and the wasted  costs  could
    have been avoided. The points were not difficult ones and  should  have
    been evident to Counsel.

11. The judgment of  the  Upper  Tier  Tribunal  President  and  First-Tier
    Tribunal President in Cancino  (costs-First-tier  Tribunal-new  powers)
    [2015] UKFTT 00059 (IAC) makes  clear that the power to order costs  is
    one which is to be exercised only in exceptional cases and is a  matter
    of discretion.

12. I am not satisfied that the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  exercising  his
    discretion in the way that he did.  Accordingly I find that  the  Judge
    did not make any error of law in relation to costs.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.
I set aside the Decision. I remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal  for
re-hearing.


Signed            Date 2 February 2016

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


