


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03225/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UTIAC Birmingham           |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On : 15 May 2017                      |On : 19 May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         abdallah abdirahman kassim
                          (no anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kullar, instructed by Aman Solicitors Advocates
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision to remove him from the UK further to the refusal of his asylum  and
human rights claim, it was found, at an error of law hearing on 20  February
2017, that the First-tier Tribunal had made errors of law in  its  decision.
The decision was accordingly set aside on a limited basis.

The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born  on  15  October  1969.  He  left
Somalia on 25 November  2011  and  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  10
December 2013, after spending time in Turkey and travelling  to  Greece  and
France. He claimed asylum on 13 February 2014. His claim was  refused  on  9
February 2015 and a decision was made by the respondent on the same  day  to
remove him from the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that
decision and his appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal by  Judge  Alis
on 9 June 2016 and was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 10 June  2016.
Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 27 July  2016.  At
an error of law hearing on 20 February 2017,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey
found that Judge Alis had made an error of law in  his  decision  such  that
the decision had to be set aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal,  but  on
a limited basis and a narrow point.

The Appellant's claim

The basis of the appellant's claim is that he fears  persecution  on  return
to Somalia from Al-Shabab. He is a member of the minority Reer  Hamar  clan.
His family's shops in Hamar Wayne were looted and confiscated by  Al  Shabab
during the civil war in 1991 and in 1997 his family moved to Hudur. In  July
2011 two Al Shabab militias approached him and asked him to fight for  them,
but he refused. He then decided to leave Somalia two weeks later. He  feared
he would be recruited to fight with Al Shabab if he returned to Somalia  and
that he would be destitute.

The respondent, in refusing the  appellant's  claim,  accepted  his  claimed
nationality and ethnicity and accepted his account of being  asked  to  join
Al Shabab, but did not accept  that  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
Somalia. The respondent considered that  the  appellant  could  relocate  to
Mogadishu as Al Shabab did  not  have  any  significant  presence  there  at
present and that he would be of no specific interest  to  Al  Shabab.  There
was no clan violence in Mogadishu and no  clan  based  discrimination,  even
for minority clan members. The respondent considered  that  the  appellant's
past experiences of work in  Somalia  and  his  current  support  mechanisms
would assist him in re-integrating in Somalia. He would be  able  to  access
medical treatment in Somalia. The respondent concluded  that  the  appellant
was not entitled to humanitarian protection and that his removal  would  not
breach his human rights.

At the hearing of the appeal against that decision, Judge  Alis  heard  from
the appellant, who said that he feared being forced to fight with Al  Shabab
if he went back to Somalia and feared that he would be unable to  find  work
and would become destitute. He claimed that his  sister  and  brother-in-law
could not assist him financially because his sister did  not  work  and  her
husband had a low paid job. He claimed that his family had left Somalia  and
had gone to Yemen and had found that out from his sister  that  morning.  He
did not know what had happened to the family friend who funded his trip  out
of  Somalia.  His  wife  was  living  in  Greece.  He  had  various  medical
conditions for which he was taking treatment. The judge considered that  the
evidence before him did not suggest that the appellant's  medical  condition
crossed an Article  3  or  8  threshold  and  neither  did  it  support  the
submissions that he could not work in Somalia. The judge did  not  find  the
appellant's account about the whereabouts of his family to be  credible  and
did not accept that they had  fled  to  Yemen.  The  judge  found  that  the
appellant had a family home available in Somalia and did not accept that  he
had lost contact with the person who had paid for him to come to the UK.  He
did not find that the appellant fell into one of the risk categories in  MOJ
& Ors (Return to Mogadishu) (Rev 1) (CG) [2014] UKUT 442 and did not  accept
that he was at risk of persecution or that he was entitled  to  humanitarian
protection and he considered that his removal to Somalia  would  not  breach
his human rights  under  Article  3  and  8  of  the  ECHR.  He  accordingly
dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
grounds.

Permission to appeal against that decision was sought on  the  grounds  that
the judge's assessment of the  appellant  having  family  to  return  to  in
Mogadishu was flawed and that he had not fully  considered  the  appellant's
family and private life in the UK.

Permission to appeal was granted on 27 July 2016.

At the error of law hearing UTJ Storey found the  judge's  determination  to
be materially flawed on one particular aspect. He found no error of  law  in
the judge's adverse credibility findings in regard to the appellant's  claim
that his family had fled to Yemen and he upheld the judge's decision  in  so
far as he found that the appellant's family  remained  in  Somalia.  However
UTJ Storey found that the judge had erred by  failing  to  consider  whether
the appellant fell into category  (xii)  of  MOJ,  on  the  basis  that  the
respondent had  accepted  that  the  appellant's  family  did  not  live  in
Mogadishu and that the appellant would be relocating to Mogadishu  where  he
had no family and no home. He set aside the judge's  decision  and  directed
that it would be re-made, at a resumed hearing,  on  the  limited  basis  of
considering evidence from the appellant's sister as to whether she would  be
able to support him if he was to be returned to Mogadishu,  in  the  context
of paragraph (xii) of MOJ.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me on 15 May  2017.  The  appellant  produced  a
statement for the hearing in which he stated that his sister  was  unwilling
to offer him financial support as she could barely make  ends  meet  herself
and was in receipt of state benefits. The appellant referred to evidence  he
was submitting to support his claim that his mother,  two  sisters  and  his
two children were living in Yemen. The appellant did not give oral  evidence
before me.

The appellant's sister, Eslah Abdirahman  Kassim,  gave  oral  evidence  and
adopted her statement of 2 May 2017, in which she stated that she could  not
provide her brother with financial support as her husband was  unwilling  to
do so given  that  they  were  barely  surviving  and  were  in  receipt  of
benefits. She stated further that there were no  relatives  in  Somalia  who
could support him and that their surviving family  had  fled  to  Yemen  and
lived in Basateen in the south of the country.


In her oral evidence Ms Kassim adopted her statement and confirmed that  she
could not support her brother financially as her husband  worked  only  part
time and they had six  children  to  support,  one  of  whom  was  going  to
university and another to college. She said that  she  came  to  the  UK  in
March 2006 with two of her children, to join her husband. She had  lived  in
the Shibs district in Mogadishu before joining her husband  and  his  family
in Yemen. She went to Yemen in around  2000  and  prior  to  that  lived  in
Mogadishu, although she  had  to  flee  from  place  to  place  outside  the
village. Ms Kassim said that  the  pictures  she  had  produced  showed  her
family in Yemen. Her sister had sent the pictures to her two to three  weeks
ago. She said that the appellant could not return to Somalia and  find  work
there because his life was in danger from Al Shabab.


Both parties made submissions. Ms Pettersen submitted that,  given  that  Ms
Kassim had lived in Mogadishu for many years before going to  Yemen  it  may
well be that there was more family there than she  and  the  appellant  were
admitting to. There was no evidence that the people  in  the  pictures  were
the appellant's family members. The appellant had  family  links  and  other
ties to Mogadishu. There was no reason why the appellant  could  not  get  a
job there and support himself. He did not fall within the  risk  factors  in
MOJ. Ms Kullar submitted that the  evidence  should  be  accepted  that  the
family had all fled to Yemen. The appellant's sister was not in  a  position
to provide support. The appellant fell within the risk factors  in  MOJ  and
the appeal should be allowed.

Consideration and findings

I set out the relevant passages of the headnote of MOJ as follows:

    "(vii)           A person returning to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
    absence will look to his nuclear family, if he has one  living  in  the
    city,  for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and  securing   a
    livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his  clan
    members who are not close relatives, such help is  only  likely  to  be
    forthcoming for majority clan  members,  as  minority  clans  may  have
    little to offer.

    (viii)         The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
    changed. Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms  and
    assist with access to livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a  protection
    function than previously. There are no clan militias in  Mogadishu,  no
    clan violence, and no clan based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
    minority clan members.

    (ix)              If it is accepted that a person facing  a  return  to
    Mogadishu after a period of absence has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
    relatives in the city to  assist  him  in  re-establishing  himself  on
    return, there will need to be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  of  the
    circumstances. These considerations will include, but are  not  limited
    to:

         .       circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
         .       length of absence from Mogadishu;
         .       family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
         .       access to financial resources;
         .        prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
    employment or self employment;
         .       availability of remittances from abroad;
         .       means of support  during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom;
         .       why his ability to fund the journey to the West  no  longer
         enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.

    (x)               Put another way, it will be  for  the  person  facing
    return to explain why he would not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
    opportunities that have been produced by the economic boom,  especially
    as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are  taking  jobs  at
    the expense of those who have never been away.

    (xi)             It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or
    family support who will not be in receipt of  remittances  from  abroad
    and who have no real prospect of securing access  to  a  livelihood  on
    return who will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling
    below that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

    (xii)            The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply
    those who originate from Mogadishu that may  now  generally  return  to
    live in the city without being subjected to an Article  15(c)  risk  or
    facing a real risk of destitution. On the  other  hand,  relocation  in
    Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links to  the
    city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or  social
    support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of  means  to
    establish a home and some form of ongoing financial support there  will
    be a real risk of having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
    accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a real  possibility  of
    having  to  live  in  conditions that  will  fall  below   acceptable
    humanitarian standards."

In his decision setting aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision,
Upper Tribunal Judge Storey considered that an error of law had arisen as  a
result of the judge's failure to consider Mogadishu as a place  of  internal
relocation and thus to consider (xii) of the  head-note.  I  have  therefore
considered the position on  return  for  the  appellant  in  line  with  the
guidance  in  that  paragraph.  Although  the  direction   given   for   the
appellant's sister to provide evidence of her circumstances was  essentially
to establish whether or not she would be able to provide  financial  support
for the appellant from the UK, it seems  to  me  that  her  evidence  raised
further issues as to the appellant's links to Mogadishu.  On  the  basis  of
the appellant's evidence that he had left Mogadishu for  Hudur  in  1997  it
was accepted that there was no family living in Mogadishu and I  do  not  go
behind that finding with respect to  immediate  and  close  family  members.
However I do not accept that the appellant has no former, or  even  current,
links to the city at all and  I  make  that  finding  on  the  basis  of  Ms
Kassim's evidence.

What became clear from Ms Kassim's  evidence  was  that  she  had  lived  in
Mogadishu from birth in 1976 until some time  after  her  marriage  and  the
birth of two of her children, when  they  joined  her  husband's  family  in
Yemen in approximately 2000, which clearly suggested  that  there  had  been
family links to  that  city  for  many  years,  contrary  to  the  situation
previously portrayed by the appellant. I found Ms Kassim to be  particularly
evasive when asked about her residence in Mogadishu and  her  departure  for
Yemen. She initially  stated  that  she  had  lived  in  Shibs  district  in
Mogadishu prior to coming to the UK,  but  then  clarified  that  she  lived
there until she left the country  for  Yemen.  When  asked  to  confirm  her
evidence that she had stayed in Mogadishu from  1976  until  2000  she  said
twice that she did not understand what was meant  by  that  question.  After
confirming that she had lived there until her departure for Yemen  she  then
added that she had moved around from place to place, but  her  evidence  was
nevertheless that she had lived in Mogadishu before departing from  Somalia.
There was no question about any problems in interpretation and the  question
was clearly and simply put  to  her  by  Ms  Pettersen.  I  find  myself  in
agreement with Ms Pettersen that there may well be  more  family  and  other
links to Mogadishu than the appellant and his sister were admitting  to  and
that Ms Kassim was being deliberately evasive.

In the circumstances I do not find, even to the  lower  standard  of  proof,
that I have been provided with a truthful account of the  family's  lack  of
ties to Mogadishu and neither do I accept that the pictures of  a  group  of
people outside Basateen Medical Centre undermines Judge Alis'  findings,  as
upheld by Judge Storey, that the appellant's account of  his  family  having
fled to Yemen was untrue. It may well be that the appellant  no  longer  has
close family members living in Mogadishu, as Judge Storey  accepted  in  his
decision, but I do not accept that he has no former links to that  city,  in
terms of family friends and contacts or even more distant  family.  As  such
he does not fall within the risk factors in (xii). Furthermore,  whether  or
not  the  appellant's  sister  is  unable  to  provide  him  with  financial
assistance, there is no evidence, medical or otherwise,  to  show  that  the
appellant would be unable to find work  in  Mogadishu.  When  asked  whether
there was any reason why he could not find work, his sister's  evidence  was
that there was not, but that the issue was not whether he could get  a  job,
rather that he could not work because of the danger from Al Shabab.  However
Judge Alis' findings that the appellant would not be at risk on  that  basis
have been upheld by Judge Storey. Accordingly it seems to me that  there  is
no  reason  why  the  appellant  could  not  find  some  unskilled  work  in
Mogadishu. The guidance at (x) and (xi) is  relevant  in  that  respect  and
there is nothing to suggest that that only  applies  to  former  and  recent
residents of Mogadishu to the exclusion of those  relocating  to  Mogadishu.
As for the ability of the appellant's sister to assist  him  financially,  I
do not accept that the evidence provided shows that she would  not  be  able
to at least provide some initial assistance until he obtained employment.  I
note that the evidence of her finances was incomplete as it did not  include
her husband's bank statements so as to provide an oversight of the  family's
financial situation as a whole. Given the evasive nature of her  evidence  I
am not prepared to accept her oral evidence alone as reliably  demonstrating
an inability to assist the appellant to that limited extent.

Accordingly I  do  not  consider  that  the  appellant  would  find  himself
destitute on return to Somalia, to Mogadishu, and I do not  accept  that  he
falls within any of the risk factors in MOJ. I do not find that he has  been
able to demonstrate, to the lower standard of proof, that  he  would  be  at
risk of persecution, that he would be subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
face a real risk of destitution, or that his human rights would be  breached
if he returned to Somalia. Accordingly I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.




    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  I see  no  reason  to
    continue that order  and  note  that  Judge  Storey  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction. I formally discharge the order of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.










Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 17 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
