
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/03411/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     m a
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 24  September  1978.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom sometime in late  April  or
    early May 2010.  On 2 May 2010, he claimed asylum.   The  Secretary  of
    State refused that claim on 9 September 2010.  On  23  September  2010,
    the appellant appealed and his appeal  was  dismissed  on  10  December
    2010.  On 11 January  2011,  permission  was  granted  to  appeal  that
    decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On 13 August  2012,  the  Home  Office
    withdrew the Secretary of State's decision of 9 September  2010  before
    the appeal was heard.

 3. On 6 May 2014, the Secretary of State made a fresh  decision  rejecting
    the appellant's claim for asylum, for humanitarian protection and under
    the European Convention on Human Rights.  On 9 May 2014, the  Secretary
    of State made a decision to refuse the appellant  leave  to  enter  and
    proposed to give directions for his removal to Iran.

 4. The appellant appealed that latter decision to the First-tier Tribunal.
     Following a hearing on 16  September  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Knowles) in a determination promulgated on  26  September  2014,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 5. On 20 October 2014, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Cruthers)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the  basis
    that the judge had  arguably  erred  in  law  in  reaching  an  adverse
    credibility finding.

 6. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Claim

 7. Before the judge, the appellant's claim was twofold.  First, he claimed
    to be at risk on return to Iran because of his political  opinion.   He
    claimed that he was a former member of the Basij who had been  arrested
    at an anti-government demonstration on 26/27 December 2009 and had been
    detained, interrogated and ill-treated before being released  on  bail.
    Secondly, the appellant claimed that he was at risk on  return  because
    of his religion.  He claimed that  he  had  converted  to  Christianity
    since his arrival in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

 8. As regards the appellant's first  claim,  the  judge  made  an  adverse
    credibility finding.  He did not accept that  the  appellant  had  ever
    been a member of the Basij or that  he  had  been  arrested,  detained,
    interrogated  or   ill-treated   in   December   2009   following   his
    participation in an anti-government demonstration.

 9. As regards the appellant's second claim, the judge did not accept  that
    the appellant was a bona fide Christian convert and that, as a  result,
    he would be at risk on return to Iran.

10. Finally, the judge did not accept that the appellant would be  at  risk
    as a failed asylum seeker,  even  if  he  had  exited  Iran  illegally,
    applying the country guidance case of SB Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.

11. The appellant did not pursue any claim under Art 8 of the  ECHR  before
    the judge.

The Grounds

12. Mr Hoshi, in his oral submissions developed the six grounds  of  appeal
    challenging the judge's adverse  credibility  finding.   Those  grounds
    are, in summary, as follows:

      1) The judge misunderstood and committed a procedural irregularity  in
         assessing the translations of the appellant's Basij card  (para  59
         of the determination);

      2) The judge failed to  take  into  account  the  background  evidence
         concerning changes in the Basij's role in 2009 in finding  that  it
         was inherently unlikely that the appellant (as he claimed)  thought
         until 2009 that the Basij was a benign organisation (paras  57  and
         58 of the determination);

      3) It was irrational or procedurally irregular for the judge to accept
         the expert evidence of Dr Kakhki when  making  an  adverse  finding
         about the appellant's Basij card (at para 59) whilst rejecting  the
         expert's evidence at para 60 of the determination.

      4) Having found that the appellant was not a member of the  Basij,  it
         was irrational for the judge to then conclude that, as a member  of
         the Basij, he would not have been released as he described (at para
         61 of the determination);

      5) The judge failed to take into account the medical evidence that the
         appellant suffered from  PTSD  which  was  highly  consistent  with
         sexual assault in  reaching  his  adverse  credibility  but  rather
         treated it as add-on contrary to the principle in  SA  (Somalia)  v
         SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1302.  Further, given the medial evidence  the
         judge erred in law by failing to take into account  the  background
         evidence (set out at para 24 of  the  grounds)  which  demonstrated
         that the use of sexual assault was a prevalent means  of  torturing
         detainees in Iran, in particular political detainees in the  period
         immediately following the 2009 presidential elections;

      6) It was irrational for the judge to find that it was  unlikely  that
         the appellant would, since being in the UK, risk blogging when that
         would expose him to danger as a political opponent of  the  Iranian
         government.  There were mistakes made in assessing the evidence  of
         the appellant's blogging and blocking of his web-site.

13. As part of his submissions, Mr Hoshi submitted that the  grounds,  seen
    as a whole, demonstrated the judge's failure to look at the evidence in
    the round.

14. In the Rule 24 response, the respondent submitted that the  grounds  of
    appeal amounted to nothing more than a "disagreement" with the  judge's
    finding which he was entitled to reach on the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before him.

15. That position was expanded upon by Mr Richards in his oral  submissions
    which I will deal with shortly.

Discussion

    Ground 1

16. The appellant claimed that he had joined the Basij in  late  2006.   He
    produced what he claimed to be his Basij  identity  card.   An  initial
    translation of that card stated that the front of the card had upon  it
    the words "valid until April/May 2004" - apparently inconsistently with
    when he claimed to have joined.  That translation is found at pages A71
    and A73 of the appellant's bundle.  The appellant did not  accept  that
    was  an  accurate  translation  of  his  card  and  his  representative
    requested that the original be returned by the respondent  to  whom  it
    had been sent in order that it could be  authenticated.   However,  the
    card was not returned prior to the day of the initial  listing  of  the
    appellant's appeal in the First-tier Tribunal on 16 July  2014.   As  a
    consequence,  the  judge  adjourned  that  hearing  and  directed   the
    respondent to produce the card in  order  to  allow  the  appellant  to
    obtain a further translation.  Again, the card was  not  returned.   At
    the hearing on 16 September 2014, the Presenting Officer was unable  to
    produce the card and, it appears, it has been misplaced or lost by  the
    respondent.

17. However, prior  to  that  hearing  the  appellant  obtained  a  further
    translation of his card  using  a  photocopy  of  the  original.   That
    translation  in  a  short  supplementary  appellant's   bundle.    That
    translation does not contain the word "valid until: April/May 2004"  as
    being on the front of the card.  Instead, the translation  states  that
    the back of the card had upon it "The  validity  of  this  card  is  as
    follows: Mehr  mah  88  (August/September  2009)".   Something  similar
    appears in the first translation at page A71 as being on  the  back  of
    the card.

18. The point before the judge is an obvious one.  The first translation of
    the card appears to be inconsistent with the appellant's claim to  have
    only joined the Basij in 2006.  The second translation does not contain
    that apparent inconsistency and, indeed, refers to the validity of  the
    card covering a period when the appellant claimed to be in the Basij.

19. In addition, the appellant submitted an  expert  report  by  Dr  Kakhki
    dated 7 June 2014 (at pages A86 - A90 of the appellant's  bundle).   Dr
    Kakhki said this about the card (at page A87):

         "With reference to the smaller document, this is a Basij membership
         card, containing the file serial number 760388 and  issued  in  the
         name of Mr. Mehdi Abdi, son of Asghar, born in  1356  (1977).   The
         card specifies that the holder was a Basij member during the period
         of the card's validity.  The  reverse  of  the  card  contains  one
         validity label up to October 2009 (Mehr 1388) confirming the card's
         expiry date.  It is common for these types of cards to  be  renewed
         annually, with space allowed  for  renewal  labels  to  extend  the
         duration of the card.  The date of issue has  not  been  specified,
         but it is apparent that the card has been valid for at least a year
         before the expiration of the issuing  duration  period  in  October
         2009 as the words on the label specifically translate as 'valid  up
         to October  2009'.   The  card  contains  a  stamp  overlaying  the
         photograph and a signature at the  bottom  left,  endorsed  by  the
         issuing official.  The text on the card specifies the  address  for
         its return and states that misuse will result in  prosecution.  The
         card also contains details of the holder's  place  of  service  and
         membership number, but these are set out in coded form.

         I  can  confirm  that  all  the  necessary   legal   and   official
         requirements for a genuine Basij membership  card  are  present  in
         this document.  The format, layout, and size of the card are all in
         accordance with the standard to be expected from a document  issued
         by the Basij.  With regard to the contents, a thorough  examination
         of the text does not  indicate  any  evidence  of  rubbing  out  or
         alteration at any point, which would be manifestly in  the  overlay
         of writing/pen or stain from chemical alteration etc.  The document
         contains the appropriate stamp from the Basij  in  the  appropriate
         location.  The stamp overlaying the photograph corresponds  to  the
         delineations present on the card itself; the outline and margins of
         the stamp on the photograph match perfectly  the  contours  on  the
         nearby area of the document, indicating that the photograph has not
         been replaced.  The stamp is both unique and presented in ink  from
         the issuing authority, namely the Shariar Branch, as should be  the
         case.  The card also contains a Revolutionary Guard  Corp  logo  at
         the top right.  This is fully in line with the format requirements,
         as the Basij is legally considered to be a subsidiary part  of  the
         Revolutionary Guard and share some of their attributes.

         Although these types of cards are normally laminated,  the  absence
         of lamination is not in itself indicative or determinative  of  the
         card's authenticity.  This is especially in view of  the  disparate
         resources which vary between base to base as well as  the  need  to
         place renewal  labels  on  the  back  of  the  card  itself,  which
         necessitates the removal of such lamination.

         The  contents,  in  particular  the  phraseology  used  when,   for
         instance, explaining consequences of misuse,  are  also  consistent
         with this type of card.  All the necessary  details  regarding  the
         holder are set out fully.  The fact that the membership number  and
         place of service are set out in coded form is an important  feature
         of a genuine Basij card, as the purpose of the code is to  maintain
         secrecy should the card fall into  the  wrong  hands.   Phraseology
         used, for instance when referring to the '20 Million  Army'  as  an
         alternative name for  the  Basij,  is  also  of  a  correctly  high
         standard.

         The procedure  for  renewal  of  the  card  has  been  consistently
         followed as evidence by the label on the back,  which  indicates  a
         period of at least a year's validity  before  October  2009.   This
         particular date of renewal is also consistent with the normal  time
         frame in which these cards are renewed  every  year.   Furthermore,
         while no details of the date of issue are explicated, this is not a
         requirement for this type of  card,  whereas  the  expiration  date
         (which is required) is correctly stated.  The appropriate signature
         of the issuing officer has also been included, which is  observable
         despite its low visibility.  It is also apparent that  all  of  the
         handwritten information on the document appears faint  due  to  its
         frequent usage but are uniform in appearance."

20. Dr Kakhki's report supports the appellant's claim that the document  is
    an  authentic  Basij  card.   In  particular,  it  is   worth   noting,
    consistently with the second translation, that Dr Kakhki notes that the
    document says "valid up to October 2009".  There is no reference to the
    card stating on its front "valid until: April/May 2004".   Further,  in
    the final paragraph set out above, Dr Kakhki notes that the stated date
    of validity (on the back of the card) is  consistent  with  the  normal
    practice that such cards are renewed annually.  He also notes that  the
    card contains "no details of the date of issue" but that this is not  a
    requirement for this type  of  card  whereas  the  expiration  date  is
    required.  In his determination, the judge dealt with  the  appellant's
    card at para 59 of his determination in the following terms:

         "The  respondent  takes  the  view  that  the  credibility  of  the
         appellant's claim to have been a Basiji is damaged by the fact that
         the expiry date  shown  on  the  front  of  the  appellant's  Basij
         identity card is April/May 2004, while the appellant claims to have
         joined  in  late  2006.   It  is  the  appellant's  case  that  the
         translation is inaccurate in that this statement  simply  does  not
         appear on the front of the card.  In support of this he produces an
         alternative translation of a copy of  the  card  (the  Home  Office
         having mislaid the  original),  together  with  a  report  from  Dr
         Kakhki.   The  appellant's  name  does  not  appear  on   the   new
         translation because it is said to be illegible on the copy.   While
         it is unfortunate that the Home Office cannot  trace  the  original
         document, it was not contended on behalf of the respondent that the
         copy retained by the appellant was not  a  copy  of  the  misplaced
         original.  I am satisfied that it is, given that both  translations
         bear the same station code on the front and the same serial  number
         on the back.  It is far from clear, however, why  the  expiry  date
         April/May 2004 should appear in the  original  translation  of  the
         card if it was not there.   The  explanation  would  appear  to  be
         either that the translator has made an elementary error or had made
         the date up - both of which I find highly unlikely.   It  is  clear
         from both translations that many of the entries  on  the  card  are
         illegible.  I cannot discount the possibility  that,  just  as  the
         second translator found the appellant's name illegible on the  copy
         of the card provided by his representatives, so too,  he  may  have
         been unable to make out the words 'valid until April/May 2004'.  In
         so concluding I  bear  in  mind  that  the  second  translator  has
         included a note in his translation to the effect that the  copy  of
         the document he was translating was not clear and/or covered  by  a
         non-readable stamp.  The second translation  does  not  satisfy  me
         that the  first  translation  was  inaccurate.   In  reaching  this
         conclusion I bear  in  mind  the  possibility  that  the  card  was
         prepared with its original  expiry  date  on  the  front  and  with
         provision for renewal dates to be printed or written on  the  back.
         To my mind, this is supported by  the  report  of  Dr  Kakhki,  who
         states that it is common for Basij cards  to  be  renewed  annually
         with space allocated for renewal labels.  In my view, the  evidence
         suggests that a label renewing the appellant's card to October 2009
         has been affixed to the back.  Based on Dr Kakhki's report, if  the
         appellant joined the Basij in late  2006  as  he  claims,  I  would
         expect his card to have been renewed in 2007 and  2008  for  it  to
         have expired in October 2009.  The card, however, contains no  such
         endorsement."

21. Mr Hoshi submitted that it was, in principle, wrong for  the  judge  to
    prefer the first translation given that the respondent had been  unable
    to return the original document so that a second translation  could  be
    based upon that document rather than a photocopy.   Further,  Mr  Hoshi
    submitted that Dr Kakhki's report  was  entirely  consistent  with  the
    appellant's claim that this document was an authentic one valid  during
    a period when he claimed to be in the Basij.  Further,  the  judge  was
    wrong to infer from Dr Kakhki's report  where  he  stated  that  annual
    renewal was normal, that the absence of renewal stamps on the  rear  of
    the card for 2007 and 2008 counted against the appellant's  claim  that
    he had joined in late 2006.

22. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Richards  acknowledged  that  it  was
    regrettable that  the  original  card  was  unavailable.   However,  he
    submitted it had been available at an early stage and a translation had
    been obtained by the appellant.  The judge was correct  not  to  "close
    his eyes" to both the  first  and  second  translations.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that he had given entirely rational  reasons  for  preferring
    the original translation to the second one.

23. Mr Richards is correct that the judge  was  required  to  consider  the
    evidence that was relied on before  him  including  both  translations.
    However, I see considerable merit in Mr  Hoshi's  submission  that  the
    judge should not have inferred that the  second  translation  was  less
    persuasive given the difficulties faced by the appellant in obtaining a
    translation using the original document which  had  been  misplaced  or
    lost by the respondent.

24. Further, the judge does not, in my  view,  properly  grapple  with  the
    second translation and the fact that it does not state  that  the  card
    was  "valid  until:  April/May  2004".   Where  the  second  translator
    considers that some passage was "illegible", he  has  expressly  stated
    so.  There is no suggestion that there is an "illegible"  part  of  the
    card following the line setting out  the  "station  code"  and  "Basij"
    immediately above the boxes on the front of the card.  In addition,  Dr
    Kakhki clearly did not in examining  the  document  see  any  "date  of
    issue" or "validity" date on the front of the card.  All he saw was the
    renewal date on the rear.

25. Also, I  accept  Mr  Hoshi's  submission  that  the  judge  appears  to
    interpret Dr Kakhki's report as stating that  the  Basij  card  have  a
    validity date on the front whilst the renewal dates are on the back  of
    the card.  Dr Kakhki does not say that, only noting that the  "date  of
    issue" is not a requirement of this type of card whilst  an  expiration
    date, which he identifies as being  present,  namely  October  2009  is
    included on the card.

26. Given the disadvantage faced by the appellant and in the light  of  the
    fact that the second translation and Dr Kakhki's report were, at  least
    prima facie, inconsistent with the  first  translation  that  the  card
    contained an endorsement of validity on its front  dated  2004,  in  my
    judgment, the judge failed to give adequate reasons for preferring  the
    first translation which was, inconsistent, with the  appellant's  claim
    not to have joined the Basij until late 2006.

27. The judge's reasons in para 59 of his determination was  a  significant
    underpinning for his adverse credibility finding.   It  was  a  central
    part of the appellant's case that he had an authentic Basij card  which
    supported his claim to have been a member of the Basij who was detained
    and ill-treated in 2009.  In itself, the  removal  of  this  pillar  to
    support the judge's adverse credibility finding was  material  to  that
    decision.  In any event, taken with my view of grounds 2 and 6 to which
    I now turn, cumulatively there is no doubt  that  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding cannot stand.

    Ground 2

28. In para 57 of his determination, the judge set out, based upon some  of
    the background evidence the nature of the Basij in Iran as follows:-

         "57. The Basij  is  an  organisation  described  in  the  US  State
             Department  Human  Rights  Report  for  2013  as  a  voluntary
             paramilitary group with  local  organisations  in  cities  and
             towns across Iran which sometimes acts  as  an  auxiliary  law
             enforcement unit.  It is said that Basij units often engage in
             crackdowns on political  opposition  elements  without  formal
             guidance or supervision.  The  report  goes  on  to  say  that
             regular and paramilitary security forces, including the Basij,
             are  frequently  accused  of  numerous  human  rights  abuses,
             including acts  of  violence  against  protestors  and  public
             demonstrations.  The country background information  indicates
             that, since the June 2009 election, the  position  as  regards
             human rights and religious freedom in  Iran  has  deteriorated
             markedly.  I note, however, from the testimony of  Dr  Katrina
             Lantos Swett (contained in the appellant's bundle) that, since
             the start of the Islamic Revolution in 1979, any  Iranian  who
             dissented from the government's  own  interpretation  of  Shia
             Islam was liable to be considered an enemy of the state and  a
             potential target of abuse by the authorities.  Dr Swett  gives
             the example of Ayatollah  Mohammad  Kazemeni  Boroujerdi,  who
             favoured the separation of religion  and  state  and  who  was
             arrested and imprisoned without charge in October  2006.   She
             indicates that the ascension of  Mahmoud  Ahmadinejad  to  the
             Presidency in the summer of 2005  put  an  end  to  hopes  for
             reform.  In my view, the emergence of  significant  opposition
             movement to contest the June 2009 election  strongly  suggests
             wide  dissatisfaction  with  the  governance  of  Iran.    The
             uprising that was triggered by the alleged ......ing  of  that
             election is also, to my mind, evidence of that.  It  is  clear
             from SB Iran CG (2009) UKAIT  00053  that  the  pre-June  2009
             position as  regards  suppression  of  dissent  was  far  from
             satisfactory."

29. Then, in para 58 the judge doubted that the appellant could have joined
    the Basij in 2006 (as he claimed) in order to serve the people  in  the
    community because the Basij was a benign organisation.  The judge  said
    this:

         "58. It is against that background that  the  appellant  claims  to
             have joined the Basij in 2006 in order, he says, to serve  the
             people and the community.  I find it unlikely that,  by  2006,
             it had not dawned on the appellant that the Basij was not  the
             benign organisation he claims to have believed it was  at  the
             time he joined.  It is said that the appellant is  a  critical
             thinker.  He  maintains  that  he  developed  an  interest  in
             Christianity while in Iran, borrowing a book  on  the  subject
             and later purchasing a Bible.  If that is true, I do not  find
             it credible that such a person would have joined the Basiji."

30. Mr Hoshi referred me to a number of documents at paras 10 - 13  of  the
    grounds which, he submitted, demonstrated that the Basij had changed in
    2009.  In particular he  relied  on  a  document  by  Dr  Saeid  Golkar
    entitled "The Ideological - Political Training of Iran's  Basij"  in  a
    Middle East Brief published by the Brandies University in  the  USA  in
    September 2010 (pages CA226 -  CA235).   There,  (at  page  CA227),  Dr
    Golkar states:-

         "In 2009, the Basij changed its name back to the  Organisation  for
         the Mobilization of the Oppressed, and General Mohammad Reza  Naqdi
         became its commander.  With this last name change, came a change in
         mission:  No longer one-fifth of  the  IRGC  military  forces,  the
         Basij was now a special organisation with the specific objective of
         confronting political and cultural threats against the regime."

31. Mr Hoshi submitted this demonstrated  that,  contrary  to  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant would have been aware that the Basij was not
    a benign organisation in 2006, in fact there had been a  sea-change  in
    its methods and mission around 2009 which was the very  time  at  which
    the appellant says  that  he  realised  the  Basij  was  not  a  benign
    organisation.

32. In addition, Mr Hoshi pointed out Dr Golkar noted that some members  of
    the Basij had refused to take part in the violent  suppression  of  the
    opposition during the 2009 presidential election which  was  consistent
    with the appellant's account that he had considered the Basij to  be  a
    benign organisation previously.   At  page  CA232  of  the  appellant's
    bundle, Dr Golkar in his article states:

         "In addition, by some accounts there were active and  even  special
         Basijis who refused to take part in the violent suppression of  the
         opposition after the disputed presidential election of 2009, making
         it even clearer  that  the  IPT  programs  had  not  been  entirely
         effective in carrying out their stated goals."

33. In my judgment, in finding that was "unlikely that, by 2006, it had not
    dawned on the appellant that the Basij was not the benign  organisation
    he claims to have believed it was at the time he joined", the judge did
    not taken into account the background evidence to which I have referred
    and which would be consistent with the appellant's account that he  had
    a change of heart around 2009 as regards his membership  of  the  Basij
    because it no longer functioned on the basis he had joined  it,  namely
    to serve the people in the community.

34. This error further undermines the sustainability of the judge's adverse
    credibility finding.

    Ground 6

35. Mr Hoshi submitted that the judge had irrationally concluded  that  the
    appellant would not, in the  light  of  a  post-election  crackdown  on
    dissent, produce anti-government blogs.  Mr Hoshi  submitted  that  the
    simple fact was that individuals did do this despite the risk to  them.
    He drew my  attention  to  the  fact  (which  was  acknowledged  by  Mr
    Richards) that there was a pending country guidance case in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the very issue of the risk to bloggers.

36. Further, he submitted that the judge had, in any event, made a  factual
    error in para 64 when he had stated:

         "I can find nothing in the documents to indicate that the  blocking
         notice relates to the same web log as the screen prints."

37. Mr Hoshi took me to the documents  (at  pages  A51  -  A55)  which,  he
    submitted, showed that the appellant's web address was the  address  on
    the blocking notice.

38. Mr Richards submitted that the judge was entitled to take the view that
    the appellant would not, if he was who he claimed,  take  the  risk  of
    blogging.  In any event, Mr Richards submitted that this was an  unfair
    criticism of the judge's finding which was not based simply  upon  that
    issue.  He had, Mr Richard's submitted given a  number  of  reasons  in
    para 64 not to accept the appellant's account that he been  a  blogging
    anti-government messages.  Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  appellant
    claimed to be a former member of the Basij  who  published  a  critical
    blog including his full name and photograph.

39. In response to that, Mr Hoshi  pointed  out  that  although  the  judge
    stated that the appellant's photograph was included on the  blog,  that
    was in fact not correct.  Mr Richards did not  seek  to  argue  to  the
    contrary.

40. Paragraph 64 of the judge's determination deals with the issue  of  the
    blog as follows:

         "In my view, it  follows  from  these  findings  that  the  Iranian
         authorities had no reason to raid the appellant's family home or to
         seize his computer.  He produces screen prints of his weblog which,
         I acknowledge, contain observations which the  Iranian  authorities
         are likely to regard as anti-regime.  There is also a screen  print
         of a message that the appellant's blog was blocked for 1 or more of
         3 reasons, although there is no  documentary  proof  of  when  this
         blocking took place.  The appellant claims to have started his blog
         in 1387 (end 2008/early 2009) when, he says, it was fashionable  to
         do such a thing and when the use of  the  internet  was  relatively
         uncontrolled by the Iranian authorities.  I note that most  of  the
         content shown in the copy screen  prints  that  the  appellant  has
         produced post-date the June 2009 election.  Given the  rigour  with
         which the authorities are reported to have cracked down on the post-
         election dissent, it strikes me that the appellant would have  been
         taking a huge  risk  in  publishing  on  the  internet  anti-regime
         material accompanied by his full name  and  photograph,  especially
         given his claim to have been a Basiji at the time.  In my judgment,
         the  appellant  paints  an  unlikely  picture  in   this   respect.
         Moreover, there  are,  in  my  view,  a  number  of  unsatisfactory
         features about  the  extracts  the  appellant  has  produced.   The
         documents are, as the respondent points out,  copies  and  not  the
         original screen prints.  They are only partially translated.  I can
         find nothing in the documents to indicate that the blocking  notice
         relates to the same weblog as the screen prints.  Even if it  does,
         I acknowledge the force in the respondent's point that  the  reason
         for the blocking action is  not  clear.   Despite  the  appellant's
         claim to have run the blog until he left Iran, there is no evidence
         that the authorities took any adverse interest in him as  a  result
         of his internet postings, even during the 10 month period from  the
         June 2009 crackdown until his exit from Iran at the  end  of  April
         2010 and despite his claim that he could be identified by his  name
         and photograph.  I find that the appellant has not proved  that  it
         is reasonably likely that he ran a  weblog  containing  anti-regime
         material in Iran or, if  he  did,  that  there  is  any  reasonable
         likelihood that the  Iranian  authorities  have  taken  an  adverse
         interest in him as a result."

41. I agree with Mr Richards that the judge does in fact give a  number  of
    reasons for not accepting  the  appellant's  account  of  his  blogging
    activity.  He does, however, mistakenly believe  that  the  appellant's
    photograph was included on the blog and wrongly fails  to  notice  that
    the blocking notice is related to the appellant's website  address  for
    his blog.  Mr Richards pointed out that the blocking  notice  (at  page
    A53 of the appellant's bundle) merely states that the blog was  blocked
    for one of three reasons: "ordered by law enforcement  authorities  for
    blocking this blog"; "violation of rules to use the  site";  "published
    immoral content that is against the law".  Only  the  first  would,  Mr
    Richards submitted, support the appellant's claim.  Mr Hoshi  responded
    that given the blogs it was a reasonable inference that only the  first
    of these reasons applied.

42. It is, of course, apparent that the judge never dealt  with  this  last
    issue in para 64 of his determination.  He made  a  number  of  factual
    mistake which cast doubt on the sustainability of his reasoning in that
    paragraph.  Although it is a high  threshold  to  reach,  I  accept  Mr
    Hoshi's submission that, without more, it is irrational for  the  judge
    to have concluded that the appellant would not have run the "huge risk"
    in exposing himself to the authorities by blogging.  The context, which
    was common ground between the  parties,  is  that  bloggers  do  expose
    themselves to risks in this way.

43. Whilst the judge did give additional reasons  for  not  accepting  this
    aspect of the appellant's claim in para 64, I  am  unable  to  conclude
    that these errors were not material to his adverse  conclusion  reached
    at the end of para 64.  That further  undermines  the  overall  adverse
    credibility finding reached by the judge.

44. Grounds 1, 2  and 6 are in themselves are sufficient given their nature
    and effect to substantially undermine the judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding and were, in my judgment, material errors such that the judge's
    adverse credibility finding cannot stand.

Other Grounds

45. In the light of that, it is not strictly necessary to consider  grounds
    3, 4 and 5.  Had it been necessary, I would have  rejected  Mr  Hoshi's
    submissions that those grounds were made out.  First (ground 3),  there
    was nothing inherently wrong in the judge accepting some  parts  of  Dr
    Kakhki's report  while  not  accepting  other  parts  of  it  providing
    adequate reasons were given and they were.  Secondly  (ground  4),  the
    judge was perfectly entitled to assess the appellant's account  of  his
    detention and ill-treatment on the basis of his account that he  was  a
    member of the Basij despite the fact that the judge did not accept that
    he was.   The  internal  coherence  or  integrity  of  the  appellant's
    evidence could, indeed should, be assessed on its own  terms.   Thirdly
    (ground 5), the judge did consider the expert medical evidence at  para
    62 but that was prior to him reaching his adverse  credibility  finding
    at para 63 of his determination.  In my view, a  fair  reading  of  the
    judge's determination cannot lead to the conclusion that he  failed  to
    consider the medical evidence in assessing the appellant's  credibility
    and merely dealt with it as an add-on.  There is, however,  some  merit
    in Mr Hoshi's submission that, having accepted that the  appellant  was
    sexually assaulted, the judge failed to  take  into  account  that  the
    background evidence was consistent with this being a means  of  torture
    employed in Iran particularly against political  detainees.   I  accept
    that that, on the face of it, amounted to an error of law by the judge.
     Had it stood alone,  it  would  not  have  been  in  itself  material.
    However, it does add to the errors I  have  identified,  in  particular
    under grounds 1, 2, and 6 above.

46. For these reasons, the judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  and  his
    rejection of the appellant's evidence relating to his membership of the
    Basij and subsequent detention and ill-treatment cannot stand.

The Conversion Issue

47. Mr Hoshi accepted that the appellant had not  directly  challenged  the
    judge's findings and conclusion in paras 66-67 that the  appellant  was
    not at risk on return as a Christian convert.  He sought to argue that,
    if  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's political claim could  not  stand,  then  his  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's fear based upon his conversion  also  could
    not stand.

48. I do not accept that submission.  At paras 66 and 67,  the  judge  gave
    freestanding  reasons  for  not  accepting  that  the   appellant   had
    established that he was a Christian convert in  the  UK.   The  judge's
    reasons are wholly independent of his adverse  credibility  finding  on
    the appellant's political claim.  Consequently, the  errors  of  law  I
    have identified  above  were  immaterial  to  his  adverse  finding  in
    relation to the appellant's claim based upon his religious  conversion.
    The judge's findings at paras 66 and 67 shall, as a consequence, stand.





Decision and Disposal

49. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

50.  Having  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
    Statements, and given the nature and extent  of  the  factual  findings
    required in remaking the decision, this is an appropriate case to remit
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

51. On remittal, in remaking the decision the judge's findings in paras  66
    and 67 shall stand.  Likewise, no challenge was  made  to  the  judge's
    finding in para 68 that the  appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  as  a
    returning asylum seeker.  That finding  shall  also  stand.   The  sole
    issue for the First-tier Tribunal will be to remake the decision  based
    on the appellant's account to be at risk based upon his  membership  of
    the Basij.  None of the judge's findings in paras 57 - 64 shall  stand.



52. Accordingly, to that extent the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (to be heard by a judge other than Judge  Knowles)  to  remake
    the decision.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
