
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03715/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 1st November 2013                            |On 11th November 2013      |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                              HELLEN TUSINGWIRE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Dickson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd July 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 12th December  1983.   She
    arrived in the UK  on  23rd  August  2011  and  worked  for  a  charity
    organisation.  She overstayed her visa and  presented  herself  to  the
    police on 4th February 2013.  The following day  she  was  arrested  by
    Immigration Officers and informed that she was  considered  an  illegal
    overstayer and liable to removal.  On the same day she claimed asylum.

 3. On 26th March 2013 a decision was made to refuse to  grant  her  asylum
    under paragraph 336 of HC 395 and to remove her from the UK by  way  of
    directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 4. The basis of the Appellant's clam is that she fears returning to Uganda
    because she is bisexual and has had a lesbian relationship and would be
    at risk on return to Uganda.  The judge did not  accept  that  she  had
    ever entered into a gay relationship whilst she was in Uganda  and  did
    not accept that she would be at risk on return.

 5. Whilst she has been in the UK the Appellant has had a relationship with
    a British national and has given birth to  a  British  national  child,
    Gabriella, born on 24th June 2013.

 6. The judge accepted that the Appellant's partner was the father  of  the
    child and that his mother was 96 years old and suffering from dementia.
    In view of his mother's problems, he said it was  clearly  not  in  the
    interests of the child that the father should see his daughter  in  his
    mother's presence.

 7. He concluded that the Appellant would have the support of  her  parents
    when she returned to Uganda and it would be possible for the father  to
    keep  in  contact  with  his   daughter   through   modern   means   of
    communication. He distinguished the case of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4
    and dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to properly consider the relevance of the child's status  as
    a British citizen. There could be no basis in law for  suggesting  that
    the Section 55 rights of  a  UK  national  child  are  best  served  by
    removing that child from the UK to Uganda. It was also  submitted  that
    the asylum findings were insufficiently reasoned.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Appleyard on  21st
    August 2013 for the reasons stated  in  the  grounds.   The  Designated
    Judge noted that it was arguable that in failing  to  take  account  of
    Omotunde (Best interests - Zambrano applied -  Razgar)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 247 the judge had erred.

Submissions

10. Mr Selway submitted that the judge had made  insufficient  findings  on
    the asylum  claim but said that there was  no  reason  to  revisit  the
    issue if the Appellant were to succeed on Article 8 grounds, which  she
    clearly should.

11. According to the Respondent's own guidance on the application  of  EX1,
    at paragraph 7:

         "Save in cases involving criminality it will  not  be  possible  to
         take a decision in relation to the  parent  of  a  British  citizen
         child where the effect of  that  decision  will  be  to  force  the
         British citizen child to leave the EU - this  is  consistent   with
         the ECAJ judgment in Zambrano."

12. Furthermore, at paragraph 11:

         "In cases where the decision being taken in respect of  the  person
         with parental responsibility would require that person to return to
         a country outside of the EU then the case must always  be  assessed
         on the basis that it would be unreasonable for the child  to  leave
         the UK with their parent.  In such cases it  will  usually  be  the
         case that the person with parental responsibility will  be  allowed
         to  stay  in  the  UK  with  the  child  provided  that  there   is
         satisfactory evidence of a genuine and subsisting relationship.  It
         may, however, be appropriate to refuse to  grant  leave  where  the
         conduct of one of the parents gives rise to considerations of  such
         weight as to justify separation, if the British citizen child could
         otherwise stay with another parent or primary career in the UK."

13. Mr Selway submitted that there were no such  considerations  here.  The
    Appellant was the sole and primary carer of the child.   She  lived  19
    miles apart from the father and he was the primary carer of his 91 year
    old mother who suffered from dementia.

14. Mr Spence submitted that the judge had reached a decision open  to  him
    on the facts so far as the asylum claim was concerned but accepted that
    the Appellant's circumstances in the UK were unchallenged  and  it  was
    not arguable that the  British  citizen  child  could   live  with  her
    father.

Findings and  Conclusions

15. So far as the asylum claim is concerned, the judge reached  a  decision
    open to him on the evidence.  The Appellant did not disclose her  claim
    to be bisexual until after having been arrested by the Respondent.  The
    judge considered  the photographs which the Appellant had produced  and
    was entitled to find that they did not establish any gay  relationship.
    When asked why the Appellant could not return to Uganda she  said  that
    the family would not accept  her  because  of  her  pregnancy  but  not
    because she was bisexual. The judge's conclusion that the Appellant had
    not established a risk on return to Uganda is unassailable.

16. However, he did err with respect to  the  consideration  of  the  human
    rights claim in not applying the law properly in respect of the British
    citizen child.  In Omotunde the Tribunal held that  the  welfare  of  a
    child, particularly a child who is a  British  citizen,  is  a  primary
    consideration,  but  there   is   no   such   consideration   in   this
    determination.

17. Furthermore, it is clear that the Appellant meets the  requirements  of
    the Respondent's  own guidance on the application of EX1, which  states
    in terms that save in cases involving criminality it is not possible to
    take a decision in relation to the parent of a  British  citizen  child
    where the effect of that decision would be to force the British citizen
    child to leave the EU.The  evidence  before  the  judge  was  that  the
    Appellant herself was the sole carer of the child and that  the  father
    was not in a position to offer such care.

18. The decision is set aside and remade in  favour of the Appellant.

Decision

19. The decision in respect of the asylum claim stands.   The  decision  in
    respect of the Article 8 claim is set aside and remade.  The appeal  is
    allowed on Article 8 grounds.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

