
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03797/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 28 August 2013                             |                             |
|Prepared 30 August 2013                       |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     KT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, Counsel, instructed by Messrs LG Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,  born  on  25  December  1985
    appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Francis who, in a determination promulgated on 20  June  2013,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  respondent
    made on 4 April 2013 to refuse asylum and to remove  the  appellant  to
    Sri Lanka.

2.   The appellant's claim was that his elder sister, who had been  an  LTTE
    fighter, had been killed in 1997 and the  following  year  his  younger
    sister had joined the LTTE and married a prominent member.  She and her
    son had gone missing during the last phase of the  war.   Her  husband,
    the appellant's brother-in-law, surrendered to the army and  was  still
    in detention.  The appellant's younger brother had been forced to  join
    the LTTE in 2009 and had not been heard of since.  His elder brother is
    in Canada.

3.   The appellant completed his A Levels in 2002, going on to study at  the
    University of Jaffna.  His studies were interrupted in 2006 with the re-
    emergence of the civil war.  He had returned to Kilinochchi  that  year
    and did a computer course.  He was forced to join the LTTE in April the
    following year and after receiving one  week's  training  he  had  been
    placed with an NGO called Caritas-Hudec Wanni,  which  was  a  Catholic
    charity.  He has continued his studies while he worked with the charity
    and had passed on information to an LTTE contact, Sivian Daiyaar.

4.   In May 2009 he had been taken by the Sri Lankan army to a relief  camp,
    his identity was verified and he told the army he had  worked  for  the
    charity.  He was released in October 2009 to complete  his  studies  at
    Jaffna University.  He stayed with a friend in Vavuniya.  The following
    day he was arrested for not carrying his ID card.  He was detained  and
    released on payment of a 100,000  rupee  bribe  by  his  friend  on  14
    October  2009  (four  days  later).   He  returned  to  university  and
    completed his degree in December 2010.  He had received two threatening
    calls at that time warning him not to do anything wrong as he was being
    watched.

5.   After finishing university the appellant had moved  to  live  with  the
    rector of St Patrick's College, Fr  Jero  Selvanayagam.   He  had  been
    arrested in December 2011 after he had been reported to the authorities
    as somebody who worked for LTTE intelligence.  Following his arrest  he
    claimed he was tortured for nearly five months.  On release on 20 April
    2012 he had two unsuccessful attempts to obtain a visa to Canada before
    applying for a UK Tier 4 Student  Visa  on  31  August  2012.   He  was
    interviewed on 12  December  2012  and  his  visa  was  granted  on  20
    September 2012.  He arrived in Britain on 4 October 2012.

6.    On  28  November  2012  he  initiated  his  claim  for  asylum,  being
    interviewed on 21 December 2012 and on 7 January 2013.

7.   The respondent accepted that the appellant was  a  Tamil  who  had  had
    family links with the LTTE, that he had  studied  and  worked  for  the
    charity until May 2009 when he had been taken to a relief camp.  It was
    not accepted that the charity Caritas-Hudec had  provided  intelligence
    to the LTTE.

8.   It was accepted that the appellant had been displaced and taken to  the
    relief camp and released.

9.   With regard to the claim  that  the  appellant  had  been  arrested  in
    December 2011 and interrogated and tortured, it was not  accepted  that
    the appellant had proved that.

10.   It was stated that his injuries  could  have  been  established  in  a
    number of ways.  It was not accepted that he had been detained  by  the
    Terrorist Investigations  Department  (TID)  on  4  December  2011  and
    interrogated and tortured as claimed, although it was  noted  that  the
    appellant had claimed that his release had been arranged by a member of
    Kuraran Party after payment of a bribe.

11.  As it was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  arrested  or
    interrogated by the TID between December 2011 and 20 April 2012 it  was
    not considered he was of any interest to the authorities.  Moreover, it
    was noted that the appellant had been allowed to continue  his  studies
    at Jaffna University from 2009 until completing his BA degree and  that
    he was being released even though it was  accepted  that  senior  high-
    profile officials in the LTTE had attended his  sister's  wedding.   It
    was considered that the authorities had no interest in the appellant.

12.  The appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Frances on 5 June 2013.

13.  The judge's findings of fact are set out in paragraphs  27  onwards  of
    the determination.  She found that the  documents  submitted  supported
    the appellant's account up until his  arrest  in  December  2011.   She
    placed weight on the fact the appellant had ceased his connection  with
    the LTTE in January 2009 and had started working for the charity in May
    of that year.  He had been arrested  on  two  occasions  in  2009,  his
    identity had been verified and he had  been  released  and  allowed  to
    continue his studies at university.  The fact that some of  his  family
    were LTTE members and had also surrendered to the authorities  did  not
    affect the appellant.  The threatening  calls  which  he  had  received
    while at university had not been acted upon and the appellant  suffered
    no other problems with the authorities.  Moreover,  the  appellant  had
    obtained a passport in December 2009.  She concluded that the appellant
    was of no interest to the authorities as a result of family  connection
    to the LTTE, and that he had  no  association  with  high-profile  LTTE
    officials as the result of his work for the charity.

14.  Turning  to  the  appellant's  claims  of  what  had  happened  to  him
    thereafter, she emphasised that in any event there was little  evidence
    in the appellant's account of what information he had passed on to  the
    LTTE.  There was no  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  supplied  any
    information to the LTTE which would cause him to come to the  attention
    of the authorities.  While he noted that the appellant had claimed that
    another LTTE informant and  colleague  at  the  charity  had  told  the
    authorities he was involved with the LTTE, she said that in fact  there
    was little to tell.  She did not find the reasons for  the  appellant's
    claimed arrest to be credible.

15.  She noted that the appellant  claimed  that  in  January  2009  he  had
    buried sensitive documents belonging to his brother-in-law  and  sister
    and also claimed to have buried documents from his work with  CHW.   He
    had claimed that he had been forced to dig up the  documents  in  March
    2012.  She noted that the appellant said that he had been release  upon
    payment of a bribe.  She stated that she did not find it  credible  the
    appellant would have been released at all if the documents showed  that
    he was a  serious  threat  to  the  authorities  because  of  his  LTTE
    involvement or connections.  She did not accept that he had buried  the
    documents as he has claimed.

16.  Having referred in paragraph 32 to the details  of  the  torture  which
    the appellant claimed he had  suffered,  she  noted  that  the  medical
    report by written by Professor Lingham referred to a  number  of  scars
    which had been caused accidentally, although they were consistent  with
    the appellant's history.  She  referred  to  the  fact  that  Professor
    Lingham had been unable to date  the  scars  which  had  probably  been
    caused by cigarette burns.  She noted that Professor  Lingham  had  not
    mentioned any scars on the appellant's back.

17.  She stated that she considered  the  medical  evidence  only  partially
    corroborated the appellant's account, and that save for  the  cigarette
    burns the scars had been caused by  accidental  means.   The  cigarette
    burns, she found, had been deliberately caused but it was not  possible
    to say when they were caused.  She stated that she did not  accept  the
    scars were caused in the manner which the appellant had claimed.

18.  The judge then took  account  of  the  appellant's  delay  in  claiming
    asylum and noted that he had made two applications to get  a  visa  for
    Canada before applying  to  come  to  Britain,  and  stated  that  that
    indicated that he was not in  genuine  fear  for  his  life  after  his
    claimed release.  She placed weight on the fact  that  the  appellant's
    parents remained living in the same village and were of no interest  to
    the authorities, and she said she did not accept that  police  came  to
    his parents' house to look  for  him.   She  noted  a  letter  from  Fr
    Selvanayagam of 17 December 2012 stating that the  appellant  had  been
    intimidated by security forces whilst doing his studies,  but  that  he
    had made no mention of the appellant's arrest in December 2011 and  his
    five month detention.  The appellant had claimed to be living  with  Fr
    Selvanayagam during that time and she did not find it credible that  he
    could fail to mention such a significant event.

19.  She therefore did not find the appellant's claim to be  credible.   She
    found therefore that there was no previous record of the appellant as a
    suspected LTTE member or supporter, particularly as she did not  accept
    that he had been arrested in December 2011 or  that  he  was  detained,
    tortured or released on payment of a bribe.  She said that in any event
    the appellant's claimed involvement with the LTTE  had  ceased  in  May
    2009.  The appellant had thereafter been placed  in  an  IDP  camp  and
    released to continue his studies.

20.  The judge therefore dismissed the appellant's appeal.

21.  The  grounds  of  appeal  argued  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  her
    assessment of the appellant's profile,  referring  to  the  appellant's
    family's connections with the LTTE.  The grounds stated that if it  was
    the case that the judge considered the appellant to  have  been  issued
    with a Sri Lankan passport, and thus was of  insufficient  interest  to
    the authorities, the appellant should have been invited to address that
    point in evidence, and that  that  was  procedurally  unfair.   In  the
    alternative, however, it was argued that there was nothing to  indicate
    that the passport issuing authorities in Sri Lanka had any  links  with
    the National Intelligence Bureau database.  In any event, the appellant
    had not been arrested until 4 December 2011.

22.   It  was  claimed  that  the  judge's  rejection  of  the   appellant's
    credibility was irrational and further that the judge had misunderstood
    the medical evidence.  It was claimed that the judge had not considered
    country guidance.

23.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Ms Walker relied on the  grounds
    of  appeal,  emphasising  that  she  considered  that  the  credibility
    findings were flawed.  She stated  that  the  findings  had  been  made
    without proper consideration of the medical  evidence,  asserting  that
    the judge had not placed proper weight  on  the  medical  report.   She
    referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in AM  (Angola)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 521.  The judge had dealt properly with the issue  of  whether
    or not there had been deliberately inflicted injury.

24.  She referred to the determination in GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) which referred to those
    who were at risk of persecution  on  return.   Among  that  group  were
    individuals who were or were perceived to be a threat to the  integrity
    of Sri Lanka.  She referred to the appellant's siblings and stated that
    there was an advanced level of  intelligence  within  Sri  Lanka  which
    would mean that it was highly probable  that  the  appellant  would  be
    perceived to be a threat because of his family connections.   He  would
    be likely to be on a "watch list".  She stated that the error of law in
    the determination was that the judge's decision was based on  what  the
    appellant had done, rather than what he would have  been  perceived  to
    have done.  She emphasised  the  importance  of  family  members  being
    relevant and asserted  that  the  judge  had  not  taken  into  account
    background evidence.  She went on to argue  that  the  appellant  would
    come to the attention of the authorities on return because he  did  not
    have a passport. It was pointed out to  her  that  he  had  arrived  in
    Britain with a valid passport  and  a  valid  student  visa.  She  then
    asserted that the passport had been obtained illegally.  It  was  again
    pointed out to her that there was no evidence nor any claim  that  that
    was the case.

25.  She then asserted that  the  judge  had  not  properly  considered  the
    evidence of risk.

26.  In reply Ms Holmes stated that the judge had considered in  detail  the
    report of Professor Lingham.  The judge had found that that report only
    partially corroborated the appellant's  claim.   She  argued  that  the
    judge had considered the medical evidence  correctly  and  her  reasons
    were fully open to her.

27.  It was clear that the judge was aware of the appellant's  family  links
    and had given very good reasons for not accepting  that  the  appellant
    was of interest.  Her determination was  logical  and  the  conclusions
    were compatible with relevant country guidance.

28.  I find there is no material error of law in the  determination  of  the
    First-tier  judge.   She  considered  the  appellant's   evidence   and
    concluded  that  the  appellant  would  not  be  of  interest  to   the
    authorities on return.  She properly considered what I  believe  to  be
    the central issue in this case which was whether or not  the  appellant
    had been detained as he alleged in 2010.  She  gave  good  reasons  for
    finding that that was not credible.  While Ms Walker placed  weight  on
    the claim that the appellant had relatives in the LTTE -  a  fact  that
    had been accepted by the respondent - the reality is that the appellant
    himself only claimed to have minimal personal links with the LTTE,  and
    there was nothing to show that those links were of any importance.   He
    gave no details of what intelligence he passed on to the  LTTE  and  it
    was clear that there was nothing to indicate that the charity for which
    he worked had any links with the LTTE  or  there  was  any  reason  why
    someone working for that charity  would  have  any  intelligence  which
    could be usefully passed on to the LTTE.

29.  Moreover, the judge was correct  to  place  weight  on  the  fact  that
    although it was accepted the appellant had been rounded up at  the  end
    of the war he had been released so that  he  could  continue  with  his
    studies.  At that stage the authorities would surely have been aware of
    his family links with the LTTE, if any, and the conclusion of the judge
    that he would not have been released had those links been as such  that
    he was of interest to the authorities was clearly open to her.

30.  I consider, moreover, that the judge did properly consider the  medical
    evidence in the determination.  She was correct when  she  stated  that
    Professor Lingham had indicated that apart from the cigarette burns the
    scarring could have been the result of accidental injury.

31.  I would add that the appellant's case is totally  different  from  that
    of the appellant in AM who had suffered torture and rape  and  who  had
    been grossly traumatised, and  moreover  had  seven  scars  which  were
    consistent with deliberately inflicted injury.

32.  In all I consider that the Tribunal judge  did  properly  consider  the
    medical report.

33.  She also considered the background documentation  and  was  correct  to
    place particular weight on the fact that Fr Selvanayagam, in his letter
    of 17 December 2012, had made no reference to the  appellant's  claimed
    arrest in December 2011 and his five month detention.  It is simply not
    possible that if that had taken place, Fr Selvanayagam would  not  have
    mentioned it  in  the  letter  dated,  of  course,  after  the  claimed
    detention.

34.  The judge was entitled to place weight on the fact that  the  appellant
    waited for some time before leaving Sri Lanka - having been turned down
    twice for visas  for  Canada  -  and  that  he  did  not  claim  asylum
    immediately on arrival.

35.  Although Ms Wilson  referred  to  paragraph  356  of  the  most  recent
    country guidance case, and in particular to the category  at  paragraph
    356(a) of individuals who were or perceived  to  be  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka, there is no reason why this appellant should be
    considered to be a threat.  He had not been involved with the LTTE, had
    not worked for them and has not been involved in support for  the  LTTE
    while in Britain.  He was able to leave Sri Lanka with a valid passport
    endorsed with a visa for study and would be returning  as  someone  who
    had come to Britain as a student.  In that regard, there is  no  reason
    why he would be likely to be on at "watch" list as there is nothing  to
    indicate that he could be considered to be a person  who  was  a  Tamil
    activist working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive
    the internal armed conflict.  The reality is, applying relevant country
    guidance that the appellant is not "reasonably likely to be detained by
    the security forces".

36.  While the grounds assert that there is nothing in the jurisprudence  to
    demonstrate that the passport issuing authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  have
    links with the National Intelligence Bureau database, the comment  that
    the judge materially erred in law by finding that the appellant was  of
    no interest to the authorities does not  follow  from  that  assertion.
    Moreover, it was not procedurally unfair for the judge not  to  put  to
    the appellant that the fact that he had been  issued  with  a  passport
    indicated that he was not of interest.  It was for the judge  to  reach
    findings of fact, and then reach conclusions thereon.

37.  The assertion that  the  judge  had  not  taken  into  account  country
    guidance is clearly wrong.  She sets out relevant country  guidance  at
    some length in paragraph 7 of the determination, and clearly  had  that
    country guidance in mind.

38.  In all  I  find  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination, and find that the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge
    shall stand.

Decision

This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
