
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03992/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 4th September 2015               |On: 15th September 2015              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                             Mr Keivan Mahmoudi
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, Broudie, Jackson Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic of Iran born in
         1989.  In March 2013 he came to  the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed
         asylum,  on  the  grounds  that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in Iran for reasons  of  his  political  opinion.  That
         claim was rejected by the Respondent and in a  determination  dated
         4th September 2013 the First-tier Tribunal  upheld  that  decision.
         Finding the Appellant's account not to  be  credible  the  Tribunal
         held that he did not have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
         Iran for the reasons he had claimed.

      2. In a  written  decision  dated  4th  September  2014  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Alis found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
         failing to make findings on a discrete point, whether the Appellant
         would be at risk of serious harm upon return to Iran. The  argument
         had been made that the Appellant's illegal exit, and the fact  that
         he would now be returned without a  valid  travel  document,  would
         itself place him at risk; the First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
         deal with that argument, or the evidence that underpinned it. Judge
         Alis directed that the matter be remade at a  later  date.  It  had
         been  thought  that  this  appeal  could  be  a  suitable  'country
         guidance'  case  to  address  the  'illegal  exit'  argument,   but
         following a lengthy delay in having it listed it was agreed that it
         was not. That was because there had been a material change  in  the
         Appellant's circumstances: in the hiatus between his appeal in  the
         First-tier Tribunal and the matter  being  relisted  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal the Appellant had, he claimed, converted to Christianity.

      3.  The  Respondent  accepts  that  if  the  Appellant  has  genuinely
         converted from  Islam  to  Christianity  he  would,  on  the  lower
         standard of proof, face a real risk of persecution for  reasons  of
         his religious belief in Iran today.   The  question  before  me  is
         therefore a narrow one: has the Appellant in fact converted  as  he
         claims.

      4. In order to determine that  question  I  heard  evidence  from  the
         Appellant himself, and from a Lieutenant Colonel Malcolm  Hitchcott
         MBE, delegated as a representative of Liverpool Anglican  cathedral
         where he works as a Eucharist Lay  Minister[1].   I  heard  helpful
         submissions from  both  representatives  and  I  took  all  of  the
         evidence into account. In weighing the Appellant's account I placed
         weight on the fact that an earlier Tribunal had found his  evidence
         in respect of past events in Iran to be wanting, and that this part
         of decision had been upheld.

         The Appellant's Case

      5. The Appellant adopted his witness statement dated 24th August 2015.
         He states therein that he was born and brought up as a  Muslim.  He
         would attend Mosque on Fridays and normally prayed three times  per
         day. He continued in this observance after he arrived  in  the  UK.
         After some time however, one of his friends in the UK, a man  named
         Mohammad, started speaking to him about Christianity. At  the  time
         the Appellant was suffering from  depression  and  felt  very  sad.
         Mohammad was trying to help him. Mohammad told him that he had also
         felt like that when one day he had gone along to  church.   He  had
         there  found  peace  and  had  felt  better.  Mohammad  wanted  the
         Appellant to find the same happiness.  It was  Mohammad  who  first
         took the Appellant to a church. In the summer of 2013 he  took  him
         to Liverpool cathedral.

      6. The Appellant describes in detail the aspects of Christianity which
         he found to be attractive. Firstly he liked the informality  of  it
         and  in  his  witness  statement  contrasts  the  strict  rules  of
         observance around Muslim prayer  with  the  "relaxed"  approach  of
         Christians: "you can talk to God when you are free,  when  you  are
         ready".  In respect of the spiritual dimension  of  the  faith  the
         Appellant believes that Jesus and God found him, not the other  way
         around. He speaks of feeling  "happiness",  "joy"  and  "lightness"
         since he became a Christian.  As a matter  of  practical  guidance,
         the Appellant acknowledges that Islam also offers a moral  code  on
         how to live your life, but finds that offered by Christianity to be
         clearer and more simple.  He believes it is his duty to tell others
         about Jesus and the happiness he has found in him.

      7. The Appellant's journey into the Christian faith consisted of first
         visiting  the  Cathedral  in  Liverpool,  then  attending   various
         meetings and asking "a lot" of questions. This led to an invitation
         to join the Alpha course and a bible studies group.  These  lessons
         started in January 2014 and on the 11th May 2014 the Appellant  was
         baptised by Canon Richard White, Bishop Iraj  Mottadeh  and  Bishop
         Cyril Ashton.  He is a regular worshipper at the Sunday service and
         also attends the Iranian language classes on a Monday.  He has  his
         own Farsi copy of the bible which he reads every day.

      8.  During  the  course  of  his   cross-examination   the   Appellant
         acknowledged that a feature of conversion had been that he began to
         find negatives in Islam, and to the Prophet Muhammad. He spoke with
         particular vehemence of how he disapproved of the Prophets marriage
         to a young girl, and his warlike  behaviour.   He  agreed  with  Mr
         Harrison that he did not like war and was  horrified  by  the  wars
         waged by Muhammad and other  Muslims.  Mr  Harrison  asked  him  to
         explain how he reconciled his own abhorrence of violence  with  his
         friendship with Lt Col Hitchcott, who had for many  years  been  in
         the British Army and  had,  it  could  be  presumed,  been  to  war
         himself. Mr Harrison further pointed out that  Liverpool  Cathedral
         has a large chapel hung with military flags.  The Appellant had not
         considered this. He had not discussed these  matters  with  Lt  Col
         Hitchcott, but sought to draw a  distinction  between  someone  who
         wages an offensive war and someone who defends his country.

      9. I heard from Lt Col Hitchcott. He adopted his statement dated  24th
         August 2015.  As  well  as  being  an  authorised  Eucharistic  Lay
         Minister Lt Col Hitchcott is the Assistant Leader  of  the  Iranian
         Ministry at the Cathedral.  Lt Col Hitchcott served in the  British
         Army for 25 years, and for much of his  career  had  responsibility
         for training and assessing young Officers up to the rank of  Major.
         He mentions this in the context of setting out his  own  experience
         in matters of judging and evaluating individuals; as he put  it  in
         his live evidence, "sometimes you  get  a  6th  sense  about  these
         things". He was forthright in explaining how  he  understands  that
         some Iranians might pretend to have found Jesus in order to support
         a false claim for asylum. This is  something  that  he,  and  other
         clergy and staff at the Cathedral,  are  very  aware  of.   He  has
         personally refused to come to court for other Iranians  who  attend
         the cathedral and has also refused to  baptise  someone.  The  fact
         that some people might seek to abuse the trust of  the  Church  has
         made him scrutinise the behaviour of the  Iranian  worshippers.  He
         watches how they behave outside of formal  services  and  meetings,
         and if this is found to be  incongruous  with  their  claim  to  be
         Christians, Lt Col Hitchcott would not support their asylum claims.
         He gave the example of one man  whose  demeanour  at  meetings  was
         markedly different from that outside; whilst quiet  and  respectful
         in company he had  been  overheard  in  the  men's  bathroom  using
         overtly  sexual  language  and  swearing.    It  was  against  this
         background that Lt Col Hitchcott asked me to evaluate his  evidence
         about the Appellant.

     10. Lt Col Hitchcott met the Appellant towards the end of 2013.  In the
         early part of 2014 the Appellant started to attend the Alpha course
         and since that time Lt Col Hitchcott has known him to be a  regular
         communicant at the Sunday service and at the Thursday morning bible
         class. As well as these weekly events Lt Col Hitchcott has, on many
         occasions,  met  the  Appellant  privately  to  discuss   spiritual
         matters, Christian life and to pray together. Whilst he understands
         that no-one can definitively know what  another  believes,  Lt  Col
         Hitchcott  has  formed  the  view  during  the  course   of   these
         discussions, meetings and services that the Appellant has a genuine
         relationship with God within the context of  the  Christian  faith.
         He believes that the Appellant has the qualities required of a good
         young Christian leader.  He  has,  to  Col  Hitchcott's  knowledge,
         introduced at least two other Iranians to the  church.  As  to  the
         Appellant's  knowledge  of  the  bible  and  Christian  values  and
         teachings Lt Col Hitchcott finds this to be commensurate  with  the
         Appellant's claim to read the bible each day.

     11. As well as the evidence of Lt Col Hitchcott I was provided with the
         additional written material concerning the Appellant's conversion:

           . Letter dated 19th August 2015 from the Very Reverend  Dr  Pete
             Wilcox, Dean of Liverpool.   This confirms that the  Appellant
             has  completed  the  Alpha  Course,  has  been  baptised   and
             continues to regularly  worship  at  the  cathedral.  Reverend
             Wilcox explains that for the vast majority of  asylum  seekers
             the cathedral will  not  be  able  to  attend  their  Tribunal
             hearings,  due  to  the  demands  of  running  the  very  busy
             cathedral: "however where  an  individual  has  had  prolonged
             investment at the cathedral we do make every effort to  attend
             or be represented". The Appellant was  one  of  those  special
             cases and it is for that reason  that  Lt  Col  Hitchcott  was
             asked to attend.

           . Statement by Canon Emeritus of Liverpool Cathedral, Canon John
             V. Roberts, dated 24th August 2015.  Canon Roberts  reiterates
             that the Cathedral would not  authorise  the  baptism  of  any
             individual whom they did not believe to  be  truly  Christian.
             He states that the cathedral has  on  a  number  of  occasions
             declined to support asylum  claims  by  individuals  who  have
             requested it.  Canon Roberts supports  the  Appellant's  claim
             because he knows him well, having ministered  to  the  Iranian
             congregation in  2013.  He  has  spoken  to  him  on  numerous
             occasions since then.  In Canon Roberts' opinion the Appellant
             is a genuine and committed Christian.  Having been a  minister
             for over 55 years Canon  Roberts  believes  that  he  has  the
             experience to be able to recognise genuine faith

           . Letter dated 14th May 2014 from Reverend Canon  Richard  White
             confirming that as far as he is concerned  the  Appellant  has
             genuinely converted

           . Statement by Iranian national Mohammad Eshraghifar dated  21st
             August 2015 to confirm that the Appellant  introduced  him  to
             Christianity and that he has since been baptised

           . Statement by Iranian national Abolfazl Babayoliae  dated  31st
             March 2014 to confirm that the  Appellant  introduced  him  to
             Christianity and that he is now waiting to be baptised

           . Statement by Iranian national Ashkan Rashidi dated 31st  March
             2014  to  confirm  that  the  Appellant  introduced   him   to
             Christianity, that he has attended the Alpha course  and  that
             he is now waiting to be baptised

           . Statement by Iranian national Amir Mousari dated  21st  August
             2015  to  confirm  that  the  Appellant  introduced   him   to
             Christianity and that he has been baptised

           . Statement by Iranian national Hamid  Yomi  dated  23rd  August
             2015  to  confirm  that  the  Appellant  introduced   him   to
             Christianity and that he has now been baptised

           . Certificate of baptism plus photographs

         My Findings

     12. I remind myself that the burden of proof lies on the Appellant  who
         must establish that there is a real likelihood that if returned  to
         Iran he would be persecuted for reasons of  his  religious  belief.
         The phrase  'real  risk'  reflects  the  lower  standard  of  proof
         applicable in protection claims, and can also  be  expressed  as  a
         "reasonable likelihood".

     13. I bear  in  mind  that  this  is  an  Appellant  whose  account  of
         persecution for reasons  of  his  political  opinion  in  Iran  was
         rejected by the First-tier Tribunal. That is my starting point  for
         assessing  his  new,  sur  place  claim  to   have   converted   to
         Christianity. He has been found not to be a credible witness  about
         those matters.  I further bear in mind that it is all too easy  for
         Iranian nationals  to  advance  a  false  claim  of  conversion  to
         Christianity in order to secure international protection: it is not
         hard to attend church a few times and learn some stories  from  the
         bible.

     14. What is altogether  more  difficult  is  to  persuade  genuine  and
         committed Christians that a false conversion is  genuine.  That  is
         because these are men and women who will see the  individual  on  a
         regular basis over a prolonged period, sometimes on a daily  basis.
         These are people whose own understanding of their faith allows them
         to  discuss  it  freely  and  in  depth  with  others;  as  such  a
         superficial understanding of the message will quickly be  detected.
         Furthermore  they  are  in  many  cases,  as   Lt   Col   Hitchcott
         exemplifies, men and women who have considerable life experience in
         the evaluation of others and their motives.  In  his  role  in  the
         British Army Lt Col Hitchcott had cause,  over  the  three  decades
         that he did that work, to meet men of every  rank  and  background,
         and to assess their sincerity and capabilities. It seems to me that
         he is very well placed to make comment on whether  the  Appellant's
         conversion to Anglican Christianity is  genuine  or  cynical.    Mr
         Harrison made clear that the Respondent has  no  challenge  to  the
         bona fides of Lt Col Hitchcott nor indeed any of the other  figures
         from the Cathedral who provided their  support  in  writing.    The
         Respondent simply asks me to consider  whether  these  good  people
         have had the 'wool pulled over their eyes'.    Having given careful
         consideration to all of the detailed evidence  that  they  give,  I
         conclude that they have not.

     15. In his cross examination Mr  Harrison  identified  something  of  a
         contradiction in the evidence in that the Appellant averred that he
         was opposed to war-making yet appeared to have reached no  negative
         conclusions about Lt Col Hitchcott's military past nor  indeed  the
         Church of England's overt role  in  supporting  the  British  Armed
         Forces. Having heard the  oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant  I  am
         satisfied that his position is coherent; he  drew  the  distinction
         between military  offensives  and  defence.   It  is  however,  not
         something that he appeared to have given a great  deal  of  thought
         to.

     16.  I  note  that  the  Appellant  has  demonstrated  his   faith   in
         Christianity by regular  and  persistent  attendance  at  Liverpool
         cathedral since 2013.   He has taken part in bible study groups and
         in supporting an encouraging other Iranian Muslims, or  those  born
         Muslim, to take part and to develop their interest in Christianity.
          More significantly he has satisfied the clergy and lay members  of
         the cathedral that his devotion is sincere, to the extent that they
         were prepared to put pen to paper,  and  in  the  case  of  Lt  Col
         Hitchcott, to attend court in person.  Applying the lower  standard
         of proof, and having taken all of the evidence into account,  I  am
         satisfied and find as fact that the Appellant has  abandoned  Islam
         and has converted to Christianity.

     17. Mr Harrison conceded that if that was to be my  finding,  then  the
         Appellant must be granted  refugee  status,  since  the  Respondent
         accepts that an apostate from Islam is likely  to  face  a  serious
         harm in Iran today.   The appeal is therefore allowed.

     18. I wish to extend my gratitude to Ms  Khan  and  Mr  Harrison  whose
         typically diligent preparation and pertinent submissions  were,  as
         ever, extremely helpful.

         Decisions

     19. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contain  an  error  of
         law and it has been set aside.

     20. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity.

     21. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

         "The appeal is allowed on refugee convention grounds.

         The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he
         is a refugee.

         The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          8th September 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] The bundle contains a letter dated 20th October 2014 from the Vice Dean
of Liverpool Cathedral, Canon Myles Davies.  The letter serves to confirm
Lt Col Hitchcott's association with the cathedral.

