
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/03995/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 April 2018                     |                On 16 April 2018     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Butler, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    Solicitors

                                  DECISION

    1. In a decision promulgated on 23 February  2018  the  Upper  Tribunal
       identified material legal errors in the decision  of  Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal  Cockrill,  promulgated  on  21  February  2017,
       allowing the appeal of AK against the appellant's refusal  to  grant
       him leave to remain, dated 28 March 2014, which was maintained in  a
       supplementary  decision  dated  30  January  2015  and   a   further
       supplementary decision dated 18 December 2015.


    2. The principal issue before the First-tier Tribunal was  whether  the
       appellant was entitled to exclude the respondent from the protection
       of  the  1951  Refugee  Convention  on  the  basis  of  his  alleged
       involvement in a militia  organisation  that  committed  war  crimes
       during the Rwandan genocide. The judge found that the respondent was
       not excluded from the Refugee Convention but dismissed his appeal on
       asylum grounds. The judge however allowed the appeal on human rights
       grounds both under the immigration rules and outside the immigration
       rules with respect to article 8. The  judge's  conclusion  that  the
       respondent was not complicit in Crimes Against Humanity or other war
       crimes was clearly a material element in his article 8 assessment.


    3. The Upper Tribunal found that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
       potential  relevance  of  the  lies  made  by  the  respondent  when
       accepting the respondent's account of his limited  involvement  with
       the militia organisation  and  failed  to  adequately  consider  the
       'negative pull' of those lies. The Upper Tribunal additionally found
       that the judge failed  to  assess  other  material  aspects  of  the
       respondent's account or  issues  raised  by  the  appellant  in  her
       decisions, and that the judge failed to engage  with  or  adequately
       analyse the background evidence relied on by the appellant.

    4. After the Upper Tribunal promulgated its decision a Case  Management
       Review  (CMR)  was  listed  for  10  April  2018.  At  the  CMR  the
       respondent's  represented  submitted  that  the  matter  should   be
       remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal in light of the  nature  of
       the legal errors identified, which infected the whole of the judge's
       factual findings. Ms Butler indicated that there was  a  significant
       body of further evidence that would need to be considered, including
       witnesses to the respondent's activities between 1990 and 1992,  and
       a  further  expert  country  report.  Mr  Nath,   representing   the
       appellant, submitted that the Upper Tribunal was best placed to deal
       with  the  remade  decision  given  the  complexity  of  the  issues
       involved.


    5.  Having  considered  the  submissions  I  consider  it  appropriate,
       pursuant  to  s.12  (2)  (b)  (i)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
       Enforcement Act 2007, and  having  regard  to  the  Part  3  of  the
       Practice Direction for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, to remit  the  case  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal to be reconsidered at a  de  novo  hearing.  The
       judge's error of law undermined his assessment of  the  respondent's
       credibility and the basis upon which  the  judge  made  his  factual
       findings. There is a need for a full rehearing at which  significant
       further evidence  will  be  adduced  by  the  respondent,  including
       evidence  from  new  witnesses.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  has  the
       expertise to fully engage with the issues raised in this appeal.


    6. The case is therefore remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
       fresh hearing, before a judge other than  judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Cockrill.


















                                                   UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                                                               10 April 2018
