
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/03919/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 18 July 2013                               |On 26 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?
                         UPPRT TRIBUNL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                               ANATOLIE KOUIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:      Mr N Nason, Solicitor
For the respondent:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal  following  the  grant  of
    permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 24 January 2013.

2.    The appellant is an ethnic  German  from  Belarus  but  claims  to  be
    stateless. His date of birth is 15 August 1949.  He  has  been  granted
    discretionary leave to remain valid until 25 March 2015 but his  asylum
    application was refused on 26  March  2012.  His  appeal  against  that
    refusal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin and  dismissed  by
    way  of  a  determination  promulgated  on   3   October   2012.   That
    determination sets out his  immigration  and  litigation  histories  in
    detail and it is not  necessary  to  repeat  them  here.   The  salient
    features  shall  be  included  in  our  assessment  and  findings.  The
    appellant was unrepresented at that hearing.

3.    The appellant's case is that he has been politically active since  the
    1970s,  initially  against  the  Soviet  government  and  then  against
    President Lukashenka. He was a member of the Belarus Popular Front.  He
    was beaten several times by the KGB on account of his politics and  his
    anti-government writings and, eventually, fearful of the threats he had
    received, he left the country in March 1999, leaving behind his family.
    Thereafter, he spent time in many European countries trying  to  obtain
    asylum and finally entered the UK in 2002. He maintains that his family
    in Minsk have been harassed by the authorities.  He  has  been  to  the
    Belarus Embassy on several occasions but has been refused  a  passport.
    As a result, he maintains that he is a refugee.

4.    The First-tier Tribunal took as its starting point  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Irvine dismissing the appellant's  earlier
    asylum appeal on 2 August 2005. The findings in that determination  are
    summarised at paragraph 32 of Judge Levin's decision. Judge Levin  took
    note of the appellant's oral evidence but concluded that in the absence
    of any further evidence, the earlier findings stood. He then went on to
    consider the issue of statelessness and found that on the basis of  the
    report on Belarusian citizenship submitted by the  respondent  and  the
    fact  that  there  was  no  official  confirmation  of  termination  of
    citizenship, the appellant was not stateless. He found that  there  was
    no credible evidence to show that the authorities would have sufficient
    interest in the appellant to terminate his citizenship and that he  had
    fabricated the account of his family being visited by  KGB  agents.  He
    considered that the appellant's failure to submit his passport  to  the
    Belarusian Embassy further indicated that he was seeking to thwart  the
    renewal process. He also considered that the appellant's willingness to
    go back to Belarus  was  evidence  that  he  had  no  fear  of  return.
    Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge  did  not
    make findings on the letters from  the  International  Organisation  of
    Migration (IOM) which had tried to assist the  appellant  to  obtain  a
    passport and return to Belarus.

The hearing

6.    Prior to the hearing  an  application  was  made  by  the  appellant's
    representatives for a fresh document to be admitted into evidence under
    Rule 15 (2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  no
    decision appears to have been made on that.  At the  hearing  Mr  Nason
    explained that this was evidence obtained from  the  respondent's  file
    obtained following  a  subject  access  request  made  under  the  Data
    Protection Act and so its admission would not prejudice  the  Secretary
    of State. Mr Tarlow did not object and the evidence  was  admitted.  It
    consisted of a Case Record Sheet of two pages from the  UKBA  file.  On
    the first page there is an entry dated 20 March 2007 which reads:

      "Fax rec'd from Belarus Embassy confirming that sub is not  a  Belarus
    national".

      On the second page, the entry dated 5 December 2007 reads:

      "As per our discussion. There is a letter  from  the  Belarus  Embassy
    dated 06/03/07 saying that the claimant is not a citizen of Belarus but
    it doesn't say why. You may wish to clarify".

      It is followed by the following note dated 23 October 2008:

      "As per chat with (redacted) please could  you  arrange  an  interview
    for Mr Kouis who has submitted further reps on  the  grounds  of  being
    stateless. As sub has previously had a Belarus passport, it is believed
    that an interview would be beneficial in order  to  establish  why  the
    authorities are now refusing him a new passport".

      Suggested lines of enquiry are listed  and  there  follows  a  further
    note dated 23 October 2008:

      "I agree with decision of caseworker outlined above  having  discussed
    this case and the issue of statelessness which  requires  investigation
    at interview".

      The appellant, who was present at the hearing, confirmed that  he  had
    never been called for an interview in 2008 or thereafter.

7.    Mr Tarlow also submitted a file note. This is dated 26 March 2012.  It
    confirms the grant of discretionary leave to the appellant. It  briefly
    sets out the basis of his claim and then states:

      Consideration
      "There are no reason (sic)  to  grant  asylum  and  applicant  is  not
    stateless".
      Decision
      I have therefore decided to make  a  discretionary  grant  of  limited
    leave...for 3 years until 25.03.2015".

8.    Mr Tarlow tried to find the letter/fax from the  Embassy  referred  to
    in the first note but was unable to do  so.  Mr  Nason  confirmed  that
    having retained the appellant's passport since February  2002  when  he
    made his initial asylum claim, the respondent returned  it  to  him  in
    2011. The appellant had then tried to renew it by  sending  it  to  the
    village council in Belarus but this proved unsuccessful and he had  now
    received it back.

 9.   We then heard submissions. Mr Nason submitted that the judge  had  not
    properly considered the evidence from the IOM which had been  assisting
    the appellant for some time. There were no findings on the  letters  or
    the telephone call from the IOM to the Embassy  during  the  course  of
    which the Embassy official had confirmed that  the  appellant  was  not
    entitled to Belarusian citizenship. He argued that given  the  lack  of
    findings on a key issue of the appeal,  the  entire  determination  was
    undermined. Mr Nason further submitted that the  law  on  statelessness
    and citizenship was very complicated. He relied on ST (Ethnic  Eritrean
    - nationality - return) Ethiopia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  252  (IAC)  and  MA
    (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289 and  submitted  that  if  the  appellant
    could show that he had been deprived of citizenship  for  a  Convention
    reason then he was entitled to refugee  status;  he  did  not  have  to
    establish a real risk of persecution.   Mr  Nason  submitted  that  the
    respondent had not provided any reasons for continuing to maintain that
    the appellant was not stateless and had still  failed  to  provide  the
    skeleton argument that she had been directed to submit.  Despite  those
    shortcomings in the respondent's case, the judge had made  findings  on
    primary Belarusian law. He was not  an  expert  in  that  and  had  not
    received any assistance from anyone who was. He pointed to ST where the
    Tribunal had benefited from expert evidence. Finally, he submitted that
    when applying Devaseelan the  judge  had  failed  to  include  all  the
    appellant's attempts to obtain a passport when he made his assessment.

10.    Mr  Tarlow  responded.  He  submitted  that  the  determination   was
    sustainable. The appellant had failed to provide any evidence that  his
    citizenship had been terminated. The judge was entitled  to  find  that
    the appellant had attempted to thwart the passport  renewal  procedure.
    He submitted that he  was  unclear  as  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    retention of the passport by the Secretary of State. He submitted  that
    even if the appellant was not entitled to  Belarusian  citizenship,  he
    had not shown a link between that denial and the Refugee Convention and
    nor had he shown any real  risk  of  persecution.  He  asked  that  the
    decision of the judge be upheld.

11.   In  reply,  Mr  Nason  argued  that  an  individual  could  be  denied
    citizenship for a Convention reason yet not be at risk of  persecution;
    the two issues were mutually exclusive. He submitted that the  decision
    should be set aside and remade; there was sufficient evidence  for  the
    appeal to be allowed without the necessity of further oral evidence. He
    submitted that the appellant  had  always  claimed  to  be  politically
    active. Findings had been made that he had expressed  political  views.
    The Embassy  refused  to  provide  reasons  for  refusing  to  issue  a
    passport; this suggested that something was amiss.  The  appellant  had
    never been given even an oral explanation.

12.   That concluded the proceedings. We reserved  our  determination  which
    we now give.

Findings and Conclusions

 13.  Having carefully considered the evidence and the submissions made,  we
    are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  errors  of  law.
    Whilst he was of course obliged to  take  the  determination  of  Judge
    Irvine as his starting  point,  he  failed  to  consider  the  previous
    findings in the light of all the subsequent evidence. Given  that  some
    eight years had passed since that  determination  was  promulgated  and
    that the appellant had since then made many  unsuccessful  attempts  to
    obtain a passport from the Belarusian authorities both in London and in
    Belarus, the judge should have considered those matters as part of  the
    consideration of the earlier findings. Instead, it may be seen that  he
    only considered these matters after upholding the previous findings.

14.   The judge had a number of letters  from  the  IOM  before  him.  These
    detailed  the  many  times  the   appellant   applied   for   voluntary
    repatriation and a passport. The IOM also confirmed that  it  had  been
    told by the Embassy that the appellant was not a  Belarusian  national.
    The judge referred to this information in his determination but made no
    findings on this evidence other than reaching  a  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had  deliberately  sought  to  thwart  the  passport  renewal
    process. No good reasons are provided for this conclusion and given the
    material from the IOM, the finding that the appellant continues to be a
    Belarus citizen is unsupported by any evidence.

15.   We are also of the view that the judge misdirected himself as  to  the
    law. There is no consideration of the country guidance decision  in  ST
    or of MA, a leading Court of Appeal decision on statelessness. The test
    set out at paragraph 57 of the determination is unsupported by any case
    law and his conclusion that the appellant's application  for  voluntary
    return undermines his claim for protection is contrary to the  guidance
    in MA and ST where it is expected that a claimant will at least attempt
    to establish his claim to statelessness by  visiting  the  Embassy  and
    applying for documents.

16.   For all these reasons  the  determination  is  unsustainable  and  the
    decision is set aside.

17.   We now proceed to assess the evidence with  a  view  to  remaking  the
    decision. We are bound to say, at the outset, that notwithstanding  our
    decision to set aside Judge Levin's determination, we agree fully  with
    his description of the manner in which the respondent  has  dealt  with
    this case as a "public disgrace". Details are set out at paragraphs  7-
    14 of his determination and include the respondent's failure to  attend
    the hearing, failure to have access to the Home Office file, failure to
    respond to repeated directions and a failure to prepare  for  hearings,
    all of which resulted in several adjournments and more delays  for  the
    appellant. We would add that Mr Tarlow was not responsible for  any  of
    these failings and had prepared for the hearing before us.

18.   The production of the UKBA file notes at the  hearing  before  us,  by
    the appellant and not the respondent, only serves to reinforce the view
    taken by the First-tier Tribunal. It is  the  case  that  although  the
    respondent rejected the appellant's claim that  he  had  submitted  his
    passport at his first asylum interview, it had been on the Home  Office
    file all along, remaining there for nine years until February 2011 when
    it was  returned  to  him  without  explanation.  Further,  whilst  the
    Secretary of State was continuing to maintain that  the  appellant  had
    not  established  statelessness  and  the   Presenting   Officer   made
    submissions to Judge Levin in that vein,  the  respondent  had  already
    been informed in writing by the Belarus Embassy that the appellant  was
    not a Belarus national. It is difficult to see  what  clearer  evidence
    there could be of statelessness given that it is not suggested  by  the
    Secretary of State that the appellant is entitled to  citizenship  from
    any other country. The evidence is all the more compelling  as  it  was
    received directly by the Home Office from the Embassy. We note that  it
    is corroboration of the information  obtained  by  the  IOM  which  was
    submitted by the appellant to the First-tier Tribunal.

19.   We further note that the passport the appellant had, which expired  in
    2001, was from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.  The  appellant
    gave evidence to Judge Irvine that he had tried to obtain a  Belarusian
    passport whilst still in  Belarus  but  that  had  been  refused.  This
    account was  accepted  both  by  the  respondent  and  the  judge  (see
    paragraphs 15 and 23 of that determination) but the  judge  found  that
    "the  fact  that  the  Belorussian  authorities  did  not  give  him  a
    Belorussian passport  does  not  indicate  that  the  authorities  were
    interested  in  him  for  any  reason  including  his   anti-government
    opinion".

20.   We can see nothing in the respondent's case to support the  contention
    that the appellant has failed to show he is stateless. We note that  in
    2005 the respondent had accepted that the authorities  had  refused  to
    issue a Belarusian passport and only agreed to issue a Soviet passport.
    Despite this and contrary to the recommendation of at  least  two  Home
    Office officials in 2007-2008, the appellant was not interviewed  about
    his statelessness. Curiously, having maintained he was  not  stateless,
    the respondent then proceeded to grant him discretionary leave in 2012.
       Mr Tarlow refused to concede the issue before us but gave no reasons
    for his stance given the compelling evidence that is now available.

21.   We find that clear, incontrovertible evidence  has  been  provided  to
    show that the appellant has been refused  citizenship  by  the  Belarus
    authorities, is not entitled to citizenship of any other country and is
    therefore stateless.

22.    Statelessness does not of course automatically mean that  a  claimant
    is a refugee and we are guided by the case law set out  above  in  this
    matter. Contrary to what was argued by  Mr  Tarlow,  we  find  that  an
    appellant does not need to establish a risk of persecution in order  to
    qualify as a refugee once his claim of statelessness has been made out.
    We are supported in this finding by the authorities  of  EB  (Ethiopia)
    [2007] EWCA Civ 809, MA and ST (op cit); in certain  circumstances  the
    act  of  removal  or  denial  of  citizenship  can  itself   constitute
    persecution.  We are required to consider the  circumstances  in  which
    that  act  occurred  particularly  when  read  against  the  background
    evidence.

23.   Judge Levin summarises the country background at paragraph 45  of  his
    determination. He notes that, as  the  appellant  has  maintained,  the
    power is concentrated in the hands of the president and a small  circle
    of  advisers  and  that  it  has  been  consolidated  as  such  through
    authoritarian means. He observes that the president introduced measures
    intended to stifle and intimidate any  form  of  anti-regime  political
    activity and placed severe restrictions on the freedom of  citizens  to
    express political  views.  Significantly,  he  notes  that  citizenship
    issues  prove   to   be   politically   motivated,   domestically   and
    internationally, and that the  implementation  of  citizenship  law  is
    dependent upon the will of those in power. He accepts that despite  the
    provisions of the Citizenship laws, the deprivation of  citizenship  is
    likely to be subject to the will of the president and his advisers.

24.   It is against that evidence that we consider the appellant's case.  He
    was never given a Belarusian passport despite his requests for same  in
    Belarus and in the  UK  where  repeated  attempts  were  made  and  are
    documented. Whilst he was issued  with  a  Soviet  passport,  that  has
    expired and all attempts to have it renewed  or  replaced  have  proved
    fruitless.  The  Belarus  Embassy  has  confirmed  in  writing  to  the
    respondent that as far as they are concerned the  appellant  is  not  a
    Belarusian national.  No reasons were given for their  decision  either
    to the respondent or the IOM Immigration Rules, for that matter, to the
    appellant himself  despite  attempts  certainly  by  the  IOM  and  the
    appellant's previous representatives, Jackson and  Canter  (on  11  May
    2012) to obtain same. Mr Nason is right to say that if  an  application
    were lawfully refused, then one would expect  a  written  refusal  with
    reasons. The appellant plainly has strong links with Belarus and it was
    his place of residence prior to his flight in 1999. Indeed, on the face
    of it, according to  Judge  Levin,  he  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Citizenship Act. In our view, the only conclusion that can,  therefore,
    be reached is that he has been arbitrarily deprived of his  entitlement
    to citizenship.  That has prevented him from returning to  be  reunited
    with his four children and his third wife whom he has  not  seen  since
    1999, and his grandchildren whom he has never  met.  The  decision  has
    deprived him of  his  right  to  return  and  as  per  ST  and  in  the
    circumstances of the appellant's case, that constitutes persecution.

25.   For all these reasons and in the unusual  and  specific  circumstances
    of the appellant's case, we find that he has been arbitrarily  deprived
    of his citizenship for no good reason. We find  that  this  deprivation
    constitutes persecution.

Decision

26.   The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  as  it
    contains errors of law. We remake the decision and allow the appeal  on
    asylum grounds.


Signed:



Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge

23 July 2013




