
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03853/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 14 October 2013                            |On 30 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                          Mohammad Saeed Jabarkhel

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Sills, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb Solicitors
(87 Kilburn)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  12  April  2013
    refusing to grant asylum.

2.   The appellant claimed to be at risk on return  to  Afghanistan  on  the
    basis that there was adverse  interest  in  him  on  the  part  of  the
    Taliban, his father having fallen out with them since he did  not  wish
    to continue to fight for them and they  wanted  him  to  continue  with
    them.  The judge found the claim to lack credibility.   He  set  out  a
    number of reasons for this.  Some of these I shall have to return to in
    due course.

3.   A  particular  matter  was  the  issue  as  to  whether,  as  noted  at
    paragraphs 34 to 36 of the determination the appellant had claimed  not
    to know where his family were and said he had made an attempt to  trace
    them through the Red Cross, using the services of his  solicitor.   The
    judge noted that there was no evidence before him of any  such  attempt
    to trace them through the Red Cross or any other agency.  He found this
    lack of evidence to undermine the appellant's credibility as his  claim
    that he had no family members in Afghanistan was specifically raised in
    the refusal letter, as was his  failure  to  produce  any  evidence  of
    attempt to trace family members through the Red Cross.  He said in  his
    evidence that he had made attempts to trace his family through the  Red
    Cross by instructing his solicitor.  Counsel at the  hearing,  however,
    made no reference to any evidence of such attempts.

4.   In his grounds of appeal  the  appellant  first  sought  permission  to
    adduce the statement of the appellant's solicitor  who  confirmed  that
    she had emailed the Red Cross on 24 April  2013  with  the  appellant's
    details, as he confirmed he had not heard anything back from his foster
    carer or social worker regarding tracing his family.  He confirmed that
    he had not yet heard anything from the  Red  Cross  and  the  solicitor
    therefore confirmed that she would  chase  the  matter  for  him.   The
    hearing before the judge took place on 22 May 2013.  In the grounds  it
    was accepted that this did not meet the Ladd  v  Marshall  [1954]  1WLR
    1489 test,  since  the  evidence  was  previously  available.   It  was
    accepted that the evidence should have been before the judge, apologies
    were made for the oversight and  the  court  was  asked  to  allow  the
    evidence to be admitted on the date as the judge  held  the  fact  that
    this evidence was not produced against the appellant and,  as  a  child
    asylum seeker, he was entitled to expect his legal team to  submit  all
    relevant evidence.

5.   The grounds go on to argue  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  requiring
    corroboration.  Reference is made to paragraph 339I of the  Immigration
    Rules and it is argued that the appellant  could  not  be  expected  to
    produce evidence to confirm a negative, i.e. that he had no  family  in
    Afghanistan.  It  is  argued  that  the  requirement  to  produce  such
    evidence was an error of  law,  and  the  statement  of  the  solicitor
    confirmed that she had applied to the Red Cross.  The  final  point  is
    made that it is accepted that this ground  attacks  only  part  of  the
    overall credibility finding, but it is argued that it cannot be  safely
    said what weight the judge gave this negative  credibility  finding  in
    relation to the overall negative credibility  finding.   The  point  is
    made that the  fact  that  the  appellant  is  a  child  and  therefore
    obviously vulnerable makes it imperative that  his  claim  is  properly
    assessed and such an error cannot be said  to  have  led  to  a  proper
    assessment.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  failure  to  adduce  the
    evidence affected the findings on credibility in relation  to  a  claim
    based on age which required to be determined pursuant to principles set
    out in KA (Afghanistan) and EU (Afghanistan).

7.   At the hearing before me Mr Sills relied on and developed  points  made
    in the grounds of appeal.  He argued  that  the  judge  had  in  effect
    required the appellant to prove a negative.   Reliance  was  placed  on
    paragraph 339I of HC 395.  The relevant documentation was  not  at  the
    appellant's  disposal.   He  had  reported  the  steps  taken  by   his
    solicitor.  The judge had been wrong not to accept that and to  require
    further evidence.  Reliance was placed on the appellant's age  and  the
    fact that his solicitor had now produced her statement.  It was  argued
    that it was therefore clear that there had not been a proper assessment
    of the appellant's claim based  on  all  the  evidence,  and  this  was
    material to the determination.

8.   It was argued that the finding in  respect  of  the  Red  Cross  was  a
    central finding in dismissing the appeal.  Most, if  not  all,  of  the
    reasoning of the judge related to the appellant's  evidence  about  his
    family  and  efforts  to  trace  them.   There  had  been  very  little
    consideration of the core of the claim, which was that his father was a
    member of the Taliban who had decided to leave.  The only reference  to
    the Taliban was in paragraph 41.  It  should  be  contrasted  with  the
    appellant's evidence in respect of that.  The only  other  issue  dealt
    with in any detail was the separation of the family in Iran.  Paragraph
    47 ignored the nature of their situation and the lack  of  choice  that
    they had.  The point was made at paragraph 48 that it was not  credible
    to send a child from safety in Iran overland in a  lorry  with  unknown
    persons in the hands  of  an  unknown  agent,  but  what  was  said  at
    paragraph 38 in the refusal letter  about  deportations  from  Iran  to
    Afghanistan should be borne in mind.

9.   The judge therefore materially erred in requiring extra  evidence  from
    the appellant.  The solicitor's evidence now provided showed  what  had
    been done.  This was a case where the judge's error could have  made  a
    difference.  It was  a  material  error  of  law  and  the  solicitor's
    evidence should be considered.  It should be taken  into  account  that
    the appellant was a minor and had  been  denied  a  fair  hearing.   As
    regards the acceptance that the Ladd v Marshall criteria had  not  been
    met, imposing that requirement on the appellant was  a  flaw,  and  the
    Tribunal was invited to exercise  discretion  in  the  evidence  to  be
    considered.

10.  In her submissions Ms Kiss relied on what was said in Ladd v  Marshall.
     It was relevant to look at the solicitor's evidence.  No copy  of  the
    email referred to had been provided.  The process for Red Cross contact
    was familiar.  They would acknowledge  receipt  of  such  applications,
    which would have been made by the appellant himself, and  if  necessary
    with the help of a social worker or foster carer, and there was nothing
    from either of them.  The judge was criticised for not holding the lack
    of evidence against the appellant.  It was clear  from  paragraph  339I
    that an asylum applicant was expected to provide to  all  documentation
    at their disposal.   That  had  not  been  done.   In  the  appellant's
    evidence  before  the  judge  as  recorded  at  paragraph  36  of   the
    determination, he did not mention going with the foster carer or social
    worker to the Red Cross to lodge his application for assistance.  There
    was  therefore  a  conflict  between  his  evidence  and  that  of  the
    solicitor.  The email had not been submitted for consideration.  To ask
    the Tribunal to exercise discretion when all the evidence which  should
    be  available  was  not,  in  fact  severely  hampered  the  Tribunal's
    discretion.

11.  The judge had been criticised for not dealing with  the  core  account,
    but as could be seen from a careful reading of  his  determination,  he
    had done  so.   He  set  out  detailed  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    appellant based on the appellant's own evidence.  There was no error of
    law in the determination.

12.  By way of reply Mr Sills said he that he had a copy of the  email  sent
    by the solicitor on his  computer.   The  solicitor  had  produced  the
    statement.  There was no evidence from  the  social  worker  or  foster
    carer.  However, the evidence showed that attempts  had  been  made  to
    contact the family.

13.  With regard to the  determination,  the  appellant's  explanations  for
    such matters as the Taliban not finding the family needed to  be  borne
    in mind.  He said they left before dawn so they were travelling in  the
    dark.  It was not implausible that he  would  have  had  little  or  no
    contact with his relative.  The Taliban  would  not  have  found  them.
    With regard to funding, it was clear from the appellant's evidence that
    his family had land and owned property, so there were assets  available
    which could have paid for their departure.  In regard to the matter  of
    Iran the judge seemed to find it a safe place for Afghan asylum seekers
    but this contrasted with the evidence referred to in the refusal letter
    and undermined the argument about the credibility of  separation.   The
    judge had therefore erred in requiring this evidence which had now been
    provided.  The core issues concerning his father and  the  Taliban  and
    risk on that account had not been dealt with in the determination.  The
    judge had erred in law.

14.  I reserved my determination.

15.  It is important to bear in mind that the  parameters  of  this  hearing
    are defined by the grounds of appeal.  There has been no application to
    amend the grounds and consequently I have  to  consider  those  matters
    that were set out specifically there.  The argument before  me  has  to
    some extent strayed  into  the  more  general  merits  of  the  judge's
    determination, but it is argued that that is  on  the  basis  that  the
    determination as a whole has to be looked at in order to  establish  to
    what extent the Red Cross issue was  central  to  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility findings.  To that extent it is appropriate to look at  the
    determination as a whole, but the essential issues are those as defined
    by the grounds of appeal.

16.  The issue in this appeal to a significant extent  revolves  around  the
    impact, as the judge found it to be, on the appellant's credibility  of
    the fact that there was no evidence to support  the  appellant's  claim
    that he had made an attempt to trace his family  using  the  Red  Cross
    through the services of his solicitor.  On the one hand  it  is  argued
    that,  in  light  of  evidence  produced  after  the  hearing  by   the
    appellant's representative that she had sent the British Red Cross  the
    appellant's details, and consequently it is argued that  that  evidence
    should be admitted to show an error of law in  the  determination.   On
    the other hand it is argued that the centrality placed by the judge  on
    this issue is such  that,  though  other  aspects  of  the  credibility
    findings are not challenged in the grounds, it is argued that it cannot
    safely be said what weight was given to this negative finding.

17.  On the former point it  is  clear  from  Ladd  v  Marshall  that  three
    conditions have to be fulfilled in order to justify  the  reception  of
    fresh evidence.  These are as follows:

         "First, it must be shown that the  evidence  could  not  have  been
         obtained with reasonable diligence for use at  the  trial;  second,
         the evidence must be such that, if given, it would probably have an
         important influence on the result of the case, though it  need  not
         be decisive; thirdly, the evidence must be such as is presumably to
         be believed, or in other words, it  must  be  apparently  credible,
         though it need not be incontrovertible."

18.  In this case it is  accepted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
    evidence was previously available and therefore one  of  the  tests  in
    Ladd v Marshall is not met.

19.  The evidence in question consists of a  statement  by  the  appellant's
    representative Ms Dhanjal, signed on 11 June 2013.  In that she says at
    paragraph 3 that on 24 April 2013 she emailed  the  British  Red  Cross
    with the appellant's details as he confirmed  that  he  had  not  heard
    anything back from his foster carer or social worker regarding  tracing
    his family.  The appellant confirmed he had not yet heard anything from
    the Red Cross and therefore she confirmed  that  she  would  chase  the
    matter for him.

20.  The appellant's evidence, as recorded by the judge at paragraph 34  and
    again at paragraph 36  of  the  determination  is  that  the  appellant
    claimed to have made an attempt to trace his  family  through  the  Red
    Cross using the services of his solicitor.  In this regard, as set  out
    above, Ms  Kiss  argued  that  there  was  a  discrepancy  between  the
    appellant's evidence and that of  his  solicitor,  and  also  that  the
    solicitor had not exhibited a copy of the email that she said  she  had
    sent to the British Red Cross and no statements had been provided  from
    the foster carer or social worker regarding tracing the family.

21.  I see some force in Ms Kiss's arguments in this regard.   However,  the
    initial point is whether this evidence is such as to show an  error  of
    law by the judge.  In my view it does not.  The guidelines  in  Ladd  v
    Marshall do not suggest any element of discretion or flexibility if one
    of the criteria is not met.  It is common  ground  that  this  evidence
    could have been provided for use at the hearing.  I do  not  doubt  the
    apparent credibility of the evidence.  The other  factor,  however,  is
    whether it would probably have had an important influence on the result
    of  the  case.   In  this  regard  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the
    determination as a whole.  Mr Sills has argued that  the  determination
    was essentially focused on the issue of the failure to provide evidence
    to show contact with the Red Cross, whereas Ms  Kiss  argues  that  the
    adverse credibility findings are more broadly based.  It  is  important
    to note that at paragraph 29  and  again  at  paragraph  50  the  judge
    reminded himself to take account of the fact of the  appellant's  youth
    and lack of experience, and how his recollection and  ability  to  give
    his account might be undermined by his youth.

22.  The first point that the judge found adverse was at paragraph 32  where
    he  concluded  that  the  account  of  the  family   circumstances   in
    Afghanistan was unreliably vague.  The appellant had said  he  did  not
    know whether any of his  mother  or  father's  parents  were  alive  or
    whether they lived in Afghanistan and claimed to have  no  parental  or
    maternal uncles or aunts.  He claimed to have  knowledge  of  only  one
    relative, the cousin who lived half an hour's walk from their  village,
    with whom it is said the family stayed and who provided the funding for
    the family's travel to Iran.  Clearly the judge found adverse the  lack
    of evidence to substantiate the appellant's claims that an attempt  had
    been made to trace them through the Red Cross.  He  bore  in  mind  the
    fact that the matter had been raised in  the  refusal  letter  and  yet
    there had been no evidence to support the claim.  I do not  think  that
    this is a matter where the judge required corroboration in a way  which
    caused him to fall into error.  It could reasonably  be  expected  that
    there would be evidence to substantiate the claimed  attempt  to  trace
    families through the Red Cross using the services of the solicitor, and
    that was not done.  It was a relevant matter for the judge to take into
    account.  He was also in  my  view  entitled  to  find  it  lacking  in
    credibility that the visit to the relative who hid them for  five  days
    was the only time he had ever seen this relative despite the fact  that
    on his evidence he  was  the  only  relative  he  claimed  to  have  in
    Afghanistan and he only lived half an hour's walk away from the family.



23.  The judge also found it lacking in credibility that this relative  with
    whom the appellant said he had had no contact took them in and hid them
    for five days and funded their flight from Afghanistan.  He also  found
    it lacking in credibility that if the  Taliban  were  looking  for  the
    appellant's father and family they would not have called  at  the  only
    living relative's house when it was as close to  the  appellant's  home
    village as it was.  Nor did he find it credible that the family's  walk
    would not have been observed and that if the  Taliban  wished  to  find
    them it would have been easy to do so.  Nor was it credible  that  this
    person would have been able so quickly to find the cost of  the  family
    with an agent.

24.  The judge further found it to lack  credibility  that  the  appellant's
    parents would have let him go from Iran, thus splitting the family  up,
    when as he put it there would have  been  no  reason  to  separate  the
    family once they were safe.  It appears to have been done on the  basis
    that the agent needed twenty boys to be put on a lorry, and this led to
    him being separated from his family.  The judge was entitled to express
    concern that a family which had fled to safety  would  risk  a  child's
    safety in such circumstances.

25.  All these matters  taken  together  in  my  view  amply  justified  the
    judge's conclusion that he  did  not  accept  the  core  account,  even
    bearing in mind such explanations as the  appellant  gave.   I  do  not
    think it can properly be said that the adverse credibility findings are
    essentially comprised in the judge's conclusions in relation to the Red
    Cross issue.  Though the admission  of  the  solicitor's  letter  would
    clearly be relevant to the result of the case, I do not  consider  that
    it satisfies the second criterion of Ladd v Marshall of being such that
    if given it would probably have an important influence on the result of
    the case.  In fact,  all  the  evidence  does  is  to  state  that  the
    solicitor emailed the Red Cross with the appellant's  details  and  the
    appellant confirmed he had not heard anything back from  them  and  she
    confirmed she would chase the matter for him.  Though this, if it  were
    to be accepted, and I bear in mind in this regard the caveats submitted
    by Ms Kiss, this says nothing about the various other  matters  I  have
    set out above which the judge found to go adverse  to  the  appellant's
    credibility, and which were not challenged in the grounds.

26.  I consider that the Ladd v Marshall criteria are not met in this  case,
    and that this evidence does not fall to be admitted  in  assessing  any
    error of law on the part of the judge.  Even if it were to  be  allowed
    in, I consider that it would make  no  material  difference  since  the
    other  matters  which  caused  the  judge  to  doubt  the   appellant's
    credibility were such as to justify the adverse conclusion.

27.  I therefore endorse the judge's reasons and conclusions.   This  appeal
    is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

