
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03545/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th August 2015                  |On 1st September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              sara worku debele
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by P G Farrell,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McGrade, promulgated on 20th  May  2015,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against refusal of recognition as a refugee from Ethiopia.

 2. The grounds criticise the judge's  reasoning  as  follows.   The  judge
    founded upon the appellant not knowing the  names  of  the  couple  who
    employed her in Abu Dhabi, overlooking the next question and answer  of
    her interview (Q/A 104) where she explained that "sheikh"  and  "madam"
    were the terms by which she addressed them, not their names, which  she
    proceeded to give.  The appellant claimed to have used a passport in  a
    false identity, changing only her first name and date of birth, not her
    surname or place of birth.  The judge thought that more would have been
    done to conceal  identity,  if  that  had  been  necessary.   That  was
    speculative and inadequately reasoned.  The judge raised  concern  over
    the appellant's passport being issued in Ethiopia  when  the  appellant
    claimed to have lived in Abu Dhabi, but there were  no  reasons  why  a
    passport might not be renewed by post or  issued  in  another  country,
    which would be a procedure similar to that adopted by the UK, and there
    was no evidence of consular or embassy procedures.  Lastly,  the  judge
    made  no  allowance  for  the  appellant  having  been   subjected   to
    trafficking and trauma.

 3. Mr Bryce's skeleton argument for the appellant raises  a  new  proposed
    ground, acknowledging that  it  comes  late.   On  3rd  July  2014  the
    competent authority concluded that the appellant had  been  trafficked,
    but that those circumstances no longer existed and so the appellant did
    not qualify for leave to remain under the Anti-Trafficking  Convention.
    The respondent's decision under appeal made  nothing  further  of  that
    aspect of the case.  That is said to be an error in the  light  of  the
    principles that  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  to  a  victim  of
    trafficking do not cease once those circumstances no longer  exist,  or
    on a concession that there is no risk of re-trafficking.  The  skeleton
    argument  proposes  as  its  principal  submission  that  the  decision
    appealed against is not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  for  want  of
    engagement with the respondent's obligations  to  the  appellant  as  a
    victim  of  trafficking,  in  particular  under  Article  14  of   said
    Convention.

 4. The skeleton argument goes on to develop the original grounds.   As  to
    the issue of a passport, a news item is produced  to  the  effect  that
    passports are issued at Addis Ababa.  In  oral  submissions,  Mr  Bryce
    said that the judge failed to give credit  to  the  appellant  for  the
    facts  that  her  account  was  self-consistent  and  consistent   with
    background information and an expert  report,  and  that  the  original
    grounds were enough to call for a rehearing.

 5. As to a the late variation of grounds of appeal,  Mr  Bryce  said  that
    such power is in the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    Rule 5(3)(c).  He acknowledged that it would be open to  the  appellant
    to  raise  the  matter  by  way  of  further  representations  to   the
    respondent, but said there were advantages in terms of the  appellant's
    immigration status through raising it in these proceedings.

 6. Miss Aitken opposed amendment of the grounds.  She said that the  point
    was entirely novel in the proceedings, there was no good reason for not
    including it in the grounds in the First-tier Tribunal, and it came  at
    the latest possible stage.  The appellant had an alternative route  for
    raising the matter with the Secretary of  State  which  she  should  be
    expected to pursue.

 7. As to  the  original  grounds,  although  there  was  error  about  the
    appellant knowing the names of her employers in Abu Dhabi, that was not
    of great significance to the outcome.  The other grounds were  no  more
    than disagreements.  The judge's points about the  appellant's  dubious
    evidence over her identity were well taken, and cumulatively there  was
    nothing to undermine the decision.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. The judge made a mistake about the appellant not knowing the  names  of
    her employers in Abu Dhabi.  However, this is not  so  material  as  to
    amount to an error of law requiring the determination to be set  aside.
    The judge's points about  the  unsatisfactory  evidence  regarding  the
    appellant's identity are well taken.  His view on the implausibility of
    the appellant disguising her identity only to a limited extent was open
    to him, and sensible reasons are given.  The point about the  place  of
    issue of the passport is also reasonable.  The news item (which was not
    before the judge, although it might conceivably be deployed now to show
    error on an unanticipated  issue)  does  not  disclose  that  Ethiopian
    passports are issued  only  and  always  in  Addis  Ababa.   The  judge
    recognised that the appellant's account received some report  from  the
    expert (paragraph 31).  He was entitled  to  find  that  outweighed  by
    other concerns.  Reading paragraphs 21 - 34 of the determination fairly
    and as a whole, the  judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the  appellant's
    account of fleeing Ethiopia due to her involvement in the OLF, for  the
    reasons he gave.

10. That leaves the further proposed ground.

11. The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  do  not  include
    express power to permit amendment of  grounds  of  appeal,  but  it  is
    usually considered to be available either as part of the  general  case
    management powers under rule 5(1) or under the specific power cited  by
    Mr Bryce, which is to "permit or require a party to amend a  document".
    That is apt to include a ground of appeal; probably a written  pleading
    is the kind of document for which the rule is intended.

12. The later an amendment is  proposed,  the  less  likely  it  is  to  be
    allowed.  There is no reason why the point could not  have  been  taken
    immediately in response to the respondent's decision.

13. The ground is not one intended to sharpen or  develop  the  case.   Its
    radical difference from anything argued in the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    also against its introduction now.

14. I think there was at least an argument open to the appellant under  the
    Anti-Trafficking Convention.  Mr Bryce referred to authority  that  the
    absence of the circumstances under which she was  trafficked,  and  the
    absence of the risk of  re-trafficking,  do  not  exhaust  the  matter.
    However, he did not argue that the point is so obvious that the  First-
    tier Tribunal should have taken it on its own initiative.  At  highest,
    I would find it difficult to construe this into an error of law by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

15. The existence of another remedy is also  relevant.   I  think  that  to
    justify such  a  late  departure  would  require  a  point  of  obvious
    strength, once  identified,  and  no  other  way  to  pursue  it.   The
    appellant has another route.  Even if she  does  not  find  it  equally
    attractive, it enables her to put the merits to the test.

16. I decline to permit variation of the grounds of appeal.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.





                           [pic]
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                           27 August 2015
