
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03864/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th November 2016                |On 18th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                              R. S. (aka M. S.)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Seehra (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Whitwell (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to remove him  was  dismissed
    by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore  ("the  judge")  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 15th August 2016.  The judge found the appellant  to  be
    an unreliable witness and concluded that his removal would  not  breach
    his Article 8 rights, would not give rise to a real risk of persecution
    on return to India and that the adverse decision was  not  unlawful  in
    any respect.

2.   In an application for permission to appeal, two grounds were  advanced.
     First, that in the Article 8 assessment, the judge failed to  properly
    consider the issue of the  Secretary  of  State's  delay  in  making  a
    decision in the appellant's case, so that the principles set out in  EB
    (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41  were  not  properly  applied.   The  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom in September 2001 and  was  given  temporary
    admission.  He failed to return for interview.  He sought to remain  in
    the United Kingdom in October 2010 on the basis of  representations  in
    which he relied upon Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and
    requested consideration under the legacy exercise.  A decision was made
    by the Secretary of State only on 23rd February  2015,  notwithstanding
    persistent attempts by the appellant's solicitors to secure a response.
     In the second ground, it  was  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly engage with whether the Secretary of State had made  a  lawful
    assessment of the case under paragraph 353B of  the  Immigration  Rules
    ("the rules").  The letter giving  reasons  for  the  adverse  decision
    showed that her representative had wrongly considered the relevant date
    of contact between the appellant and  the  authorities  of  the  United
    Kingdom to be February 2013 when it was  in  fact  October  2010.   The
    judge had failed to consider that this assessment had been made  on  an
    incorrect basis.

3.   Permission to appeal was refused by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  but
    granted in the Upper Tribunal on 28th October 2016.  The judge granting
    permission found that the judge misquoted part of an  earlier  decision
    in the Upper Tribunal and that, although he considered relevant factors
    under section 117B of the 2002 Act, and referred to what  he  described
    as a "dereliction on the part of the respondent's duty" in relation  to
    delay, the decision  did  not  show  that  he  applied  the  principles
    enunciated in EB (Kosovo) in assessing whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances supporting a claim outside the Immigration Rules.

4.   In a rule 24 response, the Secretary of State opposed  the  appeal,  on
    the basis that the judge properly  set  out  the  relevant  chronology,
    considered the claim in its entirety  and,  in  particular,  considered
    delay in the light of the Upper Tribunal decision in Dube  [2015]  UKUT
    00090.  Overall, the judge directed himself appropriately and there was
    no error (or no material error).

5.   In a reply to that  response,  it  was  contended  that  the  statutory
    provision that little weight should  be  given  to  private  life  ties
    whilst  a  person  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  was   not
    determinative of the public interest question.

6.   I was handed several authorities, including Rhuppiah  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    803 and AZ (Bangladesh) [2009] EWCA Civ 158.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Ms Seehra said that the judge failed to properly deal  with  the  issue
    of delay and  apply  the  principles  set  out  in  EB  (Kosovo).   The
    assessment appeared confused.  At paragraph 24, the  judge  dealt  with
    delay  and  briefly  with  section  117(B)(4)  but  then  paragraph  25
    considered  the  rules  and  paragraph  27  appeared   to   return   to
    proportionality.  He made findings regarding the substantial delay  but
    nowhere in the decision did he recognise the  key  principle  that  the
    weight to be given to the public interest could be  reduced  by  delay.
    Moreover, the appellant's ties to the  United  Kingdom  might  be,  and
    were, strengthened during  periods  of  delay.   The  reasoning  in  EB
    (Kosovo) had not been applied in the  balancing  exercise.   The  judge
    appeared to focus on the fact that the  appellant  absconded  for  some
    nine  years  but,  in  striking  the  balance  between  the   competing
    interests, failed to properly take into account EB (Kosovo).

8.    The  second  ground  was  also  maintained,  although  the  grant   of
    permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal Judge made no mention of it.
     Ms Seehra said that permission to appeal had not been refused.  In the
    decision letter, the Secretary of State made  some  mistakes  regarding
    the period of delay and the point of contact between the appellant  and
    the authorities of this country.  It was not open to the judge  himself
    to make a decision and it fell to the Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    proper assessment.  The judge did not deal with this matter adequately.

9.   Mr Whitwell relied on the  rule  24  response.   The  appellant's  case
    appeared to amount to a disagreement with the outcome.  The judge dealt
    fully with delay at paragraph 24 of the decision,  properly  took  into
    account statutory considerations and then made an assessment which  was
    open to him.  The issue of delay was clearly factored into the  judge's
    reasoning.  There was no need for any express mention of EB (Kosovo) or
    a statement to the effect that the public interest might be reduced  by
    delay.  It was clear that the judge had the relevant authority of  Dube
    clearly in mind and he was well aware  of  the  precariousness  of  the
    appellant's status in the United Kingdom and the period of delay  which
    the appellant himself was responsible for, during the years in which he
    avoided contact with the authorities.  There was no error  of  law  and
    even if the absence of any express mention of EB (Kosovo) did amount to
    an error, it was plainly not material.  So far as the second ground was
    concerned, permission was not granted by the Upper Tribunal Judge.

10.  In a brief discussion on the appropriate venue, should an error of  law
    be found, the representatives agreed that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should
    keep the case.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  Dealing with the first ground, I find that no error  of  law  has  been
    shown.  The decision is thorough and carefully reasoned and  I  do  not
    accept the submission that  the  decision  shows  that  the  judge  was
    confused or that he dealt with the relevant issues in an uncertain way.
     Far from it.  He first, at paragraphs 23 to 28, carefully assessed the
    evidence relied upon by the appellant regarding events in India  before
    he came to this country, the remaining ties he has there, including the
    presence of family members and  the  appellant's  immigration  history.
    This may reasonably be described as a very  poor  immigration  history.
    Having been given temporary admission, the appellant failed  to  return
    for interview and only made an  approach  to  the  authorities  of  the
    United Kingdom some nine years later, in October 2010.  There was  then
    a long period of delay, of about four and a half years.  The judge  was
    clearly well aware of that delay and he sensibly referred expressly  to
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Dube [2015] UKUT 00090, in  which
    the correct approach to section 117A to D  of  the  2002  Act  and  the
    relationship between the public interest considerations and EB (Kosovo)
    are considered.  Again, it is readily apparent from the  decision  that
    the judge had delay clearly in mind.

12.  Similarly, the decision clearly  sets  out  the  judge's  reasoning  in
    relation to the extent of the ties the appellant has established  here,
    which are private life ties, since  he  arrived  in  2001.   The  judge
    expressly referred to section 117B(4) and the consideration there  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established at  a  time
    when a person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  This bears directly
    on the ties established by the appellant during the years in  which  he
    remained here and worked unlawfully.  True  it  is  that  there  is  no
    express mention of EB (Kosovo) but that omission falls very  far  short
    of showing any error, still less a material error of law.

13.  As Mr Whitwell pointed out, in describing the period of  the  Secretary
    of State's delay as a dereliction of duty, the judge  was  repeating  a
    concern of the Upper Tribunal Judge in a decision made earlier  in  the
    proceedings.  It is clear that the judge has in fact  given  weight  to
    delay as a relevant factor diminishing the public interest to an extent
    and strengthening the appellant's case.  What the judge clearly went on
    to  do,  cogently,  was  make  an  assessment  in  which  the   balance
    nonetheless fell to be struck in the respondent's  favour,  the  public
    interest in removal outweighing the appellant's interests.  He took the
    public interest considerations in section  117B  into  account  in  his
    assessment.  He weighed the issue of delay properly and was entitled to
    draw the conclusions he did.   Even  if  the  absence  of  any  express
    mention of EB (Kosovo) or a rehearsal of parts of the judgment were  to
    amount to an error of law, it would plainly not be material.

14.  Turning to the second ground, Mr Whitwell is right that there has  been
    no grant of permission in relation to it.  In  any  event,  the  ground
    fails to disclose any error on the part of the  judge.   In  substance,
    the challenge is to the Secretary of State's assessment of the case, as
    shown in the decision  letter.   For  example,  the  point  of  contact
    between the appellant and the authorities was described there as  being
    in February 2013 rather than October 2010.  However, the true  position
    and the correct chronology were clearly well understood by both parties
    by the time of the hearing and the judge similarly was not diverted  by
    any error on the part of the  decision  maker.   Paragraph  38  of  the
    decision shows that the judge responded rationally  to  the  submission
    made on the appellant's behalf in this context, found that  there  were
    no exceptional circumstances justifying the grant of  leave  and  found
    that a substantial factor to be weighed in the balance in  relation  to
    delay was the appellant's failure to  adhere  to  reporting  conditions
    after his arrival.  Even if permission had  been  granted,  the  second
    ground has not been made out and no error of law on  the  judge's  part
    has been shown.

15.  In summary, no error of law has been shown  and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an  anonymity  direction  and  there  has
been no application to vary  it.   In  these  circumstances,  the  direction
shall continue unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

