
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03116/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                SHI JIAN CHEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  China,  born  on  16  April  1996.   The
    respondent refused his asylum claim for reasons explained in  a  letter
    dated 4 February 2014.  It was accepted that he had been  a  victim  of
    trafficking, but no leave to remain was granted as a result.   Although
    he entered the asylum process as a minor, his 18th birthday was 2  days
    after his substantive interview, so he was treated as  an  adult.   His
    account of an alleged kidnap and of  his  experiences  in  general  was
    found vague, implausible and  unreliable.   He  additionally  expressed
    some fear of his parents, but inconsistently.  Even if his  claim  were
    taken at highest and it had been accepted  that  he  was  kidnapped  in
    2010, the respondent considered there would be no  risk  on  return  to
    China, that sufficiency of protection was available, and  that  he  had
    the option of internal relocation.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons explained in her determination promulgated on 12 May 2015.  She
    found  the  appellant  an  evasive,  inconsistent  and   unsatisfactory
    witness.  He failed to establish  that  family  support  would  not  be
    available if he returned (paragraph 24).  She did  not  find  any  real
    risk of persecution or retrafficking  (paragraphs  33-37)  and  so  the
    claim failed in terms of refugee or humanitarian protection status.  At
    paragraph 41, she found no arguable case for going outside the Rules in
    terms of Article 8 of the EHCR, but that even if there had been such  a
    case, removal would be proportionate.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    first ground was error by applying the threshold criterion  of  a  good
    arguable case to Article  8.   The  second  ground  was  based  on  the
    Secretary of State's failure to fulfil the obligation to try  to  trace
    the appellant's family in China, which might have  resulted  either  in
    identifying him as a member of a social group entitled  to  asylum,  or
    might  have  been  a  material  factor  in  deciding  whether  it   was
    proportionate to return him, being a victim of trafficking.

 4. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal on both
    grounds.  The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. On 10 August 2015 an Upper Tribunal Judge  refused  permission  on  the
    first ground.  The  decision  does  not  appear  explicitly  to  decide
    whether to admit the second ground.  It grants permission on the  basis
    that it was arguable that the  FtT  committed  a  procedural  error  by
    refusing to adjourn in order for the respondent to produce the decision
    on trafficking.

 6. In a Rule 24 response to the grounds of appeal the  respondent  submits
    that the question of adjournment was addressed  at  paragraph  11;  the
    appellant wished to proceed; and any such error formed no part  of  the
    grounds submitted to either the FtT or to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. By letter of 16 October 2015 the appellant's solicitors sought to amend
    the grounds by adding the procedural point about  adjournment,  and  by
    adding a further  ground,  namely  that  in  assessing  sufficiency  of
    protection  the  Tribunal  erred  by  failing  to  consider  that   the
    individual circumstances of the appellant  were  capable  of  making  a
    difference to the question  whether  there  was  sufficient  protection
    available, and because protection after the event is no protection.   A
    letter of 21 October 2015 indicates that permission would be sought  to
    argue the first original ground (the threshold  point),  and  that  the
    second original ground, in  relation  to  the  tracing  obligation,  is
    maintained.  A further letter of 23 October (very  properly)  withdraws
    any reliance on the procedural point, it having  been  noted  that  the
    trafficking report was on the file of the appellant's  solicitors,  but
    was overlooked.

 8. Mr Winter in submissions correctly acknowledged that the  first  ground
    was not arguable, because  the  judge  at  paragraph  41  did  consider
    Article 8 in the alternative.

 9. The only remaining ground was based  on  the  tracing  obligation.   Mr
    Winter pointed out that the cases relied upon in the grounds have since
    been overtaken by TN and Others [2015]  UKSC  40,  [2015]  1  WLR.   He
    accepted that the respondent could not  be  required  to  grant  asylum
    status other than on a current basis, and not as a form of  relief  for
    any earlier breach of  obligation  (paragraphs  72  of  TN).   He  also
    acknowledged that in this  case  there  had  been  no  request  to  the
    Secretary of State to carry out a tracing  enquiry  and  there  was  no
    application to the Tribunal for adjournment while that  was  done  (see
    paragraph 73), but observed that TN was not an authority  available  at
    the time.  He submitted that if there were  material  error,  it  might
    even now be apt to adjourn  pending  tracing  enquiries.   It  made  no
    difference that the appellant is now aged 18.  The appellant  had  been
    disbelieved especially because he gave no persuasive account about  his
    family in China.  The exercise of the tracing obligation would bear  on
    that.  The further reasons given for doubting the  credibility  of  the
    appellant, paragraphs  25-27  of  the  determination,  were  relatively
    minor.   The  determination  failed  to  acknowledge  the  respondent's
    tracing obligation.  Unlike the 2 respondents considered  at  paragraph
    74 of TN, this appellant had given the names and address of his parents
    at screening and at asylum interview.  It might be relevant to internal
    flight whether he had  any  family  support  available.   It  might  be
    relevant to proportionality that he was returning  to  a  situation  of
    isolation, to be contrasted with his situation  here  as  a  trafficked
    individual who has social work and other support.   If  material  error
    were found, then either the case should be adjourned  for  the  tracing
    obligation to be met, or the case should be resolved on submissions.

10. Mrs O'Brien said (justifiably) that her preparation  had  been  largely
    set aside by the appellant's changing position on the grounds he sought
    to argue.   However,  she  was  able  to  proceed.   She  said  that  a
    trafficked  person  aged  over  18,  not  found  to  be  at   risk   of
    retrafficking or otherwise on return, was simply not  entitled  to  any
    form of status.  There had been no time available to try to  trace  the
    appellant's parents before he became an adult.  It had been  reasonable
    to proceed to resolve his case.  The respondent had not been asked then
    or since to do anything else.  It was for the  appellant  to  make  his
    case and he was found to have given a  plainly  unsatisfactory  account
    regarding his family and his efforts, or lack of  efforts,  to  contact
    them, resulting in negative findings.  Part of the evidence suggested a
    fear and reluctance to contact his parents, and there was no suggestion
    from him that he would be any more  co-operative  or  informative  now.
    The judge had reached proper conclusions on the core  facts  such  that
    the appellant had no case, and there was no reason to interfere.

11. Mr Winter in response suggested that paragraphs 52 and 53 of TN  showed
    that failure in the tracing obligation could still  be  of  "evidential
    relevance" because the lack of evidence resulting from  the  breach  of
    duty might be relevant to assessment of present risk.  The duty on  the
    Secretary of State was  established  by  the  Procedures  Directive  as
    implemented  in  regulations,  cited  at  paragraph  12  of  TN.    The
    respondent was not absolved from a failure to comply with that duty  by
    the fact that an appellant turned 18.

12. I reserved my determination.

13. Mr Winter has done his best to  tease  together  from  the  grounds  of
    appeal and from TN some thread of argument.  However, the endeavour  is
    somewhat convoluted and strained, perhaps not surprisingly,  given  the
    history of the grounds and the emerging authority of TN.

14. The submission was notably short of references to the determination.  I
    see nothing which suggests any legal error by the  judge  on  the  case
    which was put to her.  There appears to have been no reference  to  any
    tracing obligation earlier  than  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It is certainly  not  mentioned  in  the
    generic and reticent grounds of  appeal  presented  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The failure to raise it at the  appropriate  time  has  been
    passed over in silence.

15. The critical finding of fact, no risk of retrafficking, is not open  to
    dispute.  The appellant was not (at  least  after  his  18th  birthday)
    entitled to a grant of status related either to the tracing  obligation
    or to trafficking.  There is only the faintest of  suggestions  in  the
    rather confused evidence he gave that he might not return to  his  home
    area in safety, but even if that did present any difficulty  the  claim
    is defeated by the availability of internal relocation.  The  appellant
    is a young fit healthy man, there were no strong reasons  to  find  him
    particularly vulnerable, and no reason why he could not  manage  as  an
    adult  male  in  his  own  country  (paragraphs  36  and  37   of   the
    determination).  There was no realistic prospect that on the  basis  of
    his private life in the UK any judge might  have  reached  a  different
    outcome, or might do so on remaking the decision.

16. Whether or not the  appellant's  parents  can  be  contacted  from  the
    details he gave, his case has the same outcome.

17. The grounds do not identify any legal error by the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge, and certainly not one such as might entitle the  Upper  Tribunal
    to interfere with her decision.

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




                    [pic]


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                    29 October 2015
