

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/03040/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 March 2016                          | On 26 April 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between


                                     A M
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               TEH SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs O.E Dury, Jemek Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is an Iranian national. His asylum claim  was  rejected  by
   the Respondent on 8 December 2014 and on 31 December 2014 a decision  was
   made to refuse him leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Appellant
   appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ghani
   dismissed his appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  16  July  2015.  The
   Appellant sought permission to appeal and permission was granted by First-
   tier Tribunal Judge AK Simpson on 9 September 2015.


2. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that  the  Judge
   had not given sufficient reasons for finding that a Zoroastrian  in  Iran
   would not openly display a silver necklace in public  given  that  Avatar
   Meher Baba  was  a  Zoroastrian  although  it  is  said  that  the  other
   credibility findings were adequately reasoned. It is also said that it is
   arguable that the decision merely  repeats  the  arguments  made  in  the
   recent refusal letter and that it is also arguable that there  is  little
   analysis of the relevant case law. It is further  said  that  whilst  the
   Judge did not accept the Appellant's religious  views,  it  was  arguable
   that he ought to have considered whether he  would  be  perceived  as  an
   apostate in Iran.


   The Grounds


3. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  address  the
   points made in the  skeleton  argument.  It  is  said  that  it  was  the
   Appellant's case that it would be unfair to expect him to lie  about  his
   asylum claim (as a follower of Avatar Meher Baba) in the UK when  removal
   is enforced and he is detained at the airport. It is said that the First-
   tier Tribunal did not appreciate or address this argument  properly.   It
   is argued that the risk on return is not diminished by the fact that  the
   First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the Appellant is  a  follower  of
   Avatar Meher Baba. The question is said to be whether a religious opinion
   would be imputed to the Appellant on return and whether  the  authorities
   would view his asylum claim as an act which damaged the reputation of the
   Islamic Republic. This  means,  it  is  submitted,  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's assessment and finding  at  [31]  that  BA  (Demonstrators  in
   Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and RT and  others
   (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38 are not relevant in the appeal and  that
   HJ & HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 does not  take  the  matter  any
   further all amount to an error of law.


4. The second ground asserts that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  resolve
   the point raised in the skeleton argument that the Upper Tribunal in  the
   country guidance cases of BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on  return)
   Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 and SB Iran CG (Risk on  return  -  illegal  exit)
   2009 UKAIT 00053 did not have the benefit of  the  Amnesty  International
   report of February 2012 which  clearly  showed  the  risk  on  return  in
   respect of a failed asylum seeker.


   The Rule 24 Response


5. The Respondent argues that the First-tier Tribunal made  various  adverse
   credibility findings that were detailed, reasoned  and  sustainable.  The
   Appellant and his family left on their own passport and the  Judge  found
   that they travelled as a group and given the finding that  the  Appellant
   left Iran with no problems, it was the Respondent's position that it  was
   not incumbent on the Tribunal following those  findings  (and  the  other
   credibility findings) for the Judge to then further elaborate on SB (Iran
   CG (Risk on return - illegal exit) 2009 UKAIT 00053 than he  had  already
   done at [31]. It is submitted that the  grounds  have  no  merit,  merely
   disagree with the adverse outcome of the appeal without  identifying  any
   arguably material error of law.


   The Hearing


6. Mrs Dury submitted that there was an error of law in  the  decision.  She
   submitted that the Appellant  was  credible  and  his  evidence  was  not
   properly considered and First-tier Tribunal did not take into account the
   principles in SB. The skeleton argument that was submitted had  made  the
   point that even if he was not credible he could not be expected  to  lie.
   If he had to state that he was born a Shia Muslim the risk  involved  was
   not considered. At the point of return he would be  questioned  and  that
   would mean he would have to say he was an apostate. He would pay with his
   life. The Judge did not look at current  the  country  guidance  and  the
   principles raised. His appeal should be allowed. He illegally  exited  as
   the passport was not his passport but had his  face  on  it.  He  claimed
   asylum on the day of arrival. She relied on the grounds and asked for the
   matter be remitted or be allowed. He was born Muslim and  had  converted.
   He exhibited enough knowledge for him to be at risk on return and for him
   to be believed to be credible.


7. Mr Mills said that he was confused by the grant of permission. The First-
   Tier Judge granting permission said in paragraph 3 that he  was  troubled
   by the Judge's finding in relation to wearing a necklace  in  public.  Mr
   Mills submitted that it was not clear  what  the  problem  was  with  the
   findings at paragraph 23. Other than that, Judge Simpson did not see  any
   problems with other credibility findings. Ms Dury said that the fact that
   he was disbelieved did not mean he was not risk. The  findings  that  the
   Judge made were that he was not credible and that meant he would  not  be
   at risk. The  Judge  rejected  his  evidence  and  so  he  would  not  be
   recognised as an apostate. It was unclear what there was to  consider  in
   the alternative. The other aspect was risk on return. The grounds  argued
   that BA needed to be considered. The Judge  expressly  made  the  finding
   that there had been no sur place activity so BA was not  applicable.  The
   principle that a claimant could not be expected to lie did not apply to a
   rejected asylum seeker who was said to advance the basis of his  rejected
   asylum appeal. The other point argued by the Appellant was that the Judge
   should have departed from country guidance.  There  was  nothing  in  the
   evidence to justify that departure.


8. In reply Mrs Dury  submitted  that  there  was  no  further  evidence  or
   questioning about the sitting arrangement in the taxi. The  Tribunal  had
   made an assumption and looking at the case law that was reached in error.




   Discussion and Findings


9. The grounds of appeal do not seek to  impugn  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   credibility findings. The First-tier Tribunal made a  number  of  adverse
   credibility findings which I find were fully and adequately reasoned from
   paragraphs 23 to 30 of the decision. He found that  there  were  a  large
   number of inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence. He found that  the
   Appellant displayed a complete lack of knowledge about  his  newly  found
   faith and that he was not a convert as he claimed to be.  He  found  that
   the evidence he had given that he had met a man who spoke  to  him  about
   Meher Baba in a taxi was not credible and that the described meeting  did
   not occur. He found the  Appellant's  evidence  about  the  raid  on  the
   meetings and escape not to be  credible.  He  found  that  the  Appellant
   travelled on his own national passport [24] and that he was able to leave
   Iran because the authorities had no adverse interest  in  him.  He  found
   that he was not a follower of Avatar Meher Baba.


10. He therefore  rejected  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  in  its
   entirety. He then considered the case of SB (Iran) CG (risk on  return  -
   illegal exit) 2009 UKAIT 00053 and concluded that the Appellant  had  not
   been involved in sur place activities and that he did not  have  a  well-
   founded fear of persecution as claimed.


11. The grounds do not argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  credibility
   findings are perverse or inadequately reasoned. It is  therefore  perhaps
   strange that this is an issue that is raised in the grant of  permission.
   In any event,  since  the  matter  has  been  raised,  I  find  that  the
   credibility finding raised in the  grant  of  permission  was  adequately
   reasoned. He found at [23] that it was highly implausible that  a  person
   would openly display a silver necklace with a  picture  of  Avatar  Meher
   Baba in the society of Iran which is highly intolerant of other  beliefs.
   The objective evidence from the COI Report at page 15 of the  Appellant's
   bundle shows that the constitution recognises Zoroastrians and  they  are
   generally allowed to worship without interference. However,  the  grounds
   on which the First-tier Tribunal found that the account was not  credible
   was that a conversation about this religion which included  the  exchange
   of telephone numbers could not plausibly have taken place in front of the
   taxi-driver. This finding is, I find, unimpeachable in the light  of  the
   objective evidence at page 15 of the Appellant's bundle  that  conversion
   by Muslims to non-Muslim religion is punishable by  death.  Further,  the
   implausibility of the  conversation  was  not  the  sole  basis  for  his
   rejection  of  the  account.  He  identified   inconsistencies   in   the
   Appellant's evidence at [26].


12. The first point in the grounds  is  that  the  Appellant  could  not  be
   expected to lie about his asylum claim, as follower of Avatar Meher  Baba
   in the UK, when removal was enforced at the airport. It is said that this
   point was made in the skeleton argument (which it was) and that the First-
   tier Tribunal did not appreciate this argument and address  it  properly.
   In advancing this argument the Appellant relies on the cases of  HJ(Iran)
   & HT (Cameroon) v SSSHD [2010] UKSC 31, RT and others (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD
   [2012] UKSC 38, BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on  return)  Iran  CG
   [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and SB (risk on return -illegal exit) Iran CG [2009]
   UKAIT 00053.


13. The First-Tier Tribunal found that the Appellant was not a  follower  of
   Avatar Meher Baba and that  he  had  exited  legally.  In  BA  the  Upper
   Tribunal found that there is not a real risk of persecution for those who
   have exited Iran illegally or  are  merely  returning  from  Britain  and
   followed and endorsed the conclusions of  the  Tribunal  in  the  country
   guidance case of SB. Having found therefore that the Appellant had exited
   legally the First-tier Tribunal cannot have been said to have  erred,  on
   the basis of the country guidance, in finding that the Appellant was  not
   at risk of persecution. Further, as he had rejected  the  entire  factual
   basis for the Appellant's claim, there were no grounds on which he should
   have considered whether the Appellant would be perceived as  an  apostate
   in Iran.


14. The grounds and skeleton argument misunderstand the cases of  HJ  (Iran)
   and RT.  The Supreme Court in HJ held that if an applicant will  not  act
   in a way which invites persecution, but avoids persecution by  concealing
   fundamental parts of his identity and personality, then he is entitled to
   asylum. In RT the Supreme Court held that the HJ (Iran) principle applied
   to applicants who claimed asylum on the grounds of a well-founded fear of
   persecution for reasons of  lack  of  political  belief.  The  Convention
   reasons reflect characteristics which either  the  individual  is  unable
   change or cannot be expected to change because they are so closely linked
   to his identity or are an expression of fundamental rights. The HJ (Iran)
   principle applies to a person  who  has  political  beliefs  and  has  to
   conceal them in order to avoid the persecution that he would suffer if he
   were to disclose them.


15. The principle in the above cases does not extend to  a  situation  where
   the Appellant has made a false asylum claim and is questioned on  return.
   Clearly having made a false asylum claim cannot be said to be related  to
   an expression  of  fundamental  rights  or  a  characteristic  linked  to
   identity. The Refugee Convention does  not  protect  applicants  who  are
   questioned about a false asylum claim. The First-tier Tribunal  therefore
   did not err in its assessment of risk or fail  to  apprehend  a  relevant
   argument.

16. The grounds also argue that the Upper Tier Tribunal  did  not  have  the
   benefit of current country evidence. The Amnesty International Report  of
   2012 is referred to in the  grounds  but  was  not  referred  to  in  the
   skeleton argument before the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is  said  in  the
   grounds that the question is, in the  light  of  the  report,  whether  a
   religious opinion would be imputed  to  the  Appellant  and  whether  the
   authorities would view his asylum claim  as  an  act  which  damaged  the
   reputation of the Islamic Republic.


17. The Amnesty International Report 2012  was  not  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. References to it were made in an extract from the  Respondent's
   COIR dated September 2013 at p14 of the Appellant's bundle. That  extract
   stated that failed asylum seekers risked arrest if they returned to Iran,
   particularly if forcibly returned, where  their  asylum  application  was
   known to the authorities. A Swiss refugee agency  is  referred  to  which
   quoted an unnamed judge who stated that asylum seekers were  interrogated
   on return, whether or not they had been political activists  in  Iran  or
   abroad. Police would investigate whether they had done or  said  anything
   which could damage the reputation of the Islamic Republic. Returnees were
   held for a few days until it was clear to the police that  they  had  not
   been involved in political activity.


18. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant's  account  was  simply
   untrue in its entirety. The background evidence does not demonstrate that
   failed asylum seekers are at risk per se. In the circumstances there  was
   clearly no requirement for him to have regard  to  the  contents  of  the
   Amnesty International Report as it cannot  be  said  that  the  Appellant
   could have been at risk according to that evidence on the  basis  of  the
   findings made. There was therefore  no  basis  on  which  the  First-tier
   Tribunal could arguably have  departed  from  the  country  guidance  and
   therefore no error of law.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray


