

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03927/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd  March 2016                   |On 11th  April 2016                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                              SUMATHY MARKANDU
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:            The Appellant (unrepresented)
For the Respondent:         Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of Sumathy Markandu, a citizen of Sri Lanka born 30
      September 1976, against the  decision  of  19  February  2015  to  set
      removal directions against her following the  refusal  of  her  asylum
      claim.


   2. Her asylum claim was based on having  provided  support  to  the  LTTE
      whilst a student, by way of cooking food, raising funds, helping  with
      conferences and participating in  role  plays.  Additionally  she  had
      canvassed for a MP in 2004. On 20 June 2007 the  army  asked  her  and
      others to assemble on the A9 road and following their  identity  being
      checked, she  was  arrested,  taken  to  Kumblavalah  Pillaiyar  camp,
      detained for three days, blindfolded, struck with a baton, and accused
      of being a LTTE  member.  She  denied  those  allegations  though  she
      admitted the assistance she had given them  generally.  Following  her
      release  having  paid  a  bribe,  she  was  subjected   to   reporting
      conditions, to which she adhered for four months, then becoming wanted
      by the police after she breached them. In 2008 gang members associated
      with the Eelam People's Democratic Party (a political party and a pro-
      government paramilitary  organization)  visited  her  three  times  in
      Manipay, and accused her of being an LTTE member,  and  threatened  to
      arrest and kill her. She relocated to Colombo where she lived  with  a
      Sinhalese family before making arrangements to leave the country.


   3. Her asylum claim was refused because, whilst her claim  to  have  been
      detained following a round-up was credible, as were her activities  in
      support of the LTTE, she had variously stated that she had been sought
      by the police after she stopped reporting, and that her uncle had used
      his  influence  with  an  EPDP  member  to  terminate  her   reporting
      requirements; furthermore it was not  credible  that  she  could  have
      relocated to Colombo with the assistance of  a  EPDP  member  if  that
      organisation sought to arrest and kill her. Her use of false documents
      to enter the United Kingdom counted against her credibility.


   4. It was noted that a Rule 35 report had been submitted on 14 April 2014
      expressing a medical practitioner's concerns about her torture  claim,
      though this was not accepted as amounting to independent  evidence  of
      her allegation.


   5. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed her appeal on 22 December  2015.  It
      assessed her  claim,  finding  that  her  account  was  not  credible,
      upholding the Respondent's thinking that her claim to have  been  both
      assisted by, and threatened with harm by, the EPDP to be inconsistent,
      given her uncle's influence with them; it was not plausible  that  the
      EPDP would have left her unharmed had they truly threatened  her;  her
      failure to claim asylum in France also undermined her application, and
      she had given no reasonable explanation for her eleven month delay  in
      claiming asylum after arriving here. In any event she did not  have  a
      profile that would put her at risk, applying the Country Guidelines. A
      preliminary issue was considered by  way  of  an  adjournment  request
      because a report from Consultant  Psychiatrist  Dr  Persaud  had  been
      produced too late: the underlying examination had  taken  place  on  9
      December 2015 and it was unreasonable for it not to have been provided
      until the morning of the hearing on 16 December 2015.


   6. Grounds of appeal contended that the exclusion of the medical evidence
      was unfair. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 15
      January 2016 on the basis that the Judge might have  erred  given  the
      allegation in the grounds that the report was only sent to her lawyers
      by its author on 15 December 2015.


   7. Professor Persaud's report which the First-tier Tribunal  saw  fit  to
      exclude notes that the Appellant appeared  to  be  too  frightened  to
      discuss the torture she experienced in detention in Sri Lanka  in  any
      detail, and concludes with his opinion  that  Applicant  continued  to
      suffer from a serious psychiatric disorder, major depression and PTSD,
      and he did not believe that she would be able to survive in Sri  Lanka
      because of the mental and physical health  problems  she  would  face.
       Her concern that she had sustained long term damage  in  the  pelvic
      area following the violence inflicted  on  her  during  her  detention
      which  had   contributed   to   her   miscarriage   required   further
      investigation and reassurance. The appropriate treatment was  unlikely
      to be available to her in Sri Lanka. She presented  moderate  to  high
      risks of completing suicide as she expressed  hopelessness  about  her
      future.


   8. As to her Article 8 claim, it was accepted that she was in  a  genuine
      and subsisting relationship with her British  citizen  husband.  Given
      that the case could  succeed  under  the  Rules  only  if  the  couple
      established insurmountable obstacles counting  against  their  removal
      abroad, and bearing in mind that her husband was of Sri Lankan  origin
      and a failed asylum seeker, he would have spent  his  formative  years
      there and was fluent in Tamil, and  admitted  to  maintaining  contact
      with family members there. He had previously worked as a bus conductor
      in Sri Lanka and there was no  reason  to  think  he  could  not  find
      employment in the future. The  First-tier  Tribunal  expressly  relied
      upon Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 where it was  found  that  the  "mere
      fact" that the Sponsor was a British citizen who  had  lived  all  his
      life here and had employment here, and was reluctant to relocate to  a
      country where they would face some difficulty in the future, could not
      constitute insurmountable obstacles.


   9. Before me Mr Tarlow submitted that the decision was a reasonable  case
      management one and that in any event taking the claim at  its  highest
      it could not succeed applying the relevant Country Guidelines.


  Findings and reasons


  10. I had previously adjourned this appeal with a view  to  the  Appellant
      finding legal representation, those solicitors who appear to remain on
      the record for her having nevertheless not attended the  last  or  the
      present hearings. I now consider that  there  is  no  real  chance  of
      representation eventuating, given the Appellant's statement  that  her
      lawyers no longer wished to act for her and that she wished to proceed
      with the hearing without any representative.


  11. It is trite law that asylum appeals require "anxious scrutiny" -- see,
      by way of example, the decision of the House  of  Lords  in  Bugdaycay
      [1987] AC 514. They are appeals which potentially involve vital issues
      of life, limb and liberty. In consequence, the overriding objective to
      ensure that  justice  is  done  must  inevitably  outweigh  all  other
      considerations. In SA [2006] EWCA Civ 1302 at [29] Potter LJ clarified
      that one role for a medical report  is  "to  corroborate  and/or  lend
      weight to the account of the asylum seeker by a clear statement as  to
      the consistency of old scars found with the history given", and it  is
      clear that evidence going to  mental  health  may  also  bear  on  the
      assessment of credibility. In these circumstances I consider that  the
      decision to exclude potentially vital evidence only  because  of  case
      management failings was contrary to the interests of justice.


  12. So I accept that the decision is flawed by an error of law. That  does
      not  necessarily  demonstrate  that  the  appeal  requires  rehearing,
      however, as the question remains whether this is a material  error  of
      law, as the failing is only a material one if it might  arguably  have
      had an impact on the outcome of the appeal.


  13. In assessing the risks faced by the Appellant on a return, it would of
      course be necessary to base any findings  on  the  Country  Guidelines
      determination of GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
      UKUT  319  (IAC).  Indeed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  referenced  that
      decision. As can be seen note from the headnote, in so far as relevant
      to this appeal, that: "(3) The government's present  objective  is  to
      identify Tamil activists in the diaspora who  are  working  for  Tamil
      separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  enshrined
      in Amendment 6(1) to  the  Sri  Lankan  Constitution  in  1983,  which
      prohibits the 'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.   Its
      focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any
      similar Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil
      war within Sri Lanka.  (4) If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan
      security services there remains a real risk of ill-treatment  or  harm
      requiring international protection. (5) Internal relocation is not  an
      option within Sri Lanka for a person at real risk from the Sri  Lankan
      authorities, since the government now controls the whole of Sri  Lanka
      and Tamils are required to return to a  named  address  after  passing
      through the airport.  ... (7) The current  categories  of  persons  at
      real risk of persecution or serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
      whether in detention or otherwise, are: (a) Individuals  who  are,  or
      are perceived to be, a threat to the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
      single state because they are, or are perceived to have a  significant
      role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora
      and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka."


  14. There is no evidence to suggest that the  Appellant  would  fall  into
      these classes of returnee. It must be  appreciated  that  the  Country
      Guidelines are a guide rather than  a  straitjacket:  as  stated  with
      regard to Sri Lankan cases, by Underhill LJ in MP [2014] EWCA Civ 829,
      on a fair reading of GJ there  may  "be  other  cases  ...  where  the
      evidence shows particular grounds for concluding that  the  Government
      might regard the applicant as posing a current threat to the integrity
      of Sri Lanka as a single state." However there is no evidence in  this
      appeal from which such a conclusion could  reasonably  be  drawn.  The
      Country Guidelines do not suggest that the  mere  historic  breach  of
      reporting conditions is to be equated with  the  actual  issue  of  an
      arrest warrant or that visits from  gang  members  associated  with  a
      political party some years ago  would  create  a  real  risk  of  harm
      eventuating now, either from the state or from third parties.


  15. As to the findings on the Appellant's private and  family  life,  this
      was not the subject of her application for permission  to  appeal  and
      the matter is accordingly not before the Upper Tribunal for  decision.
      In so far as the report from Professor Persaud may be relevant to  her
      rights under the Human Rights Convention, that will be a  matter  that
      the Secretary of State will doubtless wish to consider in the  future,
      having  contended  for  the  report's  exclusion  from  the  appellate
      proceedings successfully.

  Decision


   16. Accordingly the appeal is dismissed.

       [pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 23 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

