
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03754/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 May 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Shekhay Rasouli

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Sotani, Counsel, instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Claimant is a citizen of Iran being born on 27 August 1991.

2.   He arrived in the United Kingdom on 13 July 2010 and being  encountered
    by Immigration Officers on arrival made a claim for asylum.

3.    That claim was refused under the terms of the refusal letter dated  29
    September 2010.  The decision  was  appealed  and  by  a  determination
    promulgated on 23 November 2010 the appeal was  dismissed.   Permission
    to appeal was refused on 17 December 2010.

4.   Further submissions were made on 31 January 2012 which were refused  by
    the  SSHD  in  a  decision  of  29  February  2012.   A   request   for
    reconsideration was made on  8  March  2012  and  subsequently  further
    refusal letter dated 27 March 2012 was issued, together with directions
    for the Claimant's removal to Iran.

5.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Balloch on 11 May 2012.

6.   On that occasion the only issue was  whether  or  not  removal  of  the
    Claimant would contravene his fundamental  human  rights  as  enshrined
    within Article 8 of the ECHR.

7.   The Judge upheld the appeal.  Subsequently the SSHD  sought  to  appeal
    against that decision contending that the approach taken by  the  Judge
    to Article 8  was  fundamentally  flawed.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.

8.    Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  in  pursuance  of  that   leave.
    Technically now the appellant in the appeal is the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department.  In order to avoid the confusion as  to  terms
    Mr Shekhay Rasouli shall be referred to as the "claimant".

9.   A central issue in the appeal was whether or not there  was  a  genuine
    subsisting relationship as between the Claimant and his  wife  Samantha
    Perry (now Mrs Rasouli).

10.  It was the finding of the Immigration Judge that  such  a  relationship
    did exist.  There has been no challenge to that matter by the Secretary
    of State for the Home Department in this appeal.

11.  The claimant and his wife had first met  through  friends  in  December
    2010 and their friendship had progressed into a relationship  in  March
    2011.  They married on 27 October 2011.

12.  At the time Samantha Perry was not working, although  subsequently  she
    has  found  employment.   Perhaps  a  significant   feature   of   that
    relationship was that at the time of the marriage or shortly  after  it
    was discovered that Samantha Rasouli was pregnant and a  hard  decision
    was taken to have an abortion in October 2011, because it was felt that
    the  circumstances  were  not  right  for  a  child.   There  was   the
    uncertainty  of  the  claimant's  status  and  the  lack  of  security.
    Evidence was given by Mr Rasouli which was included in general germs in
    paragraph 19 of the determination that she would not be  able  to  cope
    without him.  They are devoted to one another. In  February  2012  they
    moved into their own home and have made plans for their future with the
    intention of having further children in due course.  Miss  Rasouli  has
    parents and family with whom she is particularly close.

13.  The first challenge that is made  to  the  determination  is  that  the
    Judge employed the wrong standard of proof in  making  a  finding  that
    there was a possibility that the Claimant would come to  the  attention
    of the authorities if returned.

14.  It is to be noted that in the determination the Judge  recognises  that
    the burden of proof is upon the appellant.  In cases of Article 8 it is
    often difficult to be prescriptive as to the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof to be applied.  When considering the issue of  interference  with
    the relationship it is often  said  that  the  burden  rests  upon  the
    appellant to show  that  such  interference  would  be  caused  by  the
    removal.  It is also necessary to show that interference would be  such
    as to engage Article 8.  Thereafter  it  may  be  considered  that  the
    burden shifts somewhat towards the SSHD to show that  any  removal  was
    proportionate in the circumstances.

15.  Mr Dewison, who represents the SSHD, submitted that it  was  a  finding
    of fact that trespassed unnecessarily into  the  territory  of  asylum.
    The Claimant had been found not to be credible  as  to  his  claim  for
    asylum and it was clear from the country guidance case of SB  (Risk  on
    return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 0053 that generally  having
    exited Iran illegally  was  not  a  significant  risk  factor.   It  is
    therefore contended that the finding that there would be a  possibility
    of the claimant to the attention of the authorities was speculative  in
    the extreme.

16.  There would seem to be  merit  in  that  contention  but  it  would  be
    dangerous, as I so find to conclude from that  particular  and  limited
    finding, that the Judge has not approached the Article  8  appeal  upon
    the proper basis.

17.  As I indicated to Miss  Sotani,  who  represents  the  claimant,  there
    seemed to be a lack of structure in the Judge's approach to  Article  8
    of the ECHR.  She sought to disagree with that and she  invited  me  to
    find that the determination,  when  read  as  a  whole,  contained  the
    necessary ingredients.

18.  The first issue is whether or not there would be interference with  the
    relationship by the removal of the appellant.  Miss Sotani  invites  me
    to find that there are clear findings on that  issue.   The  claimant's
    wife is British with family and connections of her own and it  was  the
    finding of the Judge that, in the light of the deteriorating  situation
    as between the UK and Iran, it would not be reasonably possible for the
    claimant's wife to live with him in Iran on a  temporary  or  permanent
    basis.  Sound reasons have been  given in the  determination  for  that
    conclusion and that is not a matter that has been  the  subject  of  an
    appeal by the Secretary of State.

19.  The next matter is whether it would be disproportionate to  expect  the
    appellant to return  to  Iran  notwithstanding  the  interference  with
    family life In that connection Miss Sotani invites me to find that  the
    Judge has looked at a number of factors, including the close nature  of
    the relationship and the dependency by Miss Perry upon  the  continuing
    presence of the claimant.  She invites me to find that the abortion has
    particular significance in that regard. It was a dramatic step to  have
    taken and illustrates the turbulent emotional uncertainty that  existed
    at the time that such a decision was taken. Since then the couple  have
    acquired property, she works and there is a real prospect of  security.
    Although perhaps the Judge did not spell that matter out  in  quite  as
    expressive terms as Miss Sotani in the determination, it is clear  from
    the large volume of documents including statements that that would  not
    be an unfair picture of that relationship and it is reflected generally
    in what the determination has to say.

20.  Miss Sotani highlights that it was the view of the  Judge  that  return
    would be unreasonable,  particularly  in  the  light  of  any  possible
    difficulties and delays in making an entry clearance  application  from
    Iran and also the likelihood that the claimant would fail to  meet  the
    new Immigration Rules.  The possibility of prolonged separation was, in
    the circumstances of the emotional dependency by Miss Perry, a relevant
    and important factor in the equation.

21.  Mr Dewison seeks to raise two matters of criticism as to  the  approach
    taken by the Judge to the issue of return.  The first is that the Judge
    did not identify any objective evidence to demonstrate that  there  was
    an increased risk on return for someone in the appellant's position. In
    effect that ground is reflective of  the  first  ground  of  complaint,
    namely that it was wholly speculative to  consider  that  the  claimant
    would experience any difficulty or obstruction by  the  authorities  on
    return.  Although  certain  difficulties  in  making  entry   clearance
    application existed it was still open to make one through Abu Dhabi and
    there is nothing to indicate that upon return there would be any  undue
    delay in that process.

22.  Further, he submits that no overt acknowledgment was made by the  Judge
    to the interests of immigration  control.   The  claimant  had  arrived
    illegally and had been disbelieved  upon  his  claim  for  asylum,  the
    relationship had commenced in the  full  knowledge  of  his  precarious
    position and all those matters were matters of some importance to  have
    been weighed in the balance by the Judge.  It also seems to me to be  a
    meritorious point to make.

23.  It is also said in the grounds of appeal that the Judge has  failed  to
    apply the decision in AAO v ECO [2011] EWCA Civ 840. If the  Judge  had
    properly considered the findings in that case she would not  have  come
    to the conclusion which she did on the proportionality of the  claimant
    returning to Iran.  For  my  part  I  do  not  find  that  case  to  be
    particularly relevant to the circumstances of this appeal.  It  was  an
    application by a mother to join her  daughter  in  England.   The  case
    cited Huang and the general principles that the Convention  confers  no
    right on individuals or family to choose where  they  prefer  to  live.
    The case stressed that proportionality is a subject of such  importance
    as to require a separate treatment. It was the  overriding  requirement
    of  the  need  to  balance  the  interest  of  society  with  those  of
    individuals or groups.   It would be difficult to see that the Court of
    Appeal in AAO added very much to those general principles.

24.  It seems to  me  that  the  decision  in  Hayat  (Nature  of  Chikwamba
    principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 44 (IAC)  is  perhaps  a  more  helpful
    decision in the circumstances of this case.

25.  The essential issue in this appeal lies in consideration as to  whether
    or not it would be proportionate  or  disproportionate  to  expect  the
    claimant to return to Iran to make application for entry clearance from
    that country.

26.  Mr Dewison has stressed the need to maintain  immigration  control  and
    deter queue jumping as  being  the  primary  reason  why  it  would  be
    proportionate to return the claimant to Iran.

27.  The Tribunal in the course of the judgment  highlighted  parts  of  the
    judgment of Lord Brown in the decision of Chikwamba  particularly  with
    the comment as set out in paragraph 44 of that particular judgment that
    in most cases it was better for the Article 8 claim to be decided  once
    and for all at the initial stages.  If  well-founded  leave  should  be
    granted, if not it should be refused.

28.  At paragraph 21 of the decision was the comment that

         "more generally, there is no indication in paragraph 9.9  that  the
         Immigration Judge brought to bear those factors  arising  from  the
         evidence she had heard, which fell to be weighed on the appellant's
         side of the scales, in particular,  the  degree  of  practical  and
         emotional support supplied by the appellant to his wife and to  the
         wife's lack of any family in the United Kingdom."

29.  Although it not entirely on all fours with the factors  of  this  case,
    it is clear from the evidence that was presented and from the  comments
    of the Judge in the determination that the issue of emotional  support,
    particularly following the abortion, was an important consideration, as
    was the need to maintain stability in  the  family.   I  interpret  the
    Tribunal in Hayat to be indicating that that was a strong factor to  be
    weighed in the balance in favour of non-removal.  The Tribunal went  on
    to say at paragraph 23:

         "The significance of Chikwamba, however, is  to  make  plain  that,
         where the only matter weighing on  the  respondent's  side  of  the
         balance is the public policy of requiring a person to  apply  under
         the Rules from abroad, that legitimate objective would  usually  be
         outweighed by factors  resting  on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
         balance."

30.  The Tribunal went on to say:

         "Viewed correctly, the Chikwamba principle does  not,  accordingly,
         automatically trump anything on the state's side, such as appalling
         immigration history.  Conversely, the principle  cannot  be  simply
         'switched off' on mechanistic grounds, such as because children are
         not involved or that (as here) the  appellant  is  not  seeking  to
         remain with the spouse who is settled in the United Kingdom."

31.  In short the Tribunal in Hayat stressed that the decision maker had  to
    apply his or her mind to the relevant factors.  The relevant factors in
    this case, as can be gleaned from reading the determination as a whole,
    is the importance of emotional and physical support by the claimant  to
    his wife, particularly in the aftermath of the abortion; the likelihood
    of appreciable delay in  making  application  to  re-enter  the  United
    Kingdom and the likelihood that that would not  succeed  in  any  event
    because of the changes in the Immigration Rules.

32.  This is by no means an easy matter to determine  in  the  circumstances
    of this case.  As I have indicated, I would be  assisted  by  a  better
    structure in the determination. It is not my task to  embark  upon  the
    merits of the hearing, rather to determine whether or not the reasoning
    of the Judge was absent or that it was so defective as to constitute an
    error of law.

33.  It seems to me that the clear finding  of  the  Judge  was  that  there
    would be undue interference with family life were the appellant  to  be
    removed and that it was not reasonable to expect his wife to follow him
    to Iran either on a temporary or permanent basis.

34.  Looking at the determination as a  whole  it  is  discernible  why  the
    Judge concludes that it  would  not  be  proportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant to return to make the application to come back.  Although  it
    could, as I have said, have been expressed in clearer and more  helpful
    terms, it seems to me that the findings of the  Judge,  notwithstanding
    the comments and criticisms  most  properly  made  by  Mr  Dewison,  is
    capable of being within the reasonable ambit  of  decision  making.  As
    such I do not find there to  be  a  material  error  of  law  in  these
    circumstances.

35.  Further, even were I to consider  that  the  issue  of  proportionality
    could have been better expressed and examined, it seems to me  that  in
    the light of the factors as outlined by Miss Soltani and factors  which
    are clearly evident both from the evidence and from the  determination,
    it is inevitable that that aspect would be resolved in  favour  of  the
    appellant applying the Hayat principles.

36.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal by the Secretary of State  is
    dismissed. The decision of Judge Balloch allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    claimant on human rights grounds stands.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
