
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03455/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 June 2016                          |On 4 July 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     BKZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and his date of birth is [  ]
    1975.  He came to the UK on 18 February 2003.   He  made  a  claim  for
    asylum which was refused on 2 February 2003.  The Appellant  absconded.
    He made contact with the Home Office on 14 August 2009  and  was  on  6
    March 2013, following further submissions, granted leave for  a  period
    of 30 months which expired on 5 September 2015. In  the  same  decision
    his asylum claim was refused.

2.   He was granted discretionary leave because it was accepted that he  had
    ongoing family life in the UK as a result of his  relationship  with  a
    Polish national and their daughter. It was accepted that he  would  not
    be able to continue family life in Poland.

3.   The Appellant appealed against the decision  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    asylum and his appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie
    in the following terms, "to the extent that the matter is  remitted  to
    the Respondent for her to consider  whether  the  Appellant  should  be
    granted leave under the legacy policy".  The appeal  was  dismissed  on
    asylum grounds. Judge Devittie accepted the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    found him credible. He concluded that the Appellant would be at risk on
    return to his home area, but that relocation was a safe option.

4.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal against the decision  of
    Judge Devittie to dismiss his claim on asylum grounds.  Permission  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes on 13 June  2013.   The
    matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Hanbury  on  27  August
    2013.  Judge Hanbury found there was no material error of  law  in  the
    decision of Judge Devittie to dismiss the Appellant's appeal on  asylum
    grounds and the decision was maintained.  Judge Hanbury's decision  was
    set aside by Lord Justice Christopher Clarke who made  an  order  which
    was  issued  on  25  February  2014.   The  decision  of  Lord  Justice
    Christopher Clarke is contained at [4] of my error of law decision  and
    there is no need for me to repeat it here.

5.   The thrust of the decision was that given  that  Judge  Devittie  found
    the Appellant to be at risk of return to his home  area  and  that  his
    persecutors from whom the risk emanated were in  power  in  Kabul,  the
    conclusion that he would not  be  at  risk  in  Kabul  appeared  to  be
    illogical unless there was no serious risk of prospective employers  or
    landlords having cause to view him with suspicion and to make enquiries
    about his background.  Following from this decision there was an  order
    by the Court of Appeal on  19  May  2015  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal. The matter came before me on 26 October
    2016.  I concluded that Judge Devittie made a material  error  of  law,
    having failed to properly consider the risk of detection in  the  light
    of the Appellant's claim, given that he was at risk on  return  to  his
    home area and that his evidence had been accepted by Judge Devittie.  I
    went on to set aside the decision (to dismiss the Appellant's appeal on
    asylum grounds) aside and the matter was adjourned  for  a  substantive
    hearing.

 6.     The matter came before me again on 2  December  2015.   It  came  to
    light at the hearing that the Appellant had returned to Afghanistan and
    the Secretary of State submitted a skeleton argument,  prepared  by  Mr
    Walker, on which  the  Respondent  sought  to  rely.  In  addition  the
    Appellant had made a further witness  statement  relating  his  return.
    The matter was further adjourned and came before me again  on  15  June
    2016.

7.       At the start of the hearings on 2 December 2015 and  15  June  2016
    the representatives discussed the remit of the rehearing, in the  light
    of Mr Walker's skeleton argument and the Appellant's  return.  I  heard
    submissions from the parties and concluded that in  the  light  of  the
    clear directions that I had made in my decision of 26 October 2015, the
    lack of response thereto by the Secretary of State and that  there  had
    been no proper counter challenge to  the  decision  of  Judge  Devittie
    (that the Appellant was  at  risk  on  return  to  his  home  area),  I
    concluded that the hearing before  me  was  limited  to  the  issue  of
    relocation;  notwithstanding,  the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    returned to Afghanistan and that there was evidence that  he  had  made
    another trip to Peshawar in Pakistan.

8.   At the start  of  the  hearing  on  15  June  2016  Mr  Avery  made  an
    application to adduce further evidence, namely case notes indicating an
    entry made by an Immigration Officer on 15 May 2014, following from the
    Appellant having been encountered  by  Immigration  Officers  returning
    from Afghanistan and having  been  asked  questions  about  his  visit.
    There are a series of questions and answers. It is recorded  that  when
    the Appellant was asked who he had visited in Afghanistan,  the  answer
    he gave was "my mother.  I stayed with my father and grandfather".   Mr
    Avery indicated to me that the note had only been discovered by him the
    day before the hearing and that is  why  it  had  not  previously  been
    submitted.

9.      Mr Bazini objected to the admission of the evidence and referred  me
    to a document at page 11 of the Appellant's  bundle  which  is  a  UKBA
    landing card which is undated but which shows a handwritten note  of  a
    series of questions and answers.  The questions and answers are  almost
    identical to the ones in the typed case notes produced by Mr Avery with
    one significant difference, which is that there is no reference in  the
    handwritten notes (signed by the Appellant) to him having said that  he
    had stayed with his father and grandfather.

10.      To his credit Mr Avery accepted his application was problematic.  I
    refused to admit the evidence which was served very late  in  the  day.
    There was no reasonable explanation for the  delay  and  there  was  no
    evidence relating to the context of the  notes  in  the  light  of  the
    handwritten document at page 11 of the Appellant's  bundle.   Mr  Avery
    submitted that the note that he relied on and the handwritten  document
    related to two separate  interviews,  but  there  was  no  evidence  in
    support of this. I concluded that  it  was  not  in  the  interests  of
    justice to admit the document.  Mr  Avery  conceded  that  if  it  were
    admitted, it would in the circumstances be of limited evidential value,
    in any event. Mr Avery did not  make  an  application  to  adjourn  the
    proceedings to obtain further clarification about the notes.

11.  Mr Bazini indicated  that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  giving  oral
    evidence. In his view, he was not well  enough  to  give  evidence  and
    reference was made to his mental health problems.   He  confirmed  that
    there was no medical evidence relied  upon  to  support  this.  It  was
    confirmed by Mr Bazini that the Appellant travelled to UAE on 15  April
    2014.  On 17 April 2014 he flew to Kabul and he returned to UAE  on  11
    May 2014. He returned  to  the  UK  on  14  May  2014.   The  Appellant
    travelled again to UAE on 23 March 2015 and he left  UAE  on  28  March
    2015 arriving Peshawar Pakistan on 28 March 2015. He left Peshawar  and
    returned to UAE on 13 April 2015 returning to the UK on 15 April  2015.



The Appellant's Evidence

12.  The evidence before me was that contained in  the  Respondent's  bundle
    which included the reasons for refusal decision.  The Appellant  relied
    on a bundle with a covering note from his  solicitors  of  25  November
    2015.  The bundle contained 845 pages and includes the bundle that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal including  the  expert  report  from  Dr
    Antonio Giustozzi of 8 May 2013 (pages 641-667) and the  second  report
    from Dr Antonio Giustozzi of 17 November 2015 (pages 43-67). There is a
    significant amount of background evidence relied upon by the Appellant.
     There is a supplementary bundle which contains a third report from  Dr
    Antonio Giustozzi of 14 June 2016 and a letter from the Appellant's GP,
    Dr A S Gor of 15 May 2016.  There is a copy of the  Appellant's  Afghan
    passport which he produced  at  the  hearing  and  other  documents  in
    support of his case.  At the hearing, after I  had  heard  submissions,
    the Appellant produced identity cards relating to individuals  that  he
    claimed to be his brother and sister who reside in Pakistan.

13.     The  Appellant's  evidence,  accepted  by  Judge  Devittie,  can  be
    summarised. He is from Paktia Province.   His  brother  was  an  active
    member of Hezb-e-Islami for approximately  ten  years.  In  2002  local
    warlords abducted him and the  Appellant's  father.   Four  days  later
    their bodies were discovered in the mountains.  The Appellant's  father
    was innocent, but he was killed because of  the  Appellant's  brother's
    role in Hezb-e-Islami.  The Appellant's brother handed weapons over  to
    the Taliban.  The Appellant was detained for about a week prior to  the
    murder of his brother and  father  and  he  was  questioned  about  his
    brother's whereabouts.   The  village  elders  managed  to  secure  his
    release.  The Appellant fled Afghanistan  and  fears  return  from  the
    warlords who are commanders of the Afghan Mujahedeen and who  now  hold
    powerful positions in the Afghanistan government.  The  commanders  are
    Dawood of Paktia Province, Chaman  and  Qalin  who  are  from  an  area
    bordering the Paktia Province.  The commanders were effectively running
    President Karzai's government in Afghanistan.  The Appellant's evidence
    about which there has  to  date  been  no  lawful  findings  relate  to
    relocation. His case is that relocation was not a viable option because
    he would be arrested in Kabul.

14.      The reason the Appellant returned is because he missed  his  mother
    and there was no-one else left in his a family. He  had  not  seen  his
    mother for eleven years and she was unwell  and  was  almost  75.   The
    Appellant's evidence is that he  saved  money  from  his  benefits  and
    borrowed �600 from his friend in order to pay for a flight from  London
    to Heathrow to Dubai.  He stayed at his sister's house in Dubai and his
    brother-in-law Omir Gul helped him to buy a ticket to travel from Dubai
    to Afghanistan. Omir Gul arranged for a person in Afghanistan  to  meet
    the Appellant at Kabul and to take him to his  home  area  because  the
    Appellant does not know anybody in Afghanistan.  At  Kabul  Airport  he
    was met by Javid Khan who drove him to his village by car. The  journey
    was four hours.  There were no checkpoints at any time.  The  Appellant
    stayed at his maternal grandfather's house. He hid and did not go  out.
    He did not tell anyone other than his brother-in-law that he was  going
    to Afghanistan.  When he was there he looked after his mother and  gave
    her medication. She was depressed and stressed.  There was no  hospital
    that he could take her to in the area.  After  two  weeks,  she  passed
    away. She was buried the next day in the  village.   Approximately  150
    people attended the funeral.  There were no newspaper  reports  of  her
    death.

15.  Three days after the funeral  his  brother-in-law  arranged  for  Javid
    Khan to collect him from the village and to take him to the airport  in
    Kabul.  They went  through  a  checkpoint,  but  nobody  spoke  to  the
    Appellant.  He flew from Kabul Airport to Dubai where he spent sometime
    with his brother-in-law before travelling  to  London.   He  was  asked
    questions at Heathrow Airport when he returned on 14 May  2015  and  he
    told the Immigration Officer that he had  returned  from  visiting  his
    sick mother and that he had taken a risk.  He spent about  three  weeks
    in Afghanistan.  He would never have returned there had his mother  not
    been critically ill.  He was not harmed during his stay  there  because
    he was in hiding.

16.      Even though Hezb-e-Islami have not been in power since 2001  a  lot
    of their members were part  of  the  Karzai  government  including  the
    former governor of Paktia Province Juma Khan Hamdard Khar.  He was  the
    former governor of Paktia Province until 2015.   The  authorities  will
    take a dim view of the Appellant and he  would  not  be  accepted  into
    Afghan society.

17.  The Appellant does not have anywhere to live in Kabul and he  does  not
    know anybody who could support him there.  He has no friends or  family
    there.  He has no family member left in Afghanistan.  If he  wanted  to
    rent accommodation the landlord would ask  him  straightaway  where  he
    came from and he would have to show the landlord his  passport  and  ID
    and it would become apparent that he had fled the country twelve  years
    ago and reveal his identity which would lead to his arrest.   He  would
    not be able to find employment in Kabul.  He suffers  from  mental  and
    physical health problems including stress and  depression.   He  is  on
    medication; he is prescribed; fluoxetine; propranolol and amitriptyline
    (60mg, 40mg and 40mg daily respectively).  If he  does  not  take  this
    medication he cannot control  himself  and  is  at  risk  of  seriously
    harming himself.  He visits a psychiatrist  at  St  Ann's  Hospital  in
    London twice a year.  He receives employment support allowance  because
    he is unable to work.

The Background Evidence

18.  Dr Giustozzi has produced three reports. In the first report of  8  May
    2013 Dr Giustozzi concluded (see [29])  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    tracked down around Afghanistan relatively easily unless he was able to
    hide without seeking employment.  It is worth quoting paragraph  29  in
    full;

         "29. [The Appellant]  could  be  tracked  down  around  Afghanistan
             relatively easily, unless he was able to hide, without seeking
             employment.  [The Appellant] would have to urgently look for a
             source of livelihood and accommodation, which will prevent him
             from  hiding  in  order  to  avoid   detection.    Prospective
             landlords and employers will be asking information  about  his
             places of origins  and  his  family  background.   Failure  to
             provide them would hamper his chances of finding either; lying
             would not work in the medium and short term as  employers  and
             landlords are able to check information  through  networks  of
             acquaintances and regularly do so.  It might  take  weeks  for
             receiving  a  feedback,  but  eventually  the  background   of
             individuals will be checked.  His whereabouts  will  therefore
             be known."

    Dr Giustozzi goes on  to  conclude  that  if  relocated  the  Appellant
    without family support or state assistance and being unable to  find  a
    secure well-paid  job  would  risk  becoming  homeless.   Dr  Giustozzi
    concludes;


         "32. It is not clear from [the  Appellant's]  account  whether  his
             case can be described as a blood feud.  The execution  of  his
             father and brother were extra judiciary  ones,  as  the  death
             penalty was not being applied in  Afghanistan  at  that  time.
             However, the blood feud would only apply where it was possible
             to identify the particular individuals who ordered the murder,
             or executed it.  This is not clear from the account.  It would
             appear that the local authorities were fully mobilised against
             [the Appellant's] family.


         33.  In sum, the threat to [the  Appellant]  from  the  authorities
             would be greater today than in 2002, because Hizb-i Islami  is
             so much more active today.  The authorities cannot be sure  of
             what [the Appellant] has been doing all these years, where  he
             was and whether he maintained contact with  Hizb-i  Islami  or
             not.  His presence in Paktia would  be  immediately  detected,
             but it would only be a matter of time before it  was  detected
             in Kabul too for the reasons explained."


19.  In his report of 17 November  2015  Dr  Giustozzi  concluded  that  the
    police are  less  able  than  ever  to  protect  individuals  like  the
    Appellant (see [10]) even if they wanted to and  that  they  are  badly
    stretched because of the insurgency.  Dr Giustozzi  concluded  at  [15]
    that the Appellant would not receive a level of mental healthcare  even
    remotely comparable to what he could receive in the  UK.   At  [23]  he
    states that several antidepressants are  available  in  Afghanistan  as
    authorised drugs however the real issue  is  that  in  practice  having
    access to treatment will be extremely difficult and that Kabul  is  the
    only place offering a relatively wide range of treatment opportunities.
     However, he would have to compete  with  a  large  portion  of  the  5
    million residents of the city of which 40% suffer mental health  issues
    and that there are only a handful of mental health staff but that it is
    far from certain that the appellant would be  able  to  live  in  Kabul
    considering the high cost and his inability to obtain  employment.   Dr
    Giustozzi concluded the following;

         "26. What stated in my previous report about traceability  of  [the
             Appellant] remains valid.  [The Appellant] could  avoid  being
             traced if he only sought basic accommodation  in  a  dormitory
             and menial employment as a day  labourer.   Given  his  mental
             health condition, however  this  would  be  living  conditions
             hardly conductive to improved conditions, quite the  contrary.




         27.  In sum, [the Appellant] would still be at risk from the rivals
             of  his  father  and  from  the  authorities  because  of  his
             background.  The general climate of  violence  and  insecurity
             facilitates  these  political  feuds.    In   addition,   [the
             Appellant] will be  particularly  vulnerable  because  of  his
             mental  health  condition,  which  will  force  him  to   seek
             accommodation in an area where accessing mental care would  be
             relatively easy."

20.  At [12] of  the  second  report  Dr  Giustozzi  states  that  from  the
    beginning of 2015 the Afghan government has been  putting  pressure  on
    Western governments not to return failed asylum seekers because of  the
    unsafe situation.  He concludes at [13] that finding  accommodation  in
    Kabul in the central neighbourhoods would be difficult and forbiddingly
    expensive and prohibitively so in the safe central areas.  He concludes
    that it is very rare for Afghans to live alone and it is common to have
    large families and that one-bedroom flats are almost non-existent.   As
    in his earlier report he concludes that earning a  living  on  his  own
    would be a major challenge for the Appellant.

21.  Dr Giustozzi's third report addresses the situation for  those  leaving
    Kabul Airport or arriving at it and he concludes on  the  basis  of  an
    interview with a police officer named Omar  Gul,  who  is  deployed  at
    Kabul Airport, that an individual, who is deported back to  Afghanistan
    but is in possession of a regular passport and properly stamped, is not
    guilty of any violation of Afghan  law.   Dr  Giustozzi  described  the
    situation for failed asylum seekers who return and who  are  identified
    by possession of documents which  have  been  issued  to  them  by  the
    country which deported them.  Dr Giustozzi concludes that the fact that
    [the Appellant] was able to travel to Afghanistan through Kabul Airport
    and back suggests that he  is  not  on  the  national  list  of  wanted
    individuals; he might be still on the list of local  suspects,  without
    having an arrest warrant on his name.



Submissions

22.      Mr Avery's submissions can be summarised.  It is his view that  the
    Appellant is not at risk on return to  Kabul.   The  Appellant's  claim
    rests on his brother's involvement with  Hezb-e-Islami.   There  is  no
    direct  evidence  of  the  individuals  named  by  the   Appellant   as
    responsible for the  death  of  his  brother  and  father  having  been
    involved in their murders.  In any event General Dawood has since  been
    assassinated.  There is nothing of any interest in the Appellant to the
    authorities, his father was a shopkeeper and had  no  involvement  with
    Hezb-e-Islami.  The Appellant's evidence is that he  was  detained  and
    subsequently  released  having   been   asked   about   his   brother's
    whereabouts.  At this time he was relatively young, still  a  teenager.
    The Appellant has not had any involvement in terrorist  activities  and
    it is very difficult to see how he would come to the attention  of  the
    commanders. He has been in the UK in excess of  ten  years.   Mr  Avery
    submitted that the findings of  Dr  Giustozzi  at  [4]  of  the  second
    report, where reference is made to a blood  feud  is  speculative.  The
    same report at [27] talks of rivals of  the  Appellant's  father  which
    shows a misunderstanding of the Appellant's case. Mr Avery referred  me
    to the second report at [29] where  Dr  Giustozzi  indicates  that  the
    Appellant would be tracked down very easily. He submitted that there is
    no reason to track the Appellant down because he  has  no  profile  and
    indeed his brother did not have a significant  profile.   There  is  no
    realistic prospect of anyone having any interest in him whether or  not
    it is possible to track him down.

23.  Mr Avery addressed me in relation to  family  support  indicating  that
    the Appellant has returned to Kabul and received help from his brother-
    in-law who arranged for him to travel to his village in Afghanistan. He
    would be assisted by his family should he return to Kabul and the  fact
    he has returned suggests there is no  real  fear  of  the  authorities.
    There is no evidence relating to the Appellant's mental health.

24.  In submissions Mr  Bazini  relied  on  the  Asylum  Policy  Instruction
    relating to the revocation of refugee status issued by the Home  Office
    (version 4.0) published on 19 January  2016  and  he  addressed  me  in
    submissions on this document.  There is also a  copy  of  AJ  (Risk  to
    homosexuals) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00001 which is  relied  on  by
    the Appellant.

25.   Mr Bazini addressed relied on  the  skeleton  argument  and  submitted
    that there was no evidence of family connection  or  support  from  the
    Appellant's family.  He referred me to the decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal which was strongly worded and made reference to the illogicality
    of the decision of Judge Devittie that the Appellant would be  at  risk
    in his home area but not in Kabul.  He also drew my  attention  to  the
    fact that the Appellant has been found by Judge Devittie to be credible
    having given oral evidence.  The Appellant had been open and  frank  to
    the  immigration  authorities  when  he  returned  to   the   UK   from
    Afghanistan.  He  that  I  should  be  cautious  about  making  adverse
    credibility findings.  It is accepted that one of  the  commanders  has
    now passed away and that there is no up-to-date  evidence  relating  to
    the other named warlords.  However,  they  were  involved  in  terrible
    behaviour and subsequently found positions in government and they  have
    their own individual power base.   The Appellant's family was prominent
    enough to be murdered. It is illogical  for  the  Home  Office  to  put
    forward that there would be no interest in  him  should  he  return  to
    Kabul.  The Tribunal should start on the basis that the Appellant is at
    risk in his home area.  The passage of  time  is  not  material.  Judge
    Devittie's  decision  that  the  Appellant  is  at   risk   on   return
    significantly post-dates events.

26.  Mr Bazini referred me to the case of AJ.  He  submitted  that  had  the
    Appellant not returned to  Afghanistan  his  claim  would  have  to  be
    allowed in the light of the findings in relation to risk on  return  to
    his home area. He referred me to the asylum policy  and  cited  various
    paragraphs there from relating to the cessation of refugee status which
    establishes that a refugee can return to the country of origin  without
    cessation of status and that there is a legitimate distinction  between
    travelling back to one's country  of  origin,  say  for  a  visit,  and
    travelling back and re-establishing oneself.  It  has  never  been  the
    case for the Appellant that he is on a list of wanted individuals.   He
    returned to Afghanistan in order to see his mother who died during  his
    stay there and he attended her funeral.

27.  Mr Bazini referred me to [11] and [13] of Dr Giustozzi's  first  report
    in which it is stated that the Hekmatyar faction  of  Hezb-e-Islami  is
    still a target of the state security forces.  Hezb-e-Islami was once  a
    powerful party which has been eclipsed  by  the  Taliban  as  the  main
    illegal armed group of opposition in Afghanistan.  Pockets  of  Hezb-e-
    Islami activity clearly existed in Paktia Province and in 2011  Hezb-e-
    Islami was becoming  more  significant  in  the  insurgency  and  again
    reference  is  made  to  Paktia  Province.   The  significance  of  the
    paragraphs cited is that should anything happen in Kabul,  for  example
    an explosion,  the  Appellant  would  immediately  be  a  suspect.   Dr
    Giustozzi's reference to a blood feud was made on the basis  that  this
    would put him at even greater risk.

28.  In relation to [67] of Dr Giustozzi's first  report  the  reference  to
    father is clearly a typographical error.  The Appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to relocation can be found  in  his  witness  statement  of  6
    August 2015.

Conclusions

29.  According to Dr Guistozzi the risk emanates from the  Appellant  having
    to disclose information to landlords and employers which would lead  to
    any information given being  checked.  Once  his  identity  and  family
    history became clear he would be at risk from the authorities and those
    who are responsible for the death of his father and brother.  There  is
    no reason for me to doubt Dr Giustozzi's  conclusion  that  it  is  not
    difficult to track people  down  and  that  it  is  reasonably  likely,
    considering Dr Giustozzi's evidence that  someone  returning  alone  to
    Kabul without family support would be at risk of  being  tracked  down.
    This is supported by the UT  judgement  in  AJ  (Risk  to  homosexuals)
    Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00001. However there are problems with  the
    Appellant's evidence. He returned to Afghanistan voluntarily and it  is
    reasonably likely, in my view, that he has  family  or  close  contacts
    there on whom he can rely and this puts a different complexion  of  the
    case.  Whilst I accept that return of short duration is not  in  itself
    fatal to his appeal, what is known about the circumstances  surrounding
    the Appellant's return, does not establish that he would be at risk  on
    return to Kabul.  The burden is on him to establish that he would be at
    risk on return.

30.      The Appellant gave oral evidence before Judge Devittie and  he  was
    found credible.   He decided not to give evidence at the hearing before
    me and it follows that he was not cross-examined about  his  return  to
    Afghanistan. There is no medical evidence relied on by the Appellant to
    establish that he was unfit  to  give  evidence.  Whilst  there  is  no
    obligation on the Appellant to give oral evidence,  he  has  failed  to
    provide a further statement in response to  the  issues  raised  in  Mr
    Walker's skeleton argument  and  there  are  still  material  questions
    unanswered about his return.  This was made available to the  Appellant
    at the hearing in December.

31.  It is entirely understandable that the Appellant would take a  risk  to
    visit his dying mother and there is no reason to doubt  that  this  was
    the motivation for his return.  However, what  we  do  know  about  the
    visit is that his brother-in-law in Dubai has contacts which extend  to
    Kabul. I find that are close contacts  (either  family  or  very  close
    friends). Javid Khan was willing to take a significant risk in  driving
    the Appellant from the airport in Kabul to his home village (where  the
    Appellant is at risk) and back again.  There is  no  information  about
    Javid Khan and why he was willing to put himself at risk  to  help  the
    Appellant.   It is clear that any  logical  conclusion  that  may  have
    arisen prior to the Appellant's  return  to  Afghanistan  must  now  be
    considered in the light of this further evidence.   The  Appellant  has
    not established that he does not have connections  in  Afghanistan  and
    specifically in Kabul, either relatives or friends on whom he can rely.
    It is reasonably likely that the Appellant would  have  some  level  of
    support and be assisted in terms of accommodation  and  employment.  In
    this  context  the  risk  of  being  tracked  down   is   significantly
    minimalised.   Dr Giustozzi's conclusions  relating  to  tracking  down
    were based on the Appellant returning to Kabul alone and without family
    or other connections; however this does not apply to the Appellant.

32.  Mr Bazini submitted that Mr Avery did not  made  submissions  that  the
    Appellant would have family support in Kabul and therefore it  was  not
    open to me to make such a  findings.   Mr  Avery  in  submissions  made
    reference to family support and  in  any  event,  it  is  a  reasonable
    inference from the evidence before me, that the  Appellant  would  have
    the support of family and friends should he return to Kabul.

33   In terms of whether or not relocation would  cause  undue  hardship,  I
    have taken into account that he is  currently  in  receipt  of  various
    medications for depression and associated complaints. It  is  also  the
    case that he is at present not able to work because of  this.  However,
    the evidence does not  establish  that  with  support  from  family  or
    friends he would not have access to treatment in Afghanistan  and  that
    he would not be supported. It is not unreasonable for him  to  relocate
    to Kabul in the light of  this.  In  terms  of  financial  support  the
    natural inference is that he could be supported by his brother  in  law
    who resides at in Dubai should he return to  Kabul.  I  note  that  the
    Appellant's siblings live in Pakistan and may also be able to help him.
    The Appellant has not established that he would not be able  to  access
    treatment for his mental health problems in Kabul with family  support.
    There is no medical evidence before me which would indicate that he has
    serious mental health problems that would deteriorate should he return.



34.  The grounds of appeal are under the Refugee Convention and  Articles  2
    and 3. I have considered relocation in the light of the fact  that  the
    Appellant has been here for a significant period of time.  There is  no
    up-to-date evidence  from  his  partner  Ms  Mikula  and  there  is  no
    reference to either his partner or daughter in his most recent  witness
    statement.   There  is  insufficient  evidence  before  me  that  would
    establish that he has an ongoing relationship with either  which  would
    be material to relocation.

Decision

35.  The Appellant's asylum claim is dismissed.




Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 30 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

