

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03092/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                               MR ABELE BEYENI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Williams dismissing the appeal on  asylum  and  human
   rights grounds.

2) According to the appellant he is an Eritrean national, born in  Assab  on
   21 May 1987.  The appellant fears persecution by the Eritrean  government
   owing to his faith as a Pentecostal Christian, into which he was baptised
   on 7 January 2007.

3) The appellant's account of his early life  was  that  after  having  been
   born in Eritrean in 1990 he moved to Ethiopia.  In  1999,  owing  to  the
   conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia, he was deported to  Eritrea  where
   he lived with his aunt in Assab.  He did not attend school.  In 2001  the
   appellant and his father left Eritrea legally in order for his father  to
   work as a chef in Sudan.  In 2006 the appellant's father became  ill  and
   was paralysed down his left side.  In October 2005 the appellant and  his
   father returned legally to Eritrea.

4) With a week of his return the appellant held  three  prayer  meeting  for
   his father at his paternal aunt's house.  During the  third  meeting  the
   house  was  raided  by  the  authorities.   The  appellant  was   knocked
   unconscious and detained along with 3 others.  The appellant  awoke  some
   10 days later in hospital  where  he  remained  for  a  month  before  he
   escaped.  His escape was arranged by his uncle, who bribed a guard.   The
   appellant fled from Eritrea and travelled via Greece, Italy and France to
   the UK.

5) An additional aspect of the appellant's claim is that he has been  denied
   Ethiopian citizenship and this constitutes persecution by  the  Ethiopian
   authorities.

6) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  the  appellant  is  a
   Pentecostal Christian.  The judge recorded  that  the  appellant  has  an
   overall grasp of Christian doctrine, as shown at  his  asylum  interview.
   He gave a broad overall account of parts of the Bible such as  the  Books
   of Job, Isaiah and Esther.  While this knowledge  was  not  deep,  having
   regard to the low standard of proof and the fact that the  appellant  has
   attended church in the UK, the judge found  in  his  favour.   The  judge
   further found that the appellant's  claim  to  have  been  deported  from
   Ethiopia to Eritrea in December 1999 was in accordance with  the  country
   information.  According to a  COIS  report  of  January  2008,  relations
   between Ethiopia and Eritrea deteriorated in  late  1997  and  there  was
   fighting between them from May 1998.  A bitter war was fought  from  1998
   to 2000.  Eventually the Eritrean Government withdrew its troops from all
   disputed areas and a cessation of hostilities was agreed in Algiers.  The
   agreement which brought an end to the conflict included a return  to  the
   pre-May 1998 border positions.  During the war Ethiopia  expelled  70,000
   Eritreans living in the  country  and  Eritrea  subsequently  expelled  a
   similar number of Ethiopians.

7) The judge noted that the appellant was able to give accurate evidence  in
   relation to some aspects of the geography of Eritrea, for example,  roads
   and landmarks in the district of Assab.  Notwithstanding this, the  judge
   was not satisfied that the appellant was Eritrean.

8) The judge found that it was not  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant
   would have been able to leave Eritrea legally in 2001  with  his  father,
   when his father  was  approximately  44  years  of  age.   There  was  no
   explanation as to why his father was able to leave legally  and  was  not
   subject to military service.  According to the COIS report, men aged  18-
   54 were required to provide 18 months of military and non-military public
   works and services.  Some national service conscripts  were  required  to
   continue their service indefinitely, with many required to serve in their
   positions for over ten years.   National  service  conscripts  could  not
   resign from their jobs or take new employment and  could  not  leave  the
   country, as those under national service were often denied  passports  or
   exit visas.  Although the war with Ethiopia ended in 2000,  in  May  2002
   the government introduced a proclamation indefinitely extending  national
   service.  In effect it meant the forced conscription of every adult  male
   up to the age of 50, although some refugees  claimed  55  was  the  upper
   limit and other sources claimed the upper limit was 57 for men and 47 for
   women.  Reference was made to a letter dated 1 April  2010  from  British
   Embassy in Asmara stating that Eritreans  were  forcefully  brought  into
   military/national service as a result of round-ups or house searches.   A
   Human Rights Watch report  of  2011  stated  that  in  practice  national
   service is  routinely  prolonged  indefinitely.   Having  regard  to  the
   country information the judge  was  satisfied  that  if  the  appellant's
   father did not volunteer or attend for service he would have been rounded
   up.  The judge also considered that there were no exemptions for those in
   the position of the appellant's father as  a  healthy  man.   There  were
   penalties for evasion both towards the evader and their family.  The fact
   that the appellant's family remained unscathed  continuing  to  live  and
   trade in Asmara after the appellant left and the fact that the  appellant
   and his father were able to re-enter  Eritrea  legally  in  October  2005
   without arrest was not credible.

9) The judge did not consider it reasonably likely that  the  appellant  and
   his father would have freely chosen to return to Eritrea from Sudan.  The
   appellant was able to worship in Sudan but if the family  was  intent  on
   travelling they could alternatively  have  travelled  to  Ethiopia.   The
   persecution by Eritrea of Pentecostal Christians made  it  all  the  more
   incredible that the appellant's father would have  chosen  to  return  to
   Eritrea.  As a paralysed man it was not credible that he would choose  to
   make the long arduous  journey  right  across  Eritrea  to  Assab  where,
   according to the country information, there was no  guarantee  of  health
   care.  The appellant's father would not have chosen to return to  Eritrea
   when the appellant was 18 and he was about 46 as  they  would  both  have
   been eligible for military service with its consequent dangers.

10) Notwithstanding that the appellant had some geographical and  historical
   knowledge of Eritrea the judge was not satisfied that he was an  Eritrean
   national.  The appellant is a  speaker  of  Amharic  with  little  or  no
   knowledge of Tigrinya.  The appellant also has some knowledge of  Arabic.
   The judge records that, according to the country information, Amharic  is
   the national language of Ethiopia and the working language of the federal
   government,  although  there  is  equal  recognition  for  all  Ethiopian
   languages.  Tigrinya is spoken in Ethiopia and in  neighbouring  Eritrea.
   About 4 million people in Ethiopia speak it, mainly in the northern  most
   province of Tigray.  The  language  of  Tigrinya  is  one  of  the  major
   language groups in Eritrea, although  English  is  rapidly  becoming  the
   language of business and the medium of instruction at  secondary  schools
   and university.  Arabic is also widely spoken.

11) The judge noted that, according to  the  appellant,  his  father  was  a
   Tigrinya speaker, who favoured Eritrean independence and raised him, with
   the help of an Amharic speaking maid, in  Eritrea  for  the  first  three
   years of his life.  The family  had  close  ties  with  Eritrea  and  the
   appellant spent another two years there.   The  family  were  Christians.
   According to the country information the Orthodox Christians  in  Eritrea
   are Tigrinya speakers.  The judge  considered  that  if  the  appellant's
   account of his background was true, it  was  reasonably  likely  that  he
   would be able to do more than merely communicate  greetings  in  Tigrinya
   but would have a close association with the Tigrinya language.  The judge
   noted that the appellant attributed his knowledge of Arabic to  his  time
   in Sudan.  His ability to speak some English  showed  that  the  had  the
   aptitude to pick up languages and thus would  have  had  the  ability  to
   learn Tigrinya notwithstanding his relative lack of schooling.

12) The judge did not accept that the appellant was arrested in Eritrea  and
   managed to escape.   The  judge  noted  that  according  to  the  country
   information a brutal campaign has been waged in Eritrea against Christian
   minorities,  focussing  mainly  on  the   evangelical   and   Pentecostal
   movements.  Prayer meetings have been raided by the security  forces  and
   congregation members or guests have  been  rounded  up  and  detained  en
   masse.  Some Christians who  have  been  detained  have  been  reportedly
   transferred to a military facility and were severely mistreated.  Many of
   those  jailed  for  their  religious  affiliation  were  held  in   harsh
   conditions and denied medical treatment.  According to the judge  it  was
   not credible that the appellant would have received good hospital care as
   a Pentecostal Christian and a draft evader.  It was not credible that his
   paternal aunt and father were not arrested at the same time  particularly
   as, according to the appellant, his father  had  intervened  "furiously".
   According to the appellant's evidence at the hearing his uncle  told  him
   that he was to escape from the hospital only  10  minutes  prior  to  the
   appellant going to the window.  However,  at  his  asylum  interview  the
   appellant had said that he had two days notice of the escape plan.   This
   was  a  fundamental  discrepancy   which   undermined   the   appellant's
   credibility.

13) The judge did not consider it reasonably likely that the  appellant  was
   arbitrarily denied Ethiopian  citizenship.   The  judge  noted  that  the
   appellant had been to the Ethiopian Embassy and his application had  been
   endorsed with the following comments:

    "The  applicant  has  not  attached  supporting  documents   with   his
    application for an Ethiopian passport.  Therefore, there  is  no  valid
    reason for the Embassy to issue him with an Ethiopian passport."

14)  The  judge  considered  that  the  appellant's  credibility  had   been
   undermined to the  extent  that  he  could  not  be  satisfied  that  the
   appellant was telling the truth regarding the circumstances of his  life.
   Accordingly, his account of his  claimed  lack  of  documentation  and/or
   contacts in Ethiopia was not credible.

Grounds
15) The principal ground upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  was
   the  finding  by  the  judge  that  the  appellant  could   "provide   no
   explanation" as to why his father was  not  forced  to  undergo  military
   service.  The appellant's oral evidence was that his  father  had  health
   problems, including hypertension, depression and one leg shorter than the
   other.  In the application for permission to appeal it  was  pointed  out
   that the appellant's father was unlikely to be conscripted on  return  to
   Eritrea in October 2005 because of his ill-health.  The judge was said to
   have ignored the ties of the appellant and  his  father  to  Eritrea.   A
   person might return to a country where they were not treated particularly
   well because of their family or roots there.  The  judge  ought  to  have
   considered whether the claim  that  they  had  returned  to  Eritrea  was
   reasonably likely to be true and  not  found  it  more  likely  that  the
   appellant and his father would not have returned to Eritrea.

16) The grounds further state that while the appellant had a poor  knowledge
   of Tigrinya, the judge failed to take into account that Assab, where  the
   appellant lived  in  Eritrea,  was  a  town  predominantly  populated  by
   Ethiopians.  It was explicable therefore that he lacked knowledge of  the
   Tigrinya  language.   Ethiopians  made  up  approximately  60%   of   the
   population.  In relation to the appellant's alleged escape from detention
   in Eritrea, the appalling treatment of Pentecostal Christians in  Eritrea
   did not mean that the account given by the appellant was  not  reasonably
   likely to be true.  The appellant explained that  his  father  might  not
   have been arrested because of his illness and his aunt was  not  arrested
   because she was elderly.  Finally, it is pointed out that  the  appellant
   attended the Ethiopian Embassy and was denied recognition as an Ethiopian
   citizen.  The judge rejected the appellant's account  of  the  denial  of
   Ethiopian citizenship,  the  basis  of  his  overall  assessment  of  the
   appellant's credibility and had failed to consider all  the  evidence  in
   the round.

Submissions
17) At the hearing before me Mr Schwenk  relied  upon  the  grounds  in  the
   application.  He submitted that the appellant had provided an explanation
   for his father's avoidance of military service.  A judge was entitled  to
   reject an explanation for good reason but not  to  ignore  the  evidence,
   which was what the judge had done.  The appellant's father had  a  number
   of health problems.

18) Mr Schwenk continued that the judge had given two  reasons  why  it  was
   not credible for the appellant and his  father  to  have  travelled  from
   Sudan to Eritrea in 2005.  These were that the appellant and  his  father
   could worship freely in Sudan and that there was a risk of being  drafted
   for military service on return.  This was subject to the same  defect  in
   reasoning as mentioned previously in respect of the appellant's  father's
   ill-health.  By 2005 the appellant's father  was  paralysed.   The  judge
   ignored the family ties the appellant had with Eritrea.  The judge  asked
   the wrong question.  The question was not whether the  judge  would  have
   done this in the appellant's position but whether the appellant's account
   was reasonably likely to be true.

19) The question was raised of the appellant's own eligibility for  military
   service by the time of the return in 2005.  Mr Schwenk suggested that the
   appellant would have been caring for his father but it  was  pointed  out
   that according to the country information there  was  no  exemption  from
   military service for a carer.  This was recorded  in  the  letter  of  11
   October 2010 from the British Embassy  quoted  at  paragraph  29  of  the
   determination.  Mr Schwenk acknowledged that this might be correct  as  a
   statement of normal practice but the appellant's father  had  significant
   care needs and someone had to meet these.

20) Mr Schwenk then turned to the issue of language.  The  judge  found  the
   appellant had a poor knowledge of  Tigrinya.   The  judge  did  not  take
   proper account of  the  town  of  Assab  being  predominantly  Ethiopian,
   although Mr Schwenk acknowledged that this was before the war.  The judge
   considered that the appellant's account of  his  arrest  and  escape  was
   inconsistent with the  background  evidence  about  the  mistreatment  of
   Pentecostal Christians in Eritrea.  This was  not  a  proper  reason  for
   finding that the appellant's account of his  escape  lacked  credibility.
   The appellant had explained why his aunt and father  were  not  arrested.
   If the appellant's evidence of this was rejected then reasons  needed  to
   be given.

21) On the issue of citizenship, the appellant  had  applied  for  Ethiopian
   citizenship in London and been rebuffed.  This issue was addressed in the
   determination  after  the  judge  had  already  decided  to  reject   the
   appellant's account.  The judge had not considered all  the  evidence  in
   the round.

22)  Mr  Schwenk  continued  that  the  question  was  whether  the   issues
   identified where the judge's reasoning was inadequate were central to the
   adverse credibility findings.  He submitted that they were and  that,  in
   particular, the judge failed to take proper account  of  the  appellant's
   father's ill-health.   This  went  to  the  core  of  the  account.   The
   credibility findings were unsafe and there should be  a  further  hearing
   before the First-tier Tribunal at which the decision would be re-made.

23) Mr Mangion, for the respondent, submitted that the core  issue  was  the
   judge's description of the appellant's father  as  a  healthy  man.   The
   judge used the word "healthy" not because the judge was  unaware  of  the
   evidence. After the Presenting Officer had asked the appellant in  cross-
   examination why his father did not do military service, the  judge  asked
   the appellant if there were any other reasons why the appellant's  father
   would not have had to do military service.  The  appellant  replied  that
   his father had  depression.  The  judge  considered  the  exemptions  for
   military service at paragraph 29 of the determination.  According to  the
   appellant's evidence his father's hypertension was  not  diagnosed  until
   after he was in Sudan.  This may have been in  the  mind  of  the  judge.
   Military service need not be performed in a combat role but could be done
   in another capacity.  Nevertheless the appellant's father was allowed  to
   go to Sudan to work.  The appellant mentioned in  his  witness  statement
   that his father had one leg shorter than the other but the findings  made
   were open to the judge.  The judge was entitled to rely  on  the  country
   information in the way that he had and by the use of  italics  the  judge
   had made it clear on what parts of the country information  reliance  was
   being placed.

24) On the question of return from Sudan to Eritrea,  Mr  Mangion  submitted
   that the appellant had not said in his  witness  statement  that  it  was
   necessary for his  father  to  return  to  receive  care  which  was  not
   available in the Sudan or because they were missing their  family.   When
   the appellant and his father left in Eritrea in 2001 they would have been
   well  aware  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  them  to  return.   The
   appellant's  evidence  was  that  his  father  had  been  supplied   with
   medication but he made no mention of specialist care.   At  interview  he
   had said that his father was relying on the healing power of prayer.   At
   the time of the alleged  return  the  appellant  would  have  been  about
   eighteen and would have qualified for military service.

25) In relation to language, Mr Mangion  submitted  that  according  to  the
   appellant his father spoke Tigrinya and it  was  not  credible  that  his
   father would not have used this language in the home.  Many Eritreans had
   moved to Ethiopia around the time when the appellant said his family  had
   done so when he was aged  three.   The  appellant's  first  language  was
   Amharic and his second was Arabic.  The appellant claimed to  have  lived
   for five years in total in Eritrea - the second period was from  1999  to
   2001.  The appellant's  aunt  had  never  left  Eritrea.   The  appellant
   recorded in his witness statement that his father  and  his  nanny  spoke
   only Amharic to him but it was implicit in  the  determination  that  the
   judge did not believe this.

26) Mr Mangion continued that the judge gave good reasons for not  believing
   the appellant's account of his escape from detention and engaged with the
   appellant's evidence.  The appellant had never stated that his father was
   not arrested because of his infirmity.  The appellant did not  know  what
   the reason was.

27) In relation to the appellant's citizenship, Mr  Mangion  submitted  that
   this was not an "add-on" by the judge.  The  judge  was  not  obliged  to
   accept the appellant's account of going to the Ethiopian Embassy.

28) In response Mr Schwenk  reiterated  that  the  judge  did  not  properly
   consider the question of the rejection of the appellant's application for
   Ethiopian citizenship.  Mr Schwenk accepted that  having  regard  to  the
   country information the appellant's father's  health  in  2001  seemed  a
   little bit unlikely to have been such as to have led to an exemption from
   military service on the grounds of depression.  There was  the  question,
   however, of differences in culture and meaning.  There was  an  exemption
   for those registered as disabled but the appellant had not said in  terms
   that his father was registered as disabled.  Nevertheless  the  appellant
   was very young at the time and did not seek to "over-egg the pudding"  by
   providing an explanation for matters he was  not  sure  about.   Even  in
   Eritrea it was possible the appellant's father  was  registered  disabled
   because of the health problems described.

29) Mr Schwenk continued that the appellant's description  of  his  father's
   later care needs were that these were less  pressing  than  his  need  to
   pray.  This did not mean that he was not seriously ill and  that  he  did
   not have significant care needs.  The appellant described how he  had  to
   carry his father to the toilet and help him to walk.  He had to make  his
   bed and wash him.

30) On the question of language, Mr Schwenk submitted that  the  appellant's
   evidence in his witness statement was that his father did  not  speak  to
   him in Tigrinya.  If the judge rejected that explanation he was  required
   to say why.

31) The judge recorded the country information that some elderly people  and
   Christian women were arrested but it did not follow from  this  that  the
   appellant's aunt and father were arrested.  It was not sufficient  simply
   to go through the country information by way of rejecting the appellant's
   evidence.   The  question  was  whether  the  appellant's  evidence   was
   reasonably likely to be true.   The fact  that  some  elderly  Christians
   were arrested did not mean that the  appellant's  aunt  would  have  been
   arrested.  The behaviour of the authorities on one occasion did not  lead
   to the conclusion that their failure to behave  in  the  same  way  on  a
   future occasion meant that the appellant was lying.

Discussion
32) As Mr Mangion submitted, the core issue before me is whether  the  judge
   erred by disregarding the appellant's evidence of his father's ill-health
   at the time of leaving Eritrea in 2001.  If his father's  health  was  so
   poor that it would have made him unfit for military  service,  then  that
   would have explained why the appellant and his  father  were  allowed  to
   leave and this would not have contradicted the country information in the
   way the judge perceived.

33) In the course of the hearing Mr Schwenk  himself  acknowledged  that  it
   seemed a little unlikely that depression by itself  would  have  led  the
   Ethiopian authorities to  give  the  appellant's  father  exemption  from
   military service.  Mr Mangion submitted that according to the appellant's
   evidence at his asylum interview (Q69) his father was not diagnosed  with
   hypertension until after  he  was  in  Sudan.   This  hypertension  would
   hardly then have been a justification for exemption from military service
   before the appellant and his father let Eritrea.   The  remaining  health
   issue was the appellant's claim that his father had one leg shorter  than
   the other.  In relation to this Mr  Mangion  pointed  out  that  military
   service did not necessarily mean service in combat or  among  front  line
   troops.  There were other  forms  of  national  service.   The  appellant
   acknowledges that his father worked as a chef  in  Sudan.   It  might  be
   inferred that if the appellant's father was capable of working as a  chef
   in Sudan, then he would have been capable of doing work of this nature in
   military or national service.  If the appellant's father was  capable  of
   working as a chef in Sudan there seems little,  if  any,  reason  why  he
   would have been regarded  as  unfit  for  military  service  or  national
   service in Eritrea.  I am satisfied the judge was entitled  to  draw  the
   inference  he  did  regarding  the  implausibility,  when  considered  by
   reference to the country information, of the  appellant  and  his  father
   being permitted to leave Eritrea legally in 2001 to travel  to  Sudan  in
   order for his father to work there.  This was the most significant of the
   issues raised in the application for permission to appeal.

34) Mr Schwenk  submitted  that  the  judge  had  asked  himself  the  wrong
   question over the credibility of the appellant's account of returning  to
   Eritrea in 2005.  Mr Schwenk submitted that the question was not  whether
   the judge would have done this in the appellant's position but whether it
   was reasonably likely that the appellant's account was true.  Some of the
   further points made by Mr Schwenk in this regard were  little  more  than
   conjecture, such as whether the  appellant  and  his  father  would  have
   wanted to be re-united with  their  family  in  Eritrea  because  of  the
   appellant's father's poor state of health.  A more significant factor was
   raised by Mr Mangion,  namely  that  the  appellant  himself  had  become
   eligible for military service and  he  would  face  potentially  a  grave
   situation on return by reason  both  of  being  called  up  for  military
   service and by reason of his religious faith.  The judge pointed out that
   the family could  have  travelled  to  Ethiopia,  where  their  religious
   affiliation would have been tolerated.  The judge was  entitled  to  find
   that the alleged return to Eritrea was highly implausible and  the  judge
   gave adequate reasons for not accepting the appellant's  account  of  the
   return.

35) It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that  the  area  of  Eritrea
   where he lived until the age of three was at that  time  a  predominantly
   Ethiopian area.  Nevertheless, the  appellant's  evidence  was  that  his
   father was a speaker of Tigrinya.  Even although  the  appellant  claimed
   that he was cared for by a maid who spoke Amharic, the judge was entitled
   to find that was implausible that the appellant did  not  have  a  better
   knowledge of Tigrinya.  The judge was entitled to  find  the  appellant's
   evidence on this issue was not satisfactory.

36) The judge found the account given by the appellant  of  his  arrest  and
   escape in Eritrea was inconsistent with the  country  information.   This
   was a finding the judge was entitled to make.  There was not  merely  one
   inconsistency in the appellant's account, such as whether the authorities
   would have arrested his elderly aunt or his disabled  father,  but  there
   were other inconsistencies, for instance,  over  the  hospital  treatment
   afforded to the appellant and over when he learnt  of  the  escape  plan.
   The judge was entitled to regard the appellant's evidence as  lacking  in
   credibility.

37) In relation to the alleged refusal of Ethiopian citizenship,  the  judge
   noted that according to the  Ethiopian  Embassy  the  appellant  did  not
   attach supporting documents with his application and  therefore  did  not
   provide a valid reason for the Embassy to  issue  him  with  a  passport.
   This is not at all the same of saying that he  was  not  entitled,  after
   detailed examination of his circumstances, to Ethiopian nationality.

38) In conclusion, I am satisfied that the reasoning given by the judge  for
   the adverse credibility finding made was adequate and took proper account
   not only of the country information  but  also  of  the  appellant's  own
   evidence.  I am not satisfied that there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
   determination on the basis of which it should be set aside.

Conclusions

39) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

40) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

41) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

Signed                                             Date
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
