
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/03223/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 13 January 2016                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                           mr Logaraj Arulanantham
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant,  Mr  Logaraj  Arulanantham,  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent to refuse his  claim  for
    international protection.  His ensuing appeal was heard on 6 July  2015
    at Hatton Cross by Judge Plumptre.  Both parties were represented,  the
    Appellant by Mr Paramjorthy.  In a decision of 16, promulgated  on  24,
    July 2015 the appeal was dismissed on political,  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was refused to  the  Appellant  on  28  August  by
    Judge Garratt, essentially on the basis  that  it  represented  only  a
    disagreement  with  the  judicial  findings,  but  granted  on   second
    application on 10 October 2015 by Judge  Taylor,  who  wrote  that  the
    grounds may on closer examination amount to  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision but the judge's reasoning was at  times  difficult  to  follow
    particularly with respect to  the  medical  evidence.   The  Respondent
    submitted a Rule 24 response essentially arguing  that  the  judge  had
    made clear and  well  reasoned  findings  with  which  the  grounds  of
    application represented disagreement.

3.   The Appellant attended the error of law hearing, which  took  the  form
    of submissions, expanding in the case of the Appellant  upon  the  very
    full grounds of application.  I reserved my decision.

Decision

4.   The application occupies that  difficult  intermediate  ground  between
    disagreement with the judicial findings and findings which are  legally
    erroneous.

5.   The Appellant submits that the judge did not explain why  she  had  not
    accepted the Appellant's evidence.  Nor did she address the Appellant's
    evidence about various matters which are addressed  in  his  statement,
    including why he did not join the LTTE at the age of  10,  why  he  was
    selected for LTTE  training,  his  relationship  with  his  uncle,  his
    inability to explain why his father had been arrested and  why  he  had
    been allowed to contact his mother.  Insufficient  reasoning  had  been
    given for rejecting the medical evidence, in the light of KV  (scarring
    - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC).   His  claim  of
    sur place political activities in the UK was rejected  as  having  been
    "cynically undertaken to bolster a false asylum claim" (paragraph  77).
    This was to ignore Danian  [2000]  IAR  96,  which  permits  sur  place
    political activities to be undertaken in less than good faith.  This in
    turn contributed to the assessment of risk under the criteria of GJ and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  319  (IAC)
    (paragraph 81).  These conclusions are summarised at paragraphs 38  and
    80; neither was meaningfully checked, as paragraph 38 is unintelligible
    and paragraph 80  intelligible  only  by  the  insertion  of  the  word
    "reject" in the fourth line.

6.   Individually the challenges to the Appellant's evidence,  including  of
    his sur place activities, may be, as they  were,  argued  to  represent
    disagreement  with  the  judicial  findings.   Cumulatively,  they  are
    sufficiently arguable that, taken together with the  rejection  of  the
    medical evidence and the legally erroneous understanding of  sur  place
    activities, they render the decision unreliable on these grounds, which
    include insufficient  engagement  with  the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    insufficient reasoning for its rejection.

7.   The decision is accordingly set aside.  Both  parties  agreed  that  in
    this event the appeal needs to be reheard in its entirety in the First-
    tier Tribunal.



Decision

8.   The original decision contained an error of law, and is set aside.

9.   The appeal is to be reheard on all issues in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at Hatton Cross by any judge other than Judge Plumptre.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated: 11 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

