

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
      AA/03571/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23rd September 2014                       |                             |
|                                              |On 5th November 2014         |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                            Farrukh habib abbasi
                        (No anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Talacchi, Longfellow Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date  of  birth  26th  February
    1981. He has permission[1] to appeal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge  Sweet)  to  dismiss  his  appeal[2]  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse to vary his  leave  to  remain  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of  the  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006[3]. That decision followed rejection of
    the Appellant's claim to international protection[4].


 2. It is the Appellant's claim  that  he  faces  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Pakistan because he is of, or is perceived to be of, the
    Ahmadi faith. His account can  be  summarised  as  follows.  Whilst  in
    Pakistan he worked for GlaxoSmithKline and there met a Dr  Abdul  Manan
    Saddiqui who was the President of the Ahmadi community in Mirpur  Khas.
    This gentleman, and another colleague, introduced the Appellant to  the
    Ahmadi faith. Dr Saddiqui was  assassinated  in  September  2008.   The
    Appellant came to the UK as  a  student  in  2009.  He  fell  ill  with
    tuberculosis, but became well again. He attributed his recovery to  the
    fact that through work he had met a number of Ahmadis who  had  visited
    him when he was ill and discussed their faith  with  him.  He  believed
    that it was an indication from God that he should convert. In May  2013
    he returned to Pakistan and discussed his new interest  with  a  former
    colleague. He signed the Jammat Bait (adherence form) on the 12th  June
    2013 after returning to the UK and his initiation into the Ahmadi faith
    was overseen by his friend  Anwar  Zahid.   He  has  subsequently  been
    informed that his colleague's uncle lodged a FIR against him for  being
    a "Qadiani". It alleges that he burned a Qur'an.  The police raided his
    family house and a fatwa has been issued against  him.  Khatme  Nabuwat
    have threatened him and members of his own family are  threatening  his
    father, urging him to disown the Appellant.  The  Appellant  has  begun
    the process of full conversion. This was the basis of his claim.


 3. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had met  or  known  Dr
    Mannan. Various discrepancies  arose  in  his  account  such  that  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant was in fact  an  Ahmadi
    or interested in joining that  faith.   Although  two  friends  in  the
    Ahmadi  community  wrote  letters  in  support,  these  "could  not  be
    considered objective".  It is noted that the Appellant has  paid  Chana
    (charitable contribution) since he came  to  the  UK  but  since  these
    payments coincided with the Appellant claiming asylum it was considered
    that they were made in order to bolster his claim.  Overall it was  not
    accepted that the Appellant is Ahmadi or that he  is  at  any  risk  in
    Pakistan.

 4. On appeal Judge Sweet heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  from
    two witnesses from the Ahmadi community. The findings are all contained
    in paragraph 50 of the determination.  The Judge finds  discrepancy  in
    the Appellant's evidence about when his interest in  the  Ahmadi  faith
    began: 2006 or 2009. A number  of  other  discrepancies  arose  in  the
    evidence, leading the Judge to conclude: "in short, I  agree  with  the
    Respondent that there is no substantial evidence that the Appellant  is
    indeed an Ahmadi".  The  Tribunal   found  "limited"  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's involvement in the mosque here, save the  evidence  of  the
    two witnesses, which had been changed in respect of how long  they  had
    known the Appellant.  He further  found  "limited"  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had been making religious contributions and accepted that the
    Appellant was, at interview, able to give evidence "as to the facets of
    Ahmadi". He concluded that  he  had  not  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    credible.

 5. The grounds of  appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  the
    following errors:

        i) Failing to make findings on material facts, including the entire
           account of events in Pakistan since May 2013 and the FIR;


       ii) Importing the incorrect standard of proof in the use of the term
           "substantial";

      iii) Failure to give reasons for rejecting the unchallenged  evidence
           of witnesses.

 6. The Respondent opposes the appeal on all grounds.




    Error of Law

 7. At paragraph 10 the determination makes reference to the  applicable  -
    lower - standard of proof in asylum appeals.  At 50 the  Tribunal  uses
    the phrase "I agree with the Respondent that there  is  no  substantial
    evidence that the Appellant is indeed an Ahmadi".  Mr  Talacchi  argues
    that  this  was  too  high  a  standard.  I  do  not  agree.  The  term
    "substantial" is  derived  from  the  alternative  formulation  of  the
    "reasonable likelihood test" found  inter  alia  in  the  Qualification
    Directive[5]: "substantial grounds for believing that there is  a  real
    risk".  Having considered paragraph 50 in context  I  do  not  find  it
    shown that the Tribunal applied the wrong standard of proof.


 8. I am nevertheless satisfied that the determination must be  set  aside.
    The Tribunal heard from two live witnesses  who  gave  direct  evidence
    about the Appellant's commitment to the Ahmadi faith.  The  grounds  of
    appeal state - without contradiction by the Secretary of State  -  that
    their evidence had not been "materially challenged" by  the  Presenting
    Officer on the day.   No clear findings are made about their  evidence,
    paragraph 50 confining itself to observing that there was a  change  in
    the evidence about how long these witnesses had  known  the  Appellant.
    Further there were a number of conflicts  in  the  evidence  which  the
    determination fails to resolve. There are no findings about whether the
    Appellant was identified by people in Pakistan has having moved towards
    the Ahmadi faith, whether an FIR was in  fact  lodged  against  him  or
    whether these matters are reasonably likely to give rise to a  risk  on
    return. These matters cannot be said to have  been  determined  by  the
    findings that have been made, particularly since the  Tribunal  appears
    to acknowledge that there is some evidence  that  the  Appellant  knows
    about the faith, has signed an initiation  documents  and  has  started
    making charitable contributions. Even if it was not  accepted  that  he
    had in finally converted, on those facts there remained a  question  as
    to whether that was the perception of people in Pakistan.


 9. The findings of fact in this appeal are limited to paragraph 50.  As  I
    note above, this failed to deal with  much  of  the  Appellant's  case.
    Without a complete assessment of the evidence  the  findings,  such  as
    they are, cannot be considered safe. The decision is set aside  in  its
    entirety.



    Decisions

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


11. The re-making  of  this  appeal  requires  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant  and  two  additional  witnesses,  all   given   through   an
    interpreter. The parties agree a time estimate of 4 hours. In light  of
    that,  and  the  extent  of  judicial  fact-finding  required,  it   is
    appropriate that the decision be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. There was no request for anonymity and on the facts before me I see  no
    reason to make such a direction.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           3rd November 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Lever on the 30th July 2014
[2] Determination dated 2nd July 2014
[3] Decision dated 27th May 2014
[4] 'Reasons for refusal' letter dated 27th May 2014
[5] COUNCIL DIRECTIVE 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on minimum standards for
the qualification and status of third country nationals or stateless
persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international
protection and the content of the protection granted


