
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03929/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15th September 2016                     |On 12th October 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  ms T G K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, is a female, a citizen of Ethiopia, who was born on 19th
    June 1984.  She appeals to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision
    of the Respondent Secretary of State dated 27th February 2015 rejecting
    an application for asylum under the United Kingdom's obligations  under
    the Refugee Convention and the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
    and  promulgated  in  a  decision  on  27th  October  2015.    In   the
    determination,  the  judge  observed  how  the  Appellant,   of   Oromo
    ethnicity, had attended some OLF meetings in  the  UK  (paragraph  32).
    The Appellant had returned to her own country in  2012  and  the  judge
    held that there could be no credible fear of  persecution  in  Ethiopia
    (paragraph 51).  The more  important  issue  was  the  Appellant's  OLF
    participation.   The  judge  observed  that  whatever  activities   the
    Appellant had been involved in in  the  United  Kingdom  was  in  stark
    contrast to a lack of  participation  in  OLF  activities  in  Ethiopia
    (paragraph 77).  She had also not  been  involved  in  any  politically
    significant way (paragraph 78).  In fact,

         "The Appellant has only relatively recently become an  OLF  member.
         I follow the country guidance case and find that even if  she  were
         perceived by the Ethiopian authorities  to  be  such  a  member  or
         sympathiser she will not in general be at real risk for she has not
         been  previously  arrested  or  detained  on   suspicion   of   OLF
         involvement",

    according to the judge (at paragraph 81).

 3. The appeal was dismissed.

 4. On 14th  December  2015,  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  the  Appellant
    permission to appeal on the basis that there had been a failure to take
    into account important country guidance case, namely, MB (OLF and MTA -
    risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030.

 5. At the hearing before me on 15th  September  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Mr  Sharif,  a  solicitor,  and  the  Respondent   was
    represented by Ms H Aboni, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.  Mr
    Sharif handed up a handwritten letter from the Birmingham  Women's  NHS
    Trust Hospital in Edgbaston, dated 14th September 2016, confirming that
    the Appellant,

         "Had a baby girl by caesarean section on 31st August 2016  and  the
         baby is premature at thirteen weeks due to  growth  restriction  in
         utero.  The baby is currently on the neonatal  unit  at  Birmingham
         Women's Hospital where Kidist delivered.  Baby is currently in  the
         incubator on oxygen as unable to breathe on her own ..."

 6. Also handed up was a letter from Dr Clare Marsh,  from  Obstetrics  and
    Gynaecology  Department,  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    confirming that the Appellant, at the time 30 weeks pregnant, had  been
    HIV diagnosed in Ethiopia in her teens, and started  on  antiretroviral
    drugs in Italy in 2004  and  that,  "her  monitoring  has  demonstrated
    adequate forward growth but the  baby  remains  well  below  the  tenth
    centile which is small".  Subject to this new piece of information,  Mr
    Sharif began by making his submissions.  He relied upon the grounds  of
    application.

 7. First, the Appellant was returning back to Ethiopia as a  "single  lone
    female", and had been previously raped, and there was a failure to take
    into account the fact that the Appellant was returning as a single lone
    female.  She would have been a member of a particular social group  and
    was at particular persecutory risk on this account.

 8. Second, there was a failure to give adequate reasons because the  judge
    said (at paragraph 34) that,

         "Having considered the Appellant's documentary and oral evidence  I
         come to the same conclusion as the  Respondent  and  for  the  same
         reasons.  I endorse and adopt paragraphs (16) and (17) quoted above
         as part of my findings."

    The judge should have made her own findings in  this  respect  and  not
    adopted those in the refusal letter.

 9. Third, the judge failed to consider the risk  on  return  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker.  This was important because the judge had  observed  (at
    paragraphs 31 and 45) that the Appellant had been granted  humanitarian
    protection previously in Italy.  The judge had also observed that there
    was a claim for humanitarian protection by the Appellant (at paragraphs
    95 to 96).  It had been noted by the judge (at paragraph 96) that,  "in
    view of my findings of credibility and facts as outlined above  I  find
    the Appellant has failed to establish to the required standard that she
    is  eligible  for  protection  under  the  Qualification  Regulations".
    However,  this  could  not  be  right  because  if  the  Appellant  had
    previously been granted humanitarian protection in Italy then the judge
    failed to give adequate reasons as to why the Appellant would  not  now
    be at real risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  due  to  her  particular
    circumstances if she were returned alone to Ethiopia.

10. Fourth, the judge failed to apply paragraph 276ADE in that it was clear
    that the Appellant would  face  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  her
    reintegration if she returned to Ethiopia in the light of her  accepted
    "sur  place"  involvement  with  the  OLF.   Finally,  the  judge  gave
    inadequate consideration  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  HIV
    positive when holding that the  Appellant  would  not  have  access  in
    Ethiopia to medication which may be appropriate for her  (at  paragraph
    106), because in this event, and given this finding, the appeal  should
    have been allowed on the basis of Article 3.

11. For her part, Ms  Aboni  referred  to  the  Rule  24  response  by  the
    Secretary of State and submitted that there was no  error  of  law  and
    this was simply a disagreement with the findings of the judge.   First,
    the judge did consider whether the Appellant was at risk for  attending
    OLF meetings in the UK and this  is  clear  at  paragraphs  77  to  78.
    Second, the background evidence does not show that the Appellant is  at
    risk on return.  The case of MB [2007] UKAIT 00030 is quite old,  being
    a 2007 decision, but it still makes clear that one is only at  risk  if
    one has a sufficiently high profile such that one  would  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities.  Third, the suggestion that the Appellant
    had been raped in Libya was never raised before the judge as  a  Ground
    of Appeal.  Fourth, there is no indication that the Appellant  did  not
    have a fair hearing and so there could have been no  procedural  error.
    Finally, there would be no risk of persecution as a single lone female.
     The judge did consider the  Appellant's  circumstances  (at  paragraph
    87).  Moreover the judge held (at paragraph 105) that if the  Appellant
    does not want to return to Ethiopia she can return to the  place  where
    she has been granted leave to remain, namely,  to  Italy.   It  is  not
    clear why the Italian authorities gave the Appellant  leave  to  remain
    (see paragraph 45) and it cannot be assumed that there was a compelling
    reason for this.  Finally, in relation to  her  medical  treatment  the
    judge accepts (at  paragraph  106)  that  the  Appellant  may  not  get
    prescribed treatment in her own country but there was suitable  medical
    treatment (see paragraph 104).  New evidence in the form of  the  birth
    of a premature baby who is in  an  oxygen  incubator  is  not  relevant
    because these were not matters before the judge at the time.

12. In reply Mr Sharif submitted that the judge had accepted (at  paragraph
    78) that the Appellant had been involved  in  some  form  of  political
    activity.  That said, whilst it was the case that MB [2007] UKAIT 00030
    is  old  authority,  the  operational  guidance  for  2013  states  (at
    paragraph 3.15.16) that the Appellant would be at risk simply by  being
    a member of the OLF.  Secondly, the Appellant is  a  vulnerable  woman,
    not only because she has been raped previously, but because she will be
    returning as a single lone woman (and now possibly with her child).

My Consideration of the Appeal

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  This is a case  where
    the Appellant's OLF activities are accepted by the judge in the  United
    Kingdom (see paragraph 77).  What the judge concludes, however, is that
    "the Appellant's recent participation in some  OLF  activities  is  not
    politically significant".  The judge observed that, "she has attended a
    few meetings and conferences" and that "her profile would be very low".
     It is true that the case of MB [2007] UKAIT 00030 required a person to
    have some profile in order to attract the risk of persecution.

14. However, the Operational Guidance Note (Ethiopia) (November 2013) makes
    it clear that, "the available evidence  also  suggests  that  perceived
    members or sympathisers of the OLF or ONLF are likely  to  be  targeted
    and should they come to the attention of the authorities, are likely to
    be at  risk  of  persecution"  (paragraph  3.15.16).   There  has  been
    inadequate consideration of this operational guidance  and  it  is  not
    enough to say that the Ethiopian authorities "would most probably  view
    such actions as a cynical attempt to enhance a very poor  asylum  claim
    in the United Kingdom in order to remain here" (paragraph 78).

15. Second, whereas the judge gives consideration to "prospects  on  return
    to Ethiopia" (at paragraphs 83  to  88)  there  has  been  insufficient
    consideration given to the Appellant's return in  the  context  of  her
    arrival there as a single lone woman, who has previously  been  subject
    to sexual violence.

16. Under Practice Statement 7.2(b) I conclude that the nature or extent of
    any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for a decision in
    the appeal to be remade is such that it is  appropriate  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than
    Judge Colyer.  Another judge may well come to the same conclusions  but
    the appropriate guidelines will  need  to  be  followed,  such  as  the
    operational guidelines, and applied to the factual  findings  that  are
    reached.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Colyer.

18. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th October 2016




