

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: aa 03523-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                           |Decision signed: 25.11.2013   |
|On: 25.11.2013                               |Sent out: 06.12.2013          |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                            Anuraj  SINNATHTHAMBY
                    (continued anonymity not applied for)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Edward Grieves  (counsel instructed by Jein)
For the respondent: Mr Laurence Tarlow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Peter Ievins), sitting at Taylor House on 19  July,  to
    on asylum grounds an appeal by a Tamil citizen of Sri  Lanka,  born  22
    October 1983. The judge also allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds; as  there  is  no  appeal  against  that  part  of  his
    decision, this appeal does not affect whether the appellant  should  or
    should not have leave to remain in this country, but only the basis  on
    which he is to stay here.



 2. The Home Office case, as put by Mr Tarlow before me, is that the  judge
    should have treated the appellant as excluded from  Refugee  Convention
    protection under article 1F (c) as "... guilty of acts contrary to  the
    principles and purposes of the United Nations". The  factual  basis  on
    which this argument is put forward, which is  itself  agreed,  is  that
    between 2002 - 03, while a ceasefire was in force between the LTTE  and
    Government forces, this appellant acted as one  of  several  bodyguards
    for the Tamil Tiger leader Prabhakaran. The Home Office say  this  made
    him "... guilty of acts contrary to the principles and purposes of  the
    United Nations", on the basis that the protection offered  by  him  and
    others made it possible for Prabhakaran to  escape  justice  in  India,
    where he was wanted for the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, having  been
    found guilty of murder, apparently in his absence.

 3. The judge dealt with this argument quite succinctly at paragraph 56:

       The fact that the appellant acted as bodyguard for  Prabhakaran  does
       not, in my judgment, assist the respondent in support  of  exclusion.
       He acted as bodyguard between March 2002 and February 2003, at a time
       when there as a peace process between the LTTE  and  the  Sri  Lankan
       government.  The suggestion that during that time the  appellant  was
       protecting Prabhakaran from facing justice smacks to me  of  victor's
       justice.

 4. The judge went on to deal with it at paragraph 59, in  the  context  of
    article 1F (b); but his point on the facts must  apply  equally  to  1F
    (c):

       I do not consider that acting, as he did,  as  one  of  a  number  of
       bodyguards  comes  close  to  involving  the  appellant  in  any   of
       Prabhakaran's own activities or in assisting him in evading  whatever
       judicial process he might at any stage have faced.

 5. Points are made in the Home Office grounds of appeal about the  way  in
    which the judge did or did not consider  various  authorities;  but  he
    clearly had in mind the leading cases on the requirements of article 1F
    (JS (Sri Lanka) [2010] UKSC 15, applied to article 1F (c) in DD  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 1407), and the standard of proof to be met  ('serious  grounds
    for considering': al-Sirri [2012] UKSC 54).  There  is  now  a  country
    guidance case on the point, decided in the light of AH (Algeria) [2012]
    EWCA Civ 395, but of general application; however it was not  available
    at the time of the judge's decision; and, regrettably since it came out
    on 5 August, still not does not appear on the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber's web-site.

 6. The judge might have  done  better  to  avoid  emotive  language  about
    'victor's justice', since the justice  process  involved  was  that  of
    India, and not Sri Lanka. However Mr Tarlow  had  to  acknowledge  that
    there was no evidence to show that, when the appellant was acting as  a
    bodyguard for Prabhakaran during the peace process in  Sri  Lanka,  the
    Indian authorities were taking any active steps to secure Prabhakaran's
    return to their territory to face justice


    there. In my judgment the judge was well entitled to treat the argument
    that this appellant was "... guilty of acts contrary to the  principles
    and purposes of the United Nations" by preventing it, as ingenious, but
    divorced from reality.

Home Office appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



