
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03753/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined on the papers at Field House       |Determination Sent           |
|On 1 February 2013                            |On 1 February 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     E O
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)


                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Traynor promulgated on 22  October  2012,  dismissing
   his appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  made  on  28
   March 2012 to remove him from the United Kingdom.


2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  28  November
   2012 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on the grounds that the  judge's
   failure to consider the appeal on asylum grounds and the  application  of
   the balance of probabilities were arguably errors of law.

3. On 16 January 2013 I gave the following directions:

    1. Standard directions required the appellant in these  proceedings  to
       serve within 21 days, and the respondent in these proceedings within
       28 days: a skeleton argument unless relying solely on the grounds of
       appeal; and, any further evidence not before the FtT on which it  is
       intended to rely, accompanied by the notice required under  rule  15
       (2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  The
       directions also required the respondent in these proceedings to file
       within 28 days, any response to the notice  of  appeal  pursuant  to
       rule 24 of the rules.


    2. It is my preliminary view that, as is set  out  in  the  grounds  of
       appeal [5 to9] that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in directing
       himself as  to  the  standard  of  proof  applicable,  and  that  in
       consequence, none of the findings of fact in respect of  the  asylum
       and human rights claim are capable of being preserved.


    3. It is also my preliminary view that in light of BA (Nigeria) v  SSHD
       [2009] UKSC 7,  as the  respondent  had  not  certified  the  asylum
       appeal pursuant to section 92 or 96 of the 2002 Act, that the  judge
       did err in concluding that  he  had  no  jurisdiction  to  determine
       issues arising under the refugee convention.


    4. Accordingly, unless within five working days from the issue of these
       directions  I  receive  written  submissions  setting   out   cogent
       arguments to the contrary, I propose to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
       First-tier for a fresh determination of the  appeal  on  asylum  and
       human rights  grounds.   As  the  respondent  has  not  applied  for
       permission to appeal against the decision of the judge to allow  the
       appeal on the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the
       law, nor made any submissions pursuant to rule 24 or otherwise, that
       decision will stand.

5. There has been no response to these directions. I am satisfied  that  for
   the reasons set out above, and as set out in the grounds of  appeal,  the
   determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the  making  of  an
   error of law, and must be set  aside.  As  the  error  infected  all  the
   findings of  fact,  and  fresh  findings  on  all  relevant  matters  are
   necessary, it is appropriate to remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
   make a fresh determination de novo of all the facts and issues.  None  of
   the judge's findings are preserved.

   Summary of decisions

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the  making
       of an error of law and is set aside.
    2. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
       determination on all the issues.


Signed                                  Date:  1 February 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
