
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/03609/2015

                                                   AA/03753/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On: 18th October 2017                  |       On: 20th October 2017        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                   RR + 1
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms Foster, Counsel instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1981. His dependent is
    his wife[1]. He appeals with permission[2] against the decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hodgkinson)  to  dismiss  his  protection
    appeal.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


,


    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  faces  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Sri Lanka for reasons of his imputed political  opinion.
    His account, as advanced to the First-tier Tribunal, can be  summarised
    as follows:


         . He was born into a mixed faith/ethnicity  family  and  lived  in
           Colombo until he was about two years old, when the  family  home
           was attacked by a Sinhalese mob who murdered his grandfather


         . The attack precipitated the Appellant's Tamil father  moving  to
           Jaffna and joining the LTTE

         . The Appellant and his mother initially went with him but shortly
           thereafter moved back to Colombo in order that he attend school

         . In 2006 the Appellant himself started assisting the LTTE. He was
           working for a travel agent  and  he  would  arrange  travel  for
           injured cadres. The Appellant's contact in  Colombo  was  a  man
           named G

         . In 2008 he arranged passage to India for three LTTE fighters but
           one of them was arrested en route. The Appellant became  fearful
           for his safety and decided to  come  to  the  UK  to  study.  He
           applied for a visa which was granted. The Appellant and his wife
           came to the UK in October of that year

         . In August 2009 the  Appellant's  father  was  arrested.  He  was
           released on bail in 2010

         . On the 4th December 2012 the Appellant's family home in  Colombo
           was attacked by arsonists - he believes that  it  was  either  a
           Sinhalese extremist or the army.  His  mother  and  sister  were
           badly injured

         . The Appellant flew back to Sri Lanka on the 6th December 2012 to
           see them

         . On the 7th December 2012 he and his father attended the property
           to inspect the damage. His father had  left  when  the  security
           services arrived. They arrested the Appellant and  took  him  to
           Colombo Fort where he was held and ill-treated for 4 days before
           being released upon payment of a bribe. He was  given  reporting
           restrictions and told to attend a local police station each week

         . The Appellant left Sri Lanka on the 12th December 2012

         . On the 14th December 2012 his father went  missing.  The  family
           believe that he has been abducted by the Sri Lankan authorities

         . Presumably as a result of his failing to sign on at  the  police
           station the Court in Colombo issued a summons for the  Appellant
           to attend. His failure to attend that  court  date,  in  January
           2013 and subsequent, has resulted in a warrant being issued  for
           his arrest.  The  authorities  have  attended  the  family  home
           looking for him


 4. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant and his wife,
    and had regard to  a  number  of  original  documents,  which  included
    materials from the Magistrates Court  in  Colombo,  and  correspondence
    from a Sri Lankan lawyer.   The Tribunal  began  its  deliberations  by
    having regard to the adverse credibility findings that had been made by
    the Respondent in her 'reasons for refusal letter'. In respect of seven
    issues raised by the Respondent the Tribunal found in  the  Appellant's
    favour, accepting that he had given plausible evidence,  and  rejecting
    the Respondent's submissions that there  were  inconsistencies  in  the
    account.


 5. There were however findings that went the other way. The Tribunal found
    that the Appellant had given inconsistent evidence  about  whether  the
    family home had been attacked by the army  or  by  extremist  Sinhalese
    Buddhist monks.   It found it difficult to understand  how  the  police
    would have known that the Appellant was visiting the site, so that they
    could turn up and arrest him. At  paragraphs  58-61  the  determination
    addresses  the  court  documents  said  to  have  emanated   from   the
    Magistrates in Colombo 12.   The Tribunal notes the Appellant's account
    that on the 7th December 2012 his father had  already  left  the  scene
    when the police arrived  and  arrested  him.  He  stated  that  he  was
    subsequently brought before the  court  and  released  with  conditions
    after his father had arranged a bribe. The Tribunal had regard  to  the
    court documents and notes that these record that both the Appellant and
    his  father  appeared  before  the  court.    At   paragraph   60   the
    determination says this:

         "Thus, the appellant's indication, from his statement, is that  his
         father was involved in arranging monies to secure  the  appellant's
         release, which presents as inconsistent with  the  content  of  the
         court documents, which clearly indicate that the appellant's father
         was also  in  detention,  even  though  his  claimed  detention  in
         December 2012 was not referred to at all by the appellant in any of
         his pre-hearing  evidence.  I  find  these  inconsistencies  to  be
         seriously  damaging  to  the  appellant's   credibility   and   the
         reliability of the court documents produced".


 6. Having conducted a rounded assessment  of  all  of  its  findings,  the
    Tribunal dismissed the appeal on credibility grounds.




    The Appeal


 7. The grounds are simple: in making the findings it did at paragraph  60,
    the Tribunal made a material error of fact, and failed to  have  regard
    to evidence before it. The court documents relating to the case  before
    the Magistrate in Colombo 12 on the 11th December 2012  did  show  that
    the Appellant and his father had both appeared before the court but  it
    nowhere  indicated  that  they  did  so  as  defendants  in  the   same
    investigation. Counsel for the Appellant  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, Mr Mills, has prepared a witness statement for the purpose  of
    the appeal, and produced as an exhibit  his  verbatim  notes  from  the
    hearing. It is submitted on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that  this  very
    matter was raised in  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence,  and  that  the
    Tribunal, in making the findings that it did, ignored  the  explanation
    that was given.   The Appellant was asked to explain why his father was
    there that day. He said that his father had been on bail, and that  his
    case - for bail renewal - came up that day.




    The Response


 8. For the Respondent Mrs Aboni accepted that  the  Tribunal  had  made  a
    mistake of fact in respect  of  what  the  court  documents  said.  She
    accepted that they did not indicate that  the  Appellant's  father  was
    detained, or that he  had  been  arrested  at  the  same  time  as  the
    Appellant.   She accepted that the evidence referred to by Mr Mills did
    not feature in the Tribunal's deliberations.  She  did  however  submit
    that this error was not material. She pointed  to  the  fact  that  the
    Tribunal had made other  negative  findings,  and  submitted  that  the
    conclusion would have been the  same  regardless  of  this  error.  She
    further questioned whether, applying the guidance in GJ  &  Ors  (post-
    civil war returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 319 this was an appeal  that
    could ever succeed.






    My Findings




 9. The Respondent accepts that the determination  contains  a  mistake  of
    fact in the Tribunal's interpretation of the court  documents.    I  am
    satisfied that this  was  a  concession  properly  made.  Although  the
    document does indicate that the Appellant's father appeared before  the
    court that day, it says nothing about in what  capacity.  In  fact  the
    verdict of the court, that the Appellant be released on bail whilst the
    investigation continues, says nothing  at  all  about  his  father.   I
    accept Mr Mills' unchallenged evidence that an explanation was given  -
    the father attended to renew his own bail - but is  not  considered  in
    the determination.


10. Making a material error of fact, and failing to take relevant  evidence
    into account are both matters capable of constituting  errors  of  law.
    The question for me is whether those errors are material to the overall
    outcome of this appeal. This was  not  a  case  where  the  credibility
    findings went uniformly, or even mostly, against the  Appellant.  On  a
    good number of the matters raised by the Respondent, the Tribunal found
    in his favour.   It is apparent from the determination -  in  terms  of
    structure and language - that the impugned finding was at the heart  of
    the decision to dismiss the appeal.  The point  takes  up  virtually  a
    full page of reasoning, and at paragraph  60  the  Tribunal  finds  the
    perceived discrepancy to be "seriously  damaging"  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility, and to the reliability of the  court  documents  produced.
    It is the only place in the determination where such language is  used.
    Mrs Aboni is correct to say that it was not the only negative  finding,
    but I am unable to find other than it was the most significant. It went
    not only to the incident at the heart of the account, but to the  court
    documents generally, which were capable of adding significant weight to
    the Appellant's case.  For that reason  I  cannot  find  it  to  be  an
    immaterial error. But for that finding the outcome of this  appeal  may
    well have been different. I do not accept Mrs Aboni's  submission  that
    this was an appeal bound to fail applying the guidance in GJ. It is the
    Appellant's case that he has failed to attend  at  the  police  station
    when required to do so, and that he has an outstanding warrant for  his
    arrest for a failure to answer a summons. It is reasonably  likely,  if
    those matters are true,  that  he  would  feature  on  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities' 'stop list'. The  parties  agreed  that  if  that  was  my
    finding the determination must be set aside.






    Decisions


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside in its entirety.


12. The matter is to be heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


13. There is a direction for anonymity.


                                             [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                              19th October 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] At the date of the First-tier Tribunal decision the Appellant's wife
was an individual appellant, appeal number AA/03753/15. When this appeal
was lodged the grounds only related to the Appellant.  Before me the
parties agreed that since her claim entirely turns on the account of her
husband, it would be appropriate to proceed on the basis that she be
treated hereinafter as a dependent to his appeal.
[2] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on the 24th
July 2017 who considered it arguable that the determination contained a
material error of fact.



