

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03522/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                  |Decision Promulgated              |
|On 11 November 2014               |On 10 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     TBB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Edwards instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born on  11  January  1996.
    He entered the United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  19  April  2013  and
    claimed asylum.  On 15 May 2014, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claim for asylum and made a decision  to  move  him  as  an
    illegal  entrant  by  way  of  directions  under  Schedule  2  to   the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 11 July  2014,  Judge  Page  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) on 30 July 2014.

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Issue and Submissions

 6. Both the grounds of appeal and Mr Edwards submissions on behalf of  the
    appellant focussed on a single issue.

 7. In his determination, Judge Page rejected the appellant's claim  to  be
    at risk on the basis of imputed political opinion.  In particular,  the
    appellant claimed to have family members  who  were  fighting  for  the
    Sudan Liberation Movement and that, although he was not so involved, he
    had been arrested on a number of occasions  by  the  Sudanese  security
    forces when he had been detained and  tortured.   Judge  Page  made  an
    adverse credibility finding and did not accept the appellant's  account
    concerning his family or his detention and ill-treatment.

 8. In the grounds of appeal, that aspect of the appellant's  case  is  not
    challenged.  Instead, it is argued that Judge Page failed to consider a
    different ground upon which the appellant claimed  to  be  at  risk  on
    return to Sudan, namely on the  grounds  of  his  race.   Although  the
    appellant speaks  Arabic  and  is  a  member  of  an  Arab  tribe  (the
    Kababish), he claims that his mother is from a non-Arab  Darfuri  tribe
    and his African accent and descent would be distinctive and  noticeable
    on return and he would be at risk as a consequence.  It  is  said  that
    the appellant's brother was killed because of his accent which led  his
    assailants  to  believe  he  was  of  non-Arab  Darfuri  descent.   The
    appellant claims that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  and  internal
    relocation would not be viable and he relies on the case  of  AA  (Non-
    Arab Darfuris - Relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056.

 9. Mr Edwards submitted that Judge Page  had  failed  to  deal  with  this
    aspect of the appellant's claim.  He had made no findings  despite  the
    fact that the issue was raised in paras 4 and 5 of  Counsel's  skeleton
    argument, in oral submissions before Judge Page and in the  appellant's
    witness statement dated 20 June 2014 at para 2.  Mr  Edwards  submitted
    that the Judge's error was material to his decision as it was  possible
    that he could have found in the appellant's favour and he relied on the
    Operational Guidance Note for 2011  at  para  3.10.4   that  linguistic
    differences were important  in  Sudan  with  different  dialects  being
    spoken by those of African descent.

10. On behalf of the respondent, first,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    Judge had not erred in law by failing to consider the appellant's claim
    based upon his race as it had been conceded by  his  counsel  that  the
    appellant had no claim if his credibility was rejected (see para 22  of
    the determination).  That was precisely the finding that Judge Page had
    made.

11. Secondly, in any event,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  any  error  was
    immaterial.  The appellant was not a "non-Arab Darfuri" who was at risk
    on return to Sudan as recognised in AA.  He was an "Arab  Darfuri"  who
    had some association through his mother with a non-Arab  tribe.   There
    was no evidence, Mr Richards submitted, that the  appellant  spoke  any
    differently than other Arab Darfuris.  Put at its highest, Mr  Richards
    submitted that the appellant could not have succeeded before Judge Page
    and, therefore, any error of law was  immaterial  and  the  appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be dismissed.

Discussion

12. I accept Mr Edwards' submission that before the First-tier Tribunal the
    appellant did rely upon his race as creating a possible risk to him  on
    return.  Paragraph 2 of his  witness  statement  is  in  the  following
    terms:

         "My mother was from the African "Zaghawa" and my  father  was  from
         the Arabic Kababish tribe.  I relate to both  tribes  however  when
         asked what tribe I belong to I refer to my father's tribe  Kababish
         as it is the costume to follow  your  father's  tribe.   My  mother
         speaks both the "Rootana" dialect and Arabic.  It is very dangerous
         to be associated with the Zafhawa tribe therefore my  mother  would
         only speak Arabic to us.  She did not want to put us in  danger  by
         speaking her dialect.  My mother has a distinctive  African  accent
         and although myself and my siblings can only speak Arabic  we  have
         also picked up the African accent  which  is  noticeable  to  other
         Arabic speakers."

13. Likewise, Counsel for the  appellant  before  Judge  Page  specifically
    relied upon this evidence as creating a risk to the appellant on return
    at paras 4 and 5 of his skeleton argument dated 6 July 2014.

14. Whilst Judge Page does record that Counsel for the  appellant  accepted
    that the appellant's credibility determined the outcome of  the  appeal
    (see para 22 of the determination) that is said and, in  my  judgement,
    was intended to cover only the appellant's  claim  based  upon  imputed
    political opinion.  There is nothing in the  determination  to  suggest
    that Counsel for the appellant disavowed reliance upon the  appellant's
    race as a ground for establishing his Refugee Convention claim.   As  a
    result, the Judge erred in law by not considering this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's claim.

15. The issue remains, however, whether that error of law was  material  to
    the decision.  Mr Edwards submits that it was and Mr  Richards  submits
    that it was not.

16. It may well be that there are a number of obstacles  to  the  appellant
    establishing his claim based upon  his  race,  not  least  the  adverse
    credibility finding.  As the Judge did  not  consider  the  appellant's
    claim based upon his race, he made no relevant findings, in  particular
    in relation to the appellant's account that his brother had been killed
    because of his non-Arab accent which is the very basis upon  which  the
    appellant now claims to fear return  to  Sudan.   Despite  the  adverse
    credibility finding, there was a possibility that the Judge might  have
    accepted this aspect of the appellant's evidence.

17. Mr Edwards sought to argue that the  race  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    claim must be taken as having been accepted by the  respondent  as  the
    Presenting Office did not cross-examine  the  appellant  upon  it.   He
    relied, in particular, upon two decisions in the criminal  jurisdiction
    of O'Connell v Adams [1973] RTR 150 and R v Farooqi  [2013]  EWCA  Crim
    1649.  He submitted that  these  decisions  established  that  where  a
    professional advocate did not cross-examine a witness on  a  particular
    issue that advocate could not put forward a contrary case.  I have some
    doubt whether the approach in a criminal context can be simply imported
    into the First-tier Tribunal's proceedings in an immigration or  asylum
    appeal.  The context is obviously different where, for  example,  in  a
    criminal case a jury is the decider of fact and the  rigid  adversarial
    procedure applied in  that  jurisdiction  has  no  counterpart  in  the
    Tribunal's proceedings.

18. In any event, I do not accept that the respondent, simply by not cross-
    examining the appellant, must be taken to have accepted the appellant's
    evidence.  The respondent's refusal letter of 15 May 2014 put in  issue
    the appellant's credibility.  That carried over to the hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and, in my judgement  encompassed  the  appellant's
    claim and evidence as a whole.  That is also a material difference from
    the criminal jurisdiction where, without  cross-examination,  the  jury
    (the decider of fact) will not necessarily know the prosecution's  case
    and what evidence is, or is not, accepted.

19. Of course, fairness entitles an appellant to  have  an  opportunity  to
    deal with issues of fact in  dispute.   It  might  be  said  that  this
    appellant had such an opportunity given, as it is now said,  he  relied
    upon his race as a ground of persecution such that he could have  dealt
    with the issues raised by his evidence, in particular  in  relation  to
    the death of his brother.  But, even if he did not, that  is  a  matter
    which could well be explored in any further hearing.  Albeit with  some
    hesitation I cannot be confident that the Judge was bound  to  make  an
    adverse finding against the appellant in relation to his evidence about
    his claim based upon his race.

20. Mr Edwards  further  relied  upon  the  OGN  at  para  3.10.4  and,  in
    particular, its final sentence which is as follows:

         "It is also notable that members of the African tribe  speak  their
         own dialect in addition to Arabic, while members of the Arab tribes
         only speak Arabic."

21. Mr Richards submitted that the appellant's evidence  was  not  that  he
    spoke  a  dialect  but  rather,  in  both  his  screening  and   asylum
    interviews, that he spoke one  language  namely  Arabic.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that there was no independent evidence that an appellant with
    his racial background might speak with an  identifiable  and  different
    accent.

22.  The  question  which  I  have  to  address  is  whether  Mr  Richards'
    submissions lead me to conclude that the appellant was bound to fail in
    his claim based upon race.  It is clear  from  para  3.10.4  that  some
    persecuted tribes, such as the Fur, Massalit and Zaghawa tribes,  speak
    the same language (Arabic) as  their  persecutors.   Nevertheless  para
    3.10.4 does identify that  language,  albeit  described  as  "different
    dialect" is a "notable"  feature  of  Arab  tribes.   Likewise  the  US
    Department of State, "2013 Country Report  on  Human  Right  Practices:
    Sudan" (27 February 2014 at page 26 of 30) states that:

         "The population is a multi-ethnic mix of more than 500 tribes, with
         numerous languages  and  dialects.   Many  of  these  tribes  self-
         identify  as  Arab,  referring  to  language  and  other   cultural
         attributes.  Other tribes self-identify or are  identified  by  the
         broader society and members of their tribes as African."

23. For the purposes of deciding whether  or  not  the  error  of  law  was
    material, namely whether the appellant's claim was  bound  to  fail,  I
    need  say  no  more  than  I  cannot  confidently  conclude  that   the
    appellant's claim based upon race was bound to fail.  There may well be
    a number of obstacles that  have  to  be  overcome  in  order  for  the
    appellant to succeed  but  as  it  was  raised  before  the  Judge  the
    appellant was, in my view, entitled to have that  claim  examined  with
    appropriate factual findings  made  in  the  light  of  the  background
    material.

Decision and Disposal

24. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds involved  the
    making of a material error of law.  That decision is set aside.

25. Mr Edwards invited me, if I accepted  his  submissions,  to  remit  the
    appeal to a different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.   That,  in  my
    judgement, is not the proper course.  The grounds do  not  in  any  way
    challenge  Judge  Page's  findings  and  determination  as  written  in
    relation to the appellant's claim based upon imputed political opinion.
     The grounds, which I have found to be made out, argue in  effect  that
    the Judge did not complete his  task  of  determining  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The proper course, in my judgement, is to remit the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and to Judge Page in order  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's claim based upon his race.

26. That latter issue will be the only issue for the First-tier Tribunal to
    determine.  The Judge's findings in respect of  the  appellant's  claim
    based upon imputed political opinion  were  not  challenged  and  shall
    stand.

27. Consequently, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and  to
    Judge Page in accordance with the above directions.



                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:    9 December 2014



