
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03474/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Sent           |
|on 30th September 2013                        |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAHELA AKTHER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Vokes instructed by French & Company Solicitors.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant I have referred to
        the parties by the status they had before the  First-tier  Tribunal
        for ease of  reference.   Hence  the  term  Appellant  below  is  a
        reference to Mrs Akther.


     2.  Following  a  hearing  at  Birmingham  on  16th  July   2013   the
        determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Camp was  set  aside  in
        relation to both the Appellant  and  her  son.  This  hearing  only
        relates to her claim for the reasons set out in the 'Error of  Law'
        finding.



     3. The Appellant was born on 1st  April  1980  and  is  a  citizen  of
        Bangladesh. There are a number of  preserved  findings  from  Judge
        Camp's determination as follows:


              24. I am in no doubt that, whatever  the  objective  evidence,
   the appellant fears                   her husband and his family.  Unless
   she is a consummate actor,  she                      conveyed  a  genuine
   terror   of    being    returned    to    Bangladesh.     I    have    no
   doubt that she is subjectively in  fear  of  serious  ill  treatment  and
   possibly                death.


              27. The appellant gives an account of domestic violence, which
   led her to                   leaving the matrimonial home.   Her  husband
   will not have her back.  This                 does not seem  implausible.
   Family pride is well known to be a significant                  factor in
   this cultural context.


              28. Moreover, I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  living
   alone with her child. I                   see no reason to disbelieve her
   evidence that her husband has not  seen  the                   child  and
   that he had told her to have an abortion.


              33. Although the  appellant  was  under  difficulties  at  the
   hearing (being                        unrepresented and accompanied by  a
   young child), I found her to  be  a                   generally  credible
   witness,   although   I   do   not   discount   the   possibility    that
   she may have been guilty of some exaggeration.  However, I  am  satisfied
          that she has been the victim of domestic violence, as she states.


              34. This finding does not, of itself, provide an answer to the
   question whether                  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
   violence in Bangladesh, whether from her                husband's  family
   or from her husband himself, if he returns there.


              35  The appellant speaks of threats of violence to her and her
   child, as well as                to her mother.  I am prepared to  accept
   that threats have been made.                       Moreover, having found
   the   appellant    credible    on    other    matters,    I    have    no
   reason to doubt her evidence that threats  have  been  made.   Given  the
              appellant's state of apprehension, it is difficult to know how
   much weight                  to place on the reality  of  these  threats.
   However, there is ample objective                  evidence of the status
   of women in Bangladesh society.


     4. The Appellant married on  24th  February  2006  in  Bangladesh  and
        entered the United Kingdom legally as the dependent of her  husband
        who was a work permit holder at that time.  The Appellant's witness
        statement of  the  7th  May  2013  records  incidents  of  domestic
        violence and it is a preserved finding that she has been  subjected
        to domestic violence at the hands of her husband, although  she  is
        unable to remain in the United Kingdom by virtue of the  provisions
        of the Immigration Rules relating to victims of  domestic  violence
        as cannot meet the requirements of the relevant rules.


     5. The Appellant claims that in Bangladesh she has a mother and sister
        although at paragraph 31 of her statement also refers to 'aunties'.
         She claims her mother who lives in her villages is isolated by her
        in-laws although her father-in-law and two daughters live in Dhaka.
         The village is said to be less than half an hour by car from where
        they live.


     6. The Appellant states her mother  lived  with  her  own  grandmother
        supported by an uncle although when  her  grandmother  died  a  few
        months ago such support stopped. She claims she  has  distant  male
        cousins who would not support her as they do not support her mother
        who has to work to survive, and so will not be able to support  the
        Appellant.


     7. Recent developments include the Appellant's  father-in-law  stating
        he wishes to see his grandson  and  proceeding  through  a  village
        committee to seek recognition of the legitimacy of the child  which
        was found in the Appellant's son's favour. This  does  not  support
        the claim to be facing hostility from all elements of her husband's
        family.


     8. The Appellant  was  given  leave  to  file  an  additional  witness
        statement at court in which she states she is not working and is on
        medication for high blood pressure and diabetes.  She wanted to  go
        to college and saved money to do  so  but  is  not  able  to  start
        college. She has few roots in  the  United  Kingdom,  having  moved
        seven times in five years, with  only  one  close  friend  in  this
        country.


     9. The Appellant states her son started Year 1 at  school  and  during
        pre-school  was  referred  to  a  paediatrician  due   to   speech,
        communication and understanding difficulties. The Appellant  claims
        to have told her solicitor about this although no reports have been
        provided and the Appellant has been told that before a diagnosis of
        Aspergers Syndrome can be properly made the child will have  to  be
        seven years of age.  He sees a speech  and  language  therapist  at
        school and has six monthly checks.  He also receives  physiotherapy
        at six to eight weekly intervals.


    10. The Appellant is a capable woman who worked in the  United  Kingdom
        until 2008 when she stopped due to her pregnancy.   She  maintained
        in her oral evidence that her fear is still ongoing as a result  of
        threats made by her husband's brother based in part on  inheritance
        issues, inheritance law in Bangladesh indicating that  her  husband
        and then his  son  will  be  in  line  to  inherit  the  assets  in
        Bangladesh after the death of her husband's father.




Discussion



    11. Even though it is not raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  it  was
        accepted that Article 8 ECHR was an issue dealt with by Judge  Camp
        with no objection being raised. I accept that permission must  have
        been given to amend the  grounds  by  the  Judge  to  include  this
        ground, in addition to those relating to the Refugee Convention.


    12. Although it was decided in the error of law finding  that  her  son
        has no in-  country  right  of  appeal  and  is  therefore  not  an
        appellant before me today, Mr Vokes submitted that it was  relevant
        to consider his position as part of his mother's  Article  8  claim
        and under section 55 in relation to hardship that would be faced if
        returned.


    13. The current county guidance case for  women  in  Bangladesh  is  SA
        (Divorced woman - illegitimate child)  Bangladesh  CG  [2011]  UKUT
        00254(IAC) in which the Tribunal held:


              (i)      There  is  a  high  level  of  domestic  violence  in
   Bangladesh.  Despite the                  efforts of  the  government  to
   improve the situation, due to the                      disinclination  of
   the police to act upon complaints, women  subjected                    to
   domestic violence  may  not  be  able  to  obtain  an  effective  measure
     of state protection by reason of the fact that they are women  and  may
          be able to show a risk of serious harm for  a  Refugee  Convention
          reason.  Each case, however, must be determined on its own facts;


              (ii)     Under Muslim law, as applicable  in  Bangladesh,  the
   mother, or in                her absence her own family members, has  the
   right to custody of an                illegitimate child;


              (iii)    In custody and contact disputes the decisions of  the
   superior  courts                   in  Bangladesh   indicate   a   fairly
   consistent trend  to  invoke  the                      principle  of  the
   welfare     of     the     child     as     an     overriding     factor,
   permitting departure from  the  applicable  personal  law  but  a  mother
      may  be  disqualified  from  custody   or   contact   by   established
     allegations of immorality;


              (iv)     The mother of an illegitimate child may  face  social
   prejudice and                discrimination if her circumstances and  the
   fact of her having had an                 illegitimate child become known
   but she is not likely to be at a real                   risk  of  serious
    harm in urban centres by reason of that fact alone;


              (v)      The divorced mother of an illegitimate child  without
   family support                   on return to Bangladesh would be  likely
   to have to endure a                       significant degree of  hardship
   but she may well be able  to  obtain                  employment  in  the
   garment       trade       and       obtain       some       sort       of
   accommodation,   albeit   of   a   low   standard.    Some   degree    of
     rudimentary state aid would be  available  to  her  and  she  would  be
     able to enrol her child in a  state  school.   If  in  need  of  urgent
          assistance she would be able to seek temporary accommodation in  a
              woman's shelter.  The  conditions  which  she  would  have  to
   endure in               re-establishing herself in Bangladesh  would  not
   as a general matter              amount to persecution or a breach of her
   rights under article 3 of the                 ECHR.  Each case,  however,
   must  be  decided  its  own  facts  having                regard  to  the
   particular   circumstances   and   disabilities,   if   any,    of    the
   woman  and  the  child  concerned.  Of  course  if  such  a  woman   were
   fleeing  persecution  in  her  own  home  area  the  test  for   internal
     relocation would be that of undue harshness and not  a  breach  of  her
          article 3 rights.


    14. I have considered the Appellants evidence together  with  a  report
        prepared by Professor Katie Gardner, but note this is  dated  prior
        to the promulgation of SA. The report is dated 2nd January 2011.


    15. The Appellant has a subjective fear of violence on return  and  the
        first thing to consider is whether it is objectively well  founded.
        The suggestion in Professor Gardner's report relating  to  a  dowry
        does not establish such a risk  as  in  her  asylum  interview  she
        stated no such dowry was paid. She fears harm at the hands  of  her
        husband but he remains in  the  United  Kingdom  and  there  is  no
        evidence that at the date of the hearing he is attempting  to  find
        or inflict any further harm upon her in this  country.   They  have
        not had any contact for a number of years.


    16. It appears that her father-in-law has become reconciled and  wishes
        to see his grandson and appears to have taken steps to ensure  that
        the child's legitimacy  is  recognised.   This  element  no  longer
        appears to create a real risk and  the  fact  the  child  has  been
        recognised as being legitimate is relevant to any risk arising from
        return with an illegitimate child.  A  child  born  in  wedlock  is
        acceptable  culturally  far  more  than  one  born   outside,   but
        recognition of legitimacy is said  to  create  the  risk  from  the
        Appellant's brother-in-law based  upon  the  effect  of  Bangladesh
        inheritance law.


    17. Whether the third party will take action against the Appellant  and
        the child when that child has been accepted and recognised  by  his
        own father (the child's  parental  grandfather)  is  not  something
        supported by sufficiently persuasive evidence.


    18. I do accept that in a close rural community it  will  be  difficult
        for the Appellant to return without her presence being  discovered.
        If any member of the family wished to take action against her there
        are issues regarding the availability of protection from the police
        in that environment, which is not likely to be  effective  even  if
        available.


    19.  The  key  question  is  whether  it  is  reasonable  in  all   the
        circumstances for the Appellant to relocate away from her home area
        and return to Dhaka. This issue is of importance because  Paragraph
        339O of the Immigration Rules, which is intended to incorporate the
        Directive, states:

              (i)  The Secretary of State will not make:


                   (a)      a grant of asylum if in part of the  country  of
      origin a person               would not have a well  founded  fear  of
      being persecuted, and                  the person  can  reasonably  be
      expected to stay in that part of the                 country; or


                   (b)      a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of
      the country of                return a person would not  face  a  real
      risk of suffering serious                   harm, and the  person  can
      reasonably be expected to stay in that                   part  of  the
      country.


              (ii)     In examining whether a part of the country of  origin
      or country of             return meets the  requirements  in  (i)  the
      Secretary of State, when           making his decision on  whether  to
      grant asylum or humanitarian           protection, will have regard to
      the general circumstances prevailing            in that  part  of  the
      country and to the personal circumstances of the             person.


              (iii)    (i) applies notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
      return to the                 country of origin or country of return.


    20. In SA it was recognised that a person in the  Appellants  situation
        without family  support  would  be  likely  to  have  to  endure  a
        significant degree of hardship but is likely to be able  to  obtain
        employment, rudimentary state aid may be available, and she will be
        able to enrol her child in  a  state  school.   In  this  case  the
        Appellant also has relatives in Bangladesh including her mother and
        a sister.


    21. The Appellant clearly does not want to return and Mr Vokes  in  his
        skeleton argument referred to recognition in SA that as a result of
        high levels of domestic violence and disinclination by  the  police
        to act an appellant may well be able to demonstrate she  would  not
        be able to obtain an  effective  measure  of  state  protection  by
        reason of the fact that  she  was  a  woman.    I  accept  this  is
        relevant to whether she is able to return to her home  village  but
        it has not been shown that if she chooses to relocate to Dhaka  her
        extended family will be aware of her return.


    22. Mr Smart relied upon an article  produced  by  the  United  Nations
        Development Programme  dated  14th  February  2013  headed  "Gender
        Violence  Based  Investigations  Increasing"  recording  417  cases
        investigated by female police officers from the Women  Support  and
        Investigation  Division  of  Dhaka   Metropolitan   Police   (DMV),
        indicating a willingness and positive action being taken to try and
        provide additional victim support services for women.  There is  no
        evidence that if required the Appellant would not have recourse  to
        such services.


    23. I do not find the Appellant has substantiated her claim that if she
        is unable to return to her home  village  she  has  an  objectively
        sustainable well founded fear of risk in all parts  of  Bangladesh,
        particularly  in  Dhaka.   She  has  not  established  that  it  is
        unreasonable in all the circumstances for her to re-locate  to  the
        city where the Country of Origin Information Report clearly records
        the availability of  NGO  assistance  to  victims  of  violence  if
        required.   The  combined  availability  of  state  and   non-state
        organisations supports  a  finding  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
        substantiate her claim there will not be a  sufficiency  protection
        available if she faces threat  from  her  brother-in-law  or  other
        family members opposed to her or her son.


    24. There are a growing number of single  women  following  divorce  in
        Bangladesh and it has not been shown that being a single woman with
        a child creates a real risk per se although I accept  that  such  a
        person may be more vulnerable in Bangladeshi society.


    25. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom for some time and  has
        a limited private life here.  Her family life is with her  son.  In
        relation to her claim under Article 8 ECHR it has  not  been  shown
        there  is  anything  that  would  make  the  decision   to   return
        disproportionate.  Mr Vokes sought to rely upon  the  situation  of
        her son, the medical issues, and section 55 as a result.


    26. I accept that it may be difficult for the Appellant to  return  and
        that she will face hardship but she is capable of meeting the needs
        of her son so far as they relate to  basic  requirements  of  food,
        shelter, love, affection, and assistance and guidance in maximising
        his development potential.  Letters were provided on the day of the
        hearing from BIG Community confirming that a referral has been made
        for her son who is to be seen  in  December  2013  by  a  community
        paediatrician but there are no reports  and  nothing  more  than  a
        letter stating a referral is to be made. There is no evidence  that
        the child has been formally diagnosed, what treatment  is  required
        if he has a recognised condition, or that necessary treatment  will
        not be available to the Appellant and her son in Bangladesh.


    27. There is a further letter from the Birmingham Community NHS  Trust,
        Paediatric Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Department, dated
        10th July 2013 referring to  an  appointment  on  23rd   July  2013
        although the Appellant has  produced  no  reports  or  any  further
        information relating to the  extent  of  her  son's  problems  and,
        further, there is no evidence that his situation  or  condition  is
        such that it cannot receive appropriate support  in  Bangladesh  or
        would make the return disproportionate or contrary to  the  child's
        best interests.


    28. Mr Vokes was right  in  his  final  submissions  to  refer  to  the
        differences between the life of a child in the United  Kingdom  and
        in  Bangladesh  where  there  will  be  a  material  difference  in
        facilities, prospects, and standard of living generally,  but  that
        is not the test. The family  may  face  difficulties  as  a  single
        parent unit although it is a mother with a legitimate child  and  a
        unit that has some support within that country.


    29. When all the competing interests are  considered  with  appropriate
        care, and based upon the  evidence  made  available  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal, I find the Secretary of State has substantiated her claim
        to show that the decision to return is proportionate under  Article
        8 ECHR when considering the family and private life aspects of both
        the Appellant and her son and the statutory  duty  in  section  55.
        The Appellant is a failed asylum seeker who has been the victim  of
        domestic  violence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  who   may   face
        difficulties in  her  home  area.   I  note  the  strength  of  her
        subjective fear and indeed she was upset at court at  the  prospect
        of being returned to Bangladesh but it has not  been  shown  to  be
        objectively well founded and not shown to be  an  issue  that  will
        result in such consequences on return that will make  the  decision
        disproportionate or engage any of the United Kingdom's  obligations
        under the Refugee Convention, Qualification Directive or Articles 2
        or 3 ECHR in relation to protection or medical issues.


    30. Further medical evidence may warrant a fresh claim in  relation  to
        her son but that is a matter upon which the Appellant will be  able
        to seek advice. This decision is based solely upon the  evidence  I
        have been asked to consider.



Decision

    31. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.




   Anonymity.


    32. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as no application for
   anonymity was made and the       facts do not  establish  any  reason  to
   make such an order.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4th October 2013




