
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03778/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Date Sent                    |
|on 3 September 2013                           |On 12 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                HAZHARATH KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr N Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors

For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  whose  date  of  birth  is
   recorded as 1 January 1991.  No anonymity order  has  been  requested  or
   made.



2)  The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for   reasons
   explained in a letter dated 5 April 2013.  The respondent considered that
   the claim was not credible (paragraphs 16-32) but that even if  taken  at
   highest the appellant could relocate to Kabul  (paragraphs  33-44)  where
   there is legal sufficiency of protection (paragraphs 44-50).

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge Debra Clapham dismissed the appellant's  appeal
   for reasons explained in her determination promulgated on  3  June  2013.
   The judge found the appellant's case not credible, and  at  paragraph  60
   concluded that in any event he could relocate.

4) Mr Ruddy  relied  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal,  which  are  extensive.
   Grounds 1-11 dispute the adverse credibility findings.  Ground 12  argues
   that the appellant might  be  perceived  as  supporting  the  Afghanistan
   Government and  international  forces,  and  that  the  judge  failed  to
   consider the issue of humanitarian protection.

5) Submissions for  respondent.   Ground  1  does  not  disclose  any  self-
   contradiction by the judge.  Although she made some findings in favour of
   the  appellant,  she  correctly  found  that  on  other  points  he   was
   inconsistent.  At paragraph 53, the judge was entitled  to  find  it  not
   credible that if the appellant had a serious injury with pieces of a bomb
   or shrapnel inside his stomach, that could adequately have  been  treated
   application of cream or ointment at his sister's house.  Although  Ground
   2 complains about issues of which the appellant did not have fair notice,
   it was established by HA and TD v SSHD [2010] CSIH 28 that  the  Tribunal
   was not under a general obligation to air its concerns about the evidence
   presented, particularly if there were obvious points  and  the  appellant
   was represented.  There was no need for medical expertise for a judge  to
   come to such an obvious conclusion, nor was there any  need  to  put  the
   point to the appellant for further  comment.   Ground  3  criticises  the
   judge's finding that it would not  be  logical  for  the  authorities  to
   suspect the appellant because of the incident, and that she was therefore
   unclear as to why he did not  seek  the  help  of  the  authorities.   Mr
   Matthews said that the appellant might not like the  view  taken  by  the
   judge, but that amounted only to disagreement with a conclusion which was
   properly open to her.  Ground 4 criticises the judge's view at  paragraph
   54 that the evidence left it unclear why the appellant travelled  to  his
   sister's house and not  his  own  village,  but  that  was  only  another
   disagreement on the facts, and  the  judge  had  explained  why  she  had
   difficulties with the appellant's account.  Mr  Matthews  submitted  that
   the ground did nothing to explain these away.  Ground  5  criticises  the
   judge's conclusion at paragraph 55 that the claim that the village  chief
   told the authorities the  appellant  was  connected  to  the  Taliban  is
   speculative.  The ground  states  that  this  overlooks  the  appellant's
   evidence that his sister overheard the village elder saying this  to  the
   police.  Mr Matthews  response  was  that  even  if  the  judge  arguably
   overlooked that aspect of the evidence, it was at best a piece of  second
   or third hand information and the same  overall  conclusions  would  have
   been  reached.   Ground  6  criticises  the  judge  for   founding   upon
   documentation having come to hand only very  recently,  without  adequate
   explanation of how and why it was conveyed through Pakistan.  Mr Matthews
   said that the judge was entitled to  conclude  that  there  was  no  good
   explanation why the documents were conveyed  through  a  third  party  in
   another country and at a suspiciously late stage.  Ground  7  makes  only
   the same point as Ground 5.  Ground 8 criticises the judge's  finding  at
   paragraph 57 that it lacks credibility that  the  authorities  would  not
   have found the appellant on searching his  sister's  house.   The  ground
   argues that this overlooks his  account  how  he  was  concealed  in  the
   basement, under a rug which was under a bed.  Mr Matthews  submitted  the
   judge was entitled to conclude that the authorities were likely  to  have
   searched with sufficient efficiency to find the appellant, without  going
   into details of his alleged hiding  place.   Mr  Matthew  submitted  that
   paragraph 9 of the grounds misrepresents the determination,  because  the
   judge concluded that the appellant's  home  had  not  been  destroyed,  a
   question of  fact  for  her  to  decide  in  the  context  of  her  whole
   consideration of the evidence.  Ground  10  was  a  further  disagreement
   along the lines of Ground 6.  Grounds and 11 and 12  did  not  come  into
   play, as the other grounds were not made out.

6) Reply for appellant.  Mr Ruddy agreed that  Grounds  1  and  2  could  be
   taken together as going to undermine paragraph 53 of  the  determination.
   This point was crucial, because the appellant had been consistent in  his
   explanations.  Given the extent of the favourable findings at the core of
   his account, a different overall decision  could  and  should  have  been
   reached.  The judge made a favourable finding  on  the  appellant  having
   gone to his sister's home after the explosion, but this  important  point
   was overlooked in the rest of  the  determination.   While  it  might  be
   thought obvious that a serious injury such as described was not treatable
   simply by cream or  ointment,  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  a  fair
   opportunity to explain  how,  in  spite  of  such  an  injury,  he  could
   nevertheless have taken a taxi  to  his  sister's  house.   This  element
   should not have been taken to negate his account without giving a further
   opportunity to expand.  The appellant had not said that he was unable  to
   walk after his injury.  The perception of the seriousness  of  an  injury
   was subjective and a matter of degree.  While  Ground  3  did  dispute  a
   factual issue, the judge's description  of  the  appellant's  account  as
   illogical went too far.  If the judge accepted that two  bombs  went  off
   and that there might be a fear of the authorities as a result, she had to
   do more to explain to the appellant  why  his  overall  account  was  not
   accepted.  Mr Ruddy had nothing to add to Ground  4.   As  to  Ground  5,
   directed at paragraph 55, the appellant's account of how he knew  of  the
   suspicion that he was linked to the  Taliban  was  not  speculative,  but
   based on reliable information received from his sister.  If the judge got
   this wrong, it was a point which made a significant difference and  might
   have led to a different result.  On Ground 6 there had  been  direct  and
   detailed evidence of how  the  documents  came  into  the  hands  of  the
   appellant and were presented to the judge.  It was  a  relatively  simple
   explanation.  It was not sufficient for the judge to say that she was  at
   a loss on the matter.  It was accepted  that  Ground  7  covered  similar
   matters as Ground 5.  As to Ground 8,  attacking  paragraph  57,  it  was
   accepted that the judge could reach an adverse conclusion, but the  error
   was in the absence of any examination of  the  appellant's  detailed  and
   direct evidence of where and how he hid.  As to Ground 10, the  documents
   had been dismissed without examination of their terms, and  significantly
   more would have been needed to justify that conclusion.  It was  accepted
   that Grounds 11 and 12 came into play only if the other grounds were made
   out.

7) I reserved my determination.

8) A judge is entitled to consider the case put to her  without  airing  her
   concerns for further submissions, particularly  where  an  appellant  has
   been represented.  I detect no unfairness.  In any event, as  made  plain
   at paragraph 15 of HA and TD, procedural impropriety does not  vitiate  a
   decision if no prejudice  has  been  suffered.   The  appellant  has  not
   indicated that he has anything further of significance to  offer  on  the
   points of which he alleges lack of fair notice.

9) Apart from the fair notice issues, the Grounds are generally of a  nature
   attacking the adequacy of the Judge's reasons  for  her  overall  adverse
   credibility finding.  I was not referred to any authority on how  alleged
   error of law of this nature ought to be tested.

10) On inadequacy of reasoning  the  dictum  of  Lord  President  Emslie  in
   Wordie Property Co Ltd v Secretary of State for Scotland 1984 SLT 345  at
   348 may be taken as a starting point:

    The decision must, in short, leave the informed reader and the court in
    no real and substantial doubt as what the reasons for it were and  what
    were the material  considerations  that  were  taken  into  account  in
    reaching it.


11) The Court of Appeal in England and Wales  gave  general  guidance  in  R
   (Iran) and Others v SSHD [2005] Imm  AR  435  at  542.   (The  regulatory
   framework has since changed, but the principles remain the same.)

   1. ... Adjudicators were under an obligation to give  reasons  for  their
      decisions  (see  reg  53  of  the  Immigration  and   Asylum   Appeals
      (Procedure) Regulations 2003), so that a breach of that obligation may
      amount  to  an  error  of  law.  However,  unjustified  complaints  by
      practitioners that are based on an alleged failure to give reasons, or
      adequate reasons, are seen far too often.  The  leading  decisions  of
      this court on this topic are now Eagil Trust  Co  Ltd  v  Pigott-Brown
      [1985] 3 All ER 119 and English v Emery Reimbold & Strick  Ltd  [2002]
      EWCA Civ 605, [2002] 1 WLR 2409. We will adapt what was said in  those
      two cases for the purposes of illustrating the relationship between an
      adjudicator and the IAT. In the former Griffiths LJ said at p 122:
      "[An adjudicator] should give his reasons in sufficient detail to show
      the [IAT] the principles on which  he has acted and the  reasons  that
      have led him to his decision. They need not  be  elaborate.  I  cannot
      stress too strongly that there is no  duty  on  [an  adjudicator],  in
      giving his reasons, to deal  with  every  argument  presented  by  [an
      advocate] in support of his case. It is sufficient  if  what  he  says
      shows the parties and, if need be, the [IAT], the basis  on  which  he
      has acted, and if it be that the [adjudicator] has not dealt with some
      particular argument but it can be seen that there are grounds on which
      he would have been entitled to reject it, [the IAT] should assume that
      he acted on those grounds unless the appellant can point to convincing
      reasons leading to a contrary conclusion."
   1. In English Lord Phillips MR said at para 19:
      "[I]f the appellate process is to work  satisfactorily,  the  judgment
      must enable the [IAT] to understand why the [adjudicator] reached  his
      decision. This does not mean that every factor which weighed with  the
      [adjudicator] in his appraisal of the evidence has  to  be  identified
      and explained. But the issues the resolution of which  were  vital  to
      the [adjudicator]'s conclusion should be identified and the manner  in
      which he resolved them explained. It is  not  possible  to  provide  a
      template for this process. It need not involve a lengthy judgment.  It
      does require the [adjudicator] to identify and  record  those  matters
      which were critical to his decision. If the critical issue was one  of
      fact, it may be enough to  say  that  one  witness  was  preferred  to
      another because the one manifestly had a clearer recollection  of  the
      material facts or the other gave answers which demonstrated  that  his
      recollection could not be relied upon."
12)  I also have  regard  to  HA  v  SSHD  [2007]  CSIH  65,  in  particular
   paragraph 17:

      In the light of the cases cited to us it is convenient at  this  stage
      to formulate some propositions about the  circumstances  in  which  an
      immigration  judge's  decision  on  a   matter   of   credibility   or
      plausibility may be held to disclose an error of law. The  credibility
      of an asylum-seeker's account is primarily a question of fact, and the
      determination  of  that  question  of  fact  has  been  entrusted   by
      Parliament to the immigration judge (Esen, paragraph 21).  This  court
      may not interfere with the immigration judge's decision on a matter of
      credibility simply because on the evidence it would, if  it  had  been
      the fact-finder, have come to a different conclusion (Reid,  per  Lord
      Clyde at 41H). But if the immigration judge's decision on  credibility
      discloses an error of law falling within the range identified by  Lord
      Clyde in the passage quoted above from Reid, that  error  is  open  to
      correction by this court. If a decision on credibility  is  one  which
      depends for its validity on  the  acceptance  of  other  contradictory
      facts or inference from such facts, it will be erroneous in  point  of
      law if  the  contradictory  position  is  not  supported  by  any,  or
      sufficient, evidence, or is based on conjecture or speculation  (Wani,
      paragraph 24, quoted with approval in HK  at  paragraph  30).  A  bare
      assertion of incredibility or implausibility  may  disclose  error  of
      law; an immigration judge must  give  reasons  for  his  decisions  on
      credibility  and  plausibility  (Esen,  paragraph  21).  In   reaching
      conclusions on credibility and plausibility an immigration  judge  may
      draw on his common sense and his ability, as a practical and  informed
      person, to identify  what  is,  and  what  is  not,  plausible  (Wani,
      paragraph 24, page 883L, quoted with approval in HK  at  paragraph  30
      and in Esen at paragraph 21). Credibility, however, is an issue to  be
      handled with great care and sensitivity to cultural differences (Esen,
      paragraph 21), and reliance on inherent improbability may be dangerous
      or inappropriate where the conduct in question has taken  place  in  a
      society whose culture and customs are very different from those in the
      United Kingdom (HK at paragraph 29). There will be cases where actions
      which may appear implausible if judged by domestic standards  may  not
      merit rejection on that ground when considered within the  context  of
      the asylum-seeker's social and cultural  background  (Wani,  paragraph
      24, page 883I, quoted  with  approval  in  HK  at  paragraph  30).  An
      immigration judge's decision on credibility or implausibility may,  we
      conclude, disclose an error of law if, on examination of  the  reasons
      given for his decision, it appears either that he has failed  to  take
      into account the relevant consideration that the  probability  of  the
      asylum-seeker's narrative may be affected by its cultural context,  or
      has failed to explain the part played in his decision by consideration
      of that context,  or  has  based  his  conclusion  on  speculation  or
      conjecture.

13) A distinction has to  be  drawn  between  those  appeals  which  involve
   questions of law and those which are essentially argument about  findings
   of fact, presented in some language of legal error.  Fault should not  be
   found by burrowing out areas of the evidence which have been  dealt  with
   less fully than others, and presenting that as a legal flaw.

14) The Grounds in this case do not amount to more than a series of  factual
   disagreements.



15) Reading the FtT determination fairly and as a whole, it makes  it  clear
   enough to the appellant and any other reader why  his  evidence  has  not
   been found probative in its essential features.

16) I am also of the view that this was a case  plainly  defeated  upon  the
   alternative of internal relocation, an issue  from  which  the  appellant
   sought to shift the focus.

17) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                5 September 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
