

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03378/2015
                                                               AA/03410/2015
                                                               AA/10991/2014


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 1 September 2017                           |on 23 November 2017          |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     ZK
                                     IB
                                      N
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Samra of Harbans Singh & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Singh - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Gurung-Thapa  promulgated  on  30  May  2017  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeals on protection  and  human  rights
        grounds.






Background


     2. The first appellant's date of birth is 2 November 1987, the  second
        appellant 6 May 1968 and the third appellant 18 June 1994. They are
        all citizens of Afghanistan with the  second  appellant  being  the
        mother of the first and  third  appellants.  The  Judge  notes  the
        appellants arrived in the UK on 14 March 2013  and  claimed  asylum
        the same day. The second appellant's other four  children  are  her
        named dependants. The first and second appellants applications were
        refused on 11 February 2015 and the third  appellant's  application
        on 28 November 2014.
     3. The Judge notes the first appellant is the main appellant. The core
        of the appellants claim is set out together with  the  position  of
        the respondent and evidence made available to the Judge.   Findings
        of fact are set out from [42] of the decision under challenge,  the
        core findings of which can be summarised in the following terms:


                  a. The focus shall be upon the first appellant  as  he  is
                     the main appellant. Having had the  benefit  of  seeing
                     and listening carefully as he  gave  his  evidence  and
                     having compared that with his written accounts given in
                     statements interview form, it is found the  appellant's
                     claim  is  not  credible  as   it   contains   material
                     inconsistencies  and  contradictions   the   cumulative
                     effect of which affects the reliability the  appellants
                     evidence and the veracity of his case [44].
                  b. There is a material inconsistency as to the  number  of
                     companies the appellant worked for in  Afghanistan  the
                     reasons set out at [45].
                  c. If the appellants claim to have worked  for  a  company
                     called No Lemon, which was an  American  company  which
                     trained Afghan police, is  to  be  believed  the  Judge
                     found it reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  appellant
                     would have mentioned this fact at least the time of his
                     substantive asylum interview but he did not. The  Judge
                     finds he has fabricated this element of  the  claim  in
                     order to bolster his claim for asylum [47].
                  d. A material discrepancy was found in  relation  to  when
                     the appellant started and finished his  job  with  NCL.
                     The period of employment with the company in a  written
                     statement was contradicted by the appellant in his oral
                     evidence. The Judge found  it  reasonable  to  conclude
                     that the appellant would have been consistent as to the
                     start and end dates when he was with NCL [48].
                  e. The appellant's oral evidence in relation to  his  work
                     with NCL contradicts the  information  given  by  James
                     Moore the Deputy Country  Manager  for  "United  States
                     Training Centre" who confirmed the appellant worked  as
                     an   IT   support   team   member   for   DOD   Counter
                     Narcoterrorism 25 November 2009 to 26 January 2011, the
                     same period the appellant claimed to  have  worked  for
                     NCL [49].
                  f. The evidence from Mr Moore made  no  reference  to  the
                     appellant working for  NCL  and  no  reference  to  the
                     appellant's claim to have worked as an interpreter  for
                     the company. This  is  found  material  as  NCL  was  a
                     logistics company working  with  the  Counter  Narcotic
                     Admin team providing interpreters, drivers and  guards.
                     The Judge finds that if the appellant's account was  to
                     be believed there was no reason  why  his  role  as  an
                     interpreter would not have been mentioned by  Mr  Moore
                     [50].
                  g.  The  appellant  fails  to  address  the   respondent's
                     concerns in the Refusal letter that he did  not  submit
                     the original  letter  from  the  "US  Training  Centre"
                     meaning they have not been  able  to  very  verify  the
                     letter and that there are no  contact  details  on  the
                     copy letter provided [51].
                  h. The Judge found there was no reason why  the  appellant
                     could not have submitted  documentary  evidence  of  an
                     appointment with Delta Group, which  he  did  not.  The
                     Judge records submissions in relation to this aspect of
                     the evidence from [52 - 56] leading to  the  conclusion
                     that even taking the evidence at  its  highest  and  it
                     being believed  the  appellant  worked  for  the  Delta
                     Group, it is not  his  claim  that  he  was  personally
                     targeted by  the  Taliban.  The  appellant  claims  his
                     father was kidnapped for the reasons  given  which  was
                     rejected by the Judge for the reasons at [58 -  62]  of
                     the decision under challenge which  can  themselves  be
                     summarised in the following terms:


                         i. There are material discrepancies in the accounts
                            concerning his  father's  kidnapping  for  which
                            adequate reasons are given [58].
                        ii. The appellant was inconsistent as to the  number
                            of telephone calls  received  from  the  Taliban
                            [59].
                       iii. A discrepancy  related  to  when  the  appellant
                            reported his father's kidnap to the  authorities
                            [60].
                        iv.  The  Judge  did  not   accept   that   material
                            discrepancies  can  be  explained  due  to   the
                            passage of time when taking  into  consideration
                            this was a core aspect of the  appellants  claim
                            [61].
                         v.  The  Judge  found  video  evidence  purportedly
                            showing  the  appellant's  father   asking   the
                            appellant to sell the family home,  factory  and
                            the market as his life  was  in  danger,  should
                            attract  little   weight   given   the   overall
                            consideration  of  the   evidence.   The   Judge
                            accepted  the  submission  of   the   Presenting
                            Officer that it was a staged video [64].
                        vi. The appellant's claim he made no attempt to  pay
                            the kidnappers was found not to sit easily  with
                            the appellants claim his father  was  a  wealthy
                            person who had a circle of friends who are  rich
                            and connected with members of the government. It
                            is not found plausible the appellant  would  not
                            have had a conversation with  his  mother  about
                            how much money she could have raised [65].
                       vii. The claim in the appellant's oral evidence  that
                            he received a warning from the Taliban  was  not
                            mentioned in his  asylum  interview  or  witness
                            statement which the Judge found she  would  have
                            expected the appellant to have mentioned [66].


                  i. At [67 -  68]  the  Judge  sets  out  findings  in  the
                     following terms:


                      67.  Taking into consideration all  the  evidence  in
                           the round, I reject the appellants claim and find
                           that he has fabricated  his  father's  kidnapping
                           and the threats made by the Taliban on account of
                           his various roles for the foreign companies. As I
                           have indicated at its highest while the appellant
                           may have worked for the companies, I  reject  his
                           claim that he came to the  adverse  attention  of
                           the  Taliban  after  his  father's   kidnap   and
                           thereafter a ransom  demand  was  made.  In  this
                           regard, I have taken note of the case of  H  &  B
                           referred to by the respondent and  in  particular
                           paragraph  100  is  highlighted  in  the  refusal
                           letter. The court was not persuaded that the  two
                           applicants had  established  that  everyone  with
                           connections to the UN or the US forces,  even  in
                           Kabul, can be considered to be at  real  risk  of
                           treatment contrary to  Article  3  regardless  of
                           their profile or whether or not they continue  to
                           work for the international community.


                      68.  After consideration of all the evidence  in  the
                           round I find that the appellants have  failed  to
                           demonstrate, even to the lower standard of proof,
                           that they have a well-founded fear of persecution
                           for any of the reasons recognised by the  Refugee
                           Convention. I find  that  there  are  no  grounds
                           which  would  justify  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                           protection  and  I  can   find   no   reason   to
                           distinguish their claims under Articles 2 or 3 of
                           the ECHR.


     4. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  which  is  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  the  operative  part  of
        which is in the following terms:


                      "the second of the two effective grounds of appeal is
                      that the learned judge, in making adverse findings as
                      to the alleged kidnapping of the father of the  first
                      appellant  (spouse  of  the  second   appellant   and
                      likewise father of the  third  appellant)  failed  to
                      take into account witness statements, and indeed oral
                      evidence, of the second and third appellants.  It  is
                      true that there is no mention of the  effect  of  the
                      evidence of these two witnesses; no finding as to the
                      weight to be attached to the  same;  and  no  reasons
                      given for disregarding their evidence. The ground  is
                      accordingly fairly arguable and potentially material.






Error of law


     5. Mr Samra confirmed at the outset that he accepted the terms of  the
        grant of permission set out above. It was submitted, however,  that
        as the only issue  was  the  kidnapping  point  this  rendered  the
        findings in relation to all claims unsafe.
     6. In response Mr Singh submitted it was clear that at [40  -  41]  of
        the decision under challenge the Judge  records  having  considered
        the evidence of all three appellants which is  said  to  have  been
        recorded by the Judge and referred to in preparing the decision.
     7. My preliminary finding is that it has not been made  out  that  the
        Judge failed to consider the evidence relied upon  in  relation  to
        the appeal.  The  issue  is  whether  that  evidence  was  properly
        factored into the decision-making process.
     8. This is an appeal in relation to  which  the  evidence  before  the
        Judge came from family members.
     9. On the one hand, it is arguable that the reasons given by the Judge
        for finding the first appellant to lack  credibility  are  not  all
        related to issues over which the second and third  appellants  will
        be able to provide an explanation. The discrepancies noted  by  the
        Judge in relation to the appellant's claimed periods of  employment
        and employers were found to lack credibility.
    10. On the other hand, Mr Samra's submission at [58] that there  is  no
        reference to the evidence from the second or  third  appellants  is
        factually correct. The grounds seeking permission to appeal  assert
        the Judge has effectively ignored the evidence of the other  family
        members and simply  relied  only  on  the  evidence  of  the  first
        appellant. If this is the case the Judge has clearly erred  in  law
        in failing to consider all material provided.
    11. It is noted that at [44] the Judge stated that her focus will be on
        the first  appellant  as  the  main  appellant.  This  is  arguably
        suggestive that the Judge proceeded to examine matters by reference
        to that appellants evidence only.
    12. It is accepted that at [68] the Judge finds  that  "the  appellants
        (my emphasis) failed to demonstrate, even to the lower standard  of
        proof, that they have a well-founded fear of persecution any of the
        reasons recognised by the Refugee Convention". It  is  not  a  mere
        typographical error to refer to the appellants in the pleural.  Had
        all the evidence being  considered  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny and adequate reasons given for findings made which
        clearly demonstrated that all the evidence had been considered  and
        factored into the decision-making process, the weight to  be  given
        to the evidence of the parties would be a matter for the Judge.  It
        is clear the  Judge  did  not  attach  sufficient  weight  to  that
        evidence to allow for a finding that the burden of proof  had  been
        discharged, but to which evidence?  It is not  clear  from  reading
        the determination how the Judge arrives at  this  conclusion  other
        than by reference to the evidence of the first  appellant.  As  the
        Judge identified the first appellant as being the core  individual,
        yet concluded that appeal failed, have the  appeals  of  the  other
        appellants been dismissed in line without  consideration  of  their
        evidence in the assessment process?
    13. The lack of  any  reference  in  detail  of  the  evidence  of  the
        remaining appellants in the decision under challenge or  indication
        of how that evidence was incorporated into the  assessment  of  the
        credibility of the  claim,  gives  rise  to  the  question  whether
        artificial separation has been established in relation to the Judge
        only assessing the credibility of the appellants claim by reference
        to the first appellant's evidence rather than considering  all  the
        evidence as a whole.
    14. This is a troubling matter for the Judge  is  very  experienced  in
        relation to appeals of this nature, many of  which  she  has  dealt
        with during the course of her judicial career. This is not a  judge
        who is regularly successfully appealed as a result  of  failure  to
        consider  the  evidence  or  to  provide   adequate   reasons   for
        conclusions reached. Notwithstanding this  fact,  it  is  important
        that in any judicial process justice must not only be done but must
        be seen to be done  and  there  is  insufficient  material  in  the
        decision under challenge to support a finding that  notwithstanding
        any reference to the evidence from the other appellants, it can  be
        inferred that the Judge took the evidence  into  account  and  made
        specific findings in relation thereto. The absence of any reference
        or anything to support the Secretary of States assertions means  it
        has not been made out that the appellants, as those who lost  their
        appeal, are able to fully understand why all the evidence, properly
        considered, did not entitle them to proceed.
    15. The matter will have to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
        be heard afresh by a different  judge  nominated  by  the  Resident
        Judge at Birmingham.



Decision

    16. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remit the  appeal  to
        be reheard by the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Birmingham  by  a
        different judge nominated by the Resident  Judge  of  that  hearing
        Centre.




Anonymity

    17. The First-tier  Tribunal  ordered  anonymity.  I  make  such  order
        pursuant to the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules. No report  of  this
        decision shall in any way identify the appellants' or any member of
        their families. Failure to comply with this direction may amount to
        contempt of court.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 16 November 2017












