
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/03274/2014
                                                               Aa/03278/2014
                                                               Aa/03281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th August 2016                       |On 10th August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                            Nj (first Appellant)
                            rn (second Appellant)
                            sn (third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Burrett of Counsel instructed by Lawland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Birrell  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 9th November 2015.

 2.  The  Appellants  are  Sri  Lankan  nationals,  the  first  and  second
    Appellants are married and are the parents of the third Appellant.

 3. The Appellants  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  imputed  political
    opinion.  Evidence was given to the FTT at a hearing  on  23rd  October
    2015.  The FTT dismissed the appeals on all  grounds.   The  Respondent
    was not represented by a Presenting Officer.

 4. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Reliance was placed upon three grounds which are summarised below.

 5. Firstly the FTT erred in failing to apply PJ (Sri  Lanka)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1011.  There had been a previous adjournment at the request of  the
    Respondent to enable verification enquiries to take place  in  relation
    to a letter from a lawyer in Sri Lanka, court summonses, and an  arrest
    warrant.   The  Respondent  had  not  indicated  the  result  of  those
    enquiries.

 6. Secondly the FTT erred in failing to make a finding as to whether there
    was an obligation on the Respondent to  undertake  document  enquiries.
    The previous adjournment had been to  enable  the  Respondent  to  make
    enquiries, and the  Appellants  had  relied  upon  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent was undertaking such enquiries.  It was  contended  that  it
    was unfair for the FTT to make adverse credibility findings in relation
    to those documents, without receiving any result  of  the  verification
    enquiries.

 7. Thirdly the FTT had erred by "entering the arena" and, in  the  absence
    of a Presenting Officer, failing to take  into  account  the  Surendran
    guidelines.   It  was  contended  that  the  FTT  fell  into  error  by
    questioning the Appellants' account "on the basis of  the  Respondent's
    stance, and the refusal letter."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Reid  of  the  FTT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2   The grounds argue inter alia the judge  erred  in  failing  to
             apply the case of PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1011  when
             considering the adjournment application by the Respondent; the
             judge in assessing the validity of the summons  erred  by  not
             referencing the Respondent's failure to verify the  documents;
             the judge erred in failing to find whether the Respondent  had
             an obligation to undertake document enquiries;  the  judge  in
             absence of a HOPO acted contrary to the Surendran  guidelines;
             the judge's approach  was  unfair  in  questioning  the  first
             appellant's account on the basis of the Respondent's stance.

         3    The Respondent's adjournment application  was  refused  by  DJ
             McClure the day  before  the  hearing  and  was  not  renewed.
             However Judge Birrell had  a  very  good  knowledge  of  these
             appeals and, sitting as a Deputy UTJ,  ordered  the  rehearing
             and at the first rehearing, sitting as  an  FTTJ,  granted  an
             adjournment  for  document   verification   identifying   that
             verification would likely determine  the  appeal  one  way  or
             another.  It is  arguable  that  she  should  have  considered
             adjourning the hearing ex proprio motu with reference  to  the
             Procedure Rules 2014.  It is  also  arguable  that  the  judge
             failed to have regard  to  the  Surendran  guidelines  in  her
             questioning of the first appellant in the absence of  a  HOPO.
             It is further arguable that the judge should have  had  regard
             to PJ Sri Lanka in her assessment  of  the  first  appellant's
             credibility absent document verification by the Home Office.

         4    The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

 9. Following the grant of permission to appeal  the  Respondent  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.   In  summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FTT  had  not
    materially erred in law.  The FTT considered the evidence in the  round
    and was entitled to reject as being unreliable, the  summonses,  arrest
    warrant and letter from a lawyer in Sri Lanka.  It was  submitted  that
    the FTT did not breach the  Surendran  guidelines,  and  was  entitled,
    given  the  apparent  inconsistencies  between  the  first  Appellant's
    account, and a medical report, to  ask  questions  so  that  the  first
    appellant could have an opportunity of answering any concerns.

10. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Burrett relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal and submitted that the FTT  should  have  realised
    the difficulties that would  arise  in  the  absence  of  a  Presenting
    Officer.

12. Mr Burrett submitted that it was appropriate for a  Presenting  Officer
    to raise issues and cross-examine an Appellant, but not for the FTT  to
    undertake such a role.

13. Mr Burrett pointed out that there had been a previous hearing adjourned
    specifically to enable verification of documents to take  place.   That
    application had been made by the Respondent, and  it  was  stated  that
    verification enquires would probably  decide  the  appeal  one  way  or
    another.

14. Mr Burrett explained that he had made submissions to the  FTT  that  in
    the absence of any  evidence  that  verification  enquiries  had  taken
    place, no adverse inference should be drawn by the FTT in  relation  to
    the documents from Sri Lanka.

15. Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 response, contending that  the  FTT
    had not erred in law, and had carefully considered all the  documentary
    evidence before it.  I was asked to conclude that the grounds  amounted
    to disagreement with the findings made by the  FTT,  but  disclosed  no
    error of law.

16. Mr Burrett pointed out that the FTT recorded at paragraph 13 that there
    had been a previous adjournment for verification enquires to take place
    and that there  was  no  evidence  to  indicate  the  result  of  those
    enquiries, or whether any enquiries had been carried out.  The FTT  had
    not considered the principles in PJ (Sri Lanka), and in  paragraph  83,
    had not adequately analysed the documentation in the light  of  the  PJ
    (Sri Lanka) guidelines.

17. Both representatives indicated that if an error of law was found,  then
    it would be appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the  FTT  to  be
    heard afresh.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I will deal firstly with the Surendran guidelines.  I do not  find  the
    FTT erred in law, nor do I find that the FTT "entered the arena".

20. Paragraph 6 of the guidelines indicates that it is not the  role  of  a
    judge to adopt an inquisitorial role, and in my view the  FTT  in  this
    case did not  adopt  such  a  role.   Paragraph  6  of  the  guidelines
    indicates that if there is a matter which a judge  believes  should  be
    addressed, then such a matter should be drawn to the attention  of  the
    Appellant's representative, who should be invited to  make  submissions
    or call evidence in relation thereto.

21. Paragraph 7 of the guidelines indicates that if a judge considers  that
    clarification is necessary, then the judge should be at liberty to  ask
    questions for the purposes of seeking clarification, although it is not
    the function of the judge to raise matters which a  Presenting  Officer
    might have raised in cross-examination had he or she been present.

22. At paragraph 28 the FTT, in my view, followed the Surendran guidelines,
    indicating to Mr Burrett, that the first Appellant would be  given  the
    opportunity to comment on the possibility of self-infliction by  proxy,
    in relation to the difference between his account of  injuries,  and  a
    medical report.  In my view this was a fair and just  approach  and  in
    line with guidance given in KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri  Lanka
    [2014] UKUT 00320.  At paragraph 298 of  KV,  it  was  recognised  that
    Tribunal judges should ensure that an Appellant has an  opportunity  to
    deal with allegations that injury  has  been  not  caused  in  the  way
    alleged by the Appellant but by a different mechanism.

23. If the FTT made findings on issues that had not been  raised  with  the
    Appellant, so that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  an  opportunity  to
    comment, that would be unfair, and would result in an application being
    made for permission to appeal.

24. In this case, the FTT gave the Appellant an opportunity to  comment  on
    relevant issues.  There was no application for an adjournment  made  on
    behalf of the Appellant, and I find no unfairness, and no breach of the
    Surendran guidelines.

25. I will deal with the first and second Grounds of Appeal  together.   On
    this issue I find an error of law.

26. These appeals had initially been considered by the FTT in  August  2014
    and dismissed.  That decision was subsequently set aside by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in March 2015 and remitted back to the FTT to be heard  afresh
    with no findings preserved.

27. The re-hearing was to be heard on 10th  June  2015  at  the  Manchester
    Hearing Centre.  The hearing was adjourned because the  Appellants  had
    served further documents late.  Those  documents  included  the  letter
    from a Sri Lankan lawyer, two summonses, and an  arrest  warrant.   The
    Respondent requested an adjournment to enable verification enquires  to
    take place, on the basis that if the documents were genuine, they would
    strongly support the Appellants'  appeals,  and  if  not  genuine,  the
    documents would substantially damage the appeals.

28. The hearing was listed to be heard  on  23rd  October  2015.   On  22nd
    October 2015 the Respondent requested an adjournment on the basis  that
    it would not be possible to provide a Presenting Officer at the hearing
    on 23rd October 2015.  This application was  refused  by  a  Designated
    Judge.

29. There was no further application for an adjournment made to the FTT  by
    either party.

30.  The  FTT  therefore  had  no  information  to  indicate  whether   any
    verification enquiries had been made, and if such  enquiries  had  been
    made, the result of those enquiries.

31. I find that the FTT should have considered  the  guidance  in  PJ  (Sri
    Lanka) given that there had been a  previous  adjournment  specifically
    for the purpose of verification enquiries in relation to documents from
    Sri Lanka.  The  general  guidance  in  relation  to  consideration  of
    documentary evidence is that contained in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439.  This is the approach adopted by the FTT  at  paragraph  83,  in
    that if a claimant seeks to rely on a  document,  then  in  the  normal
    course, the burden lies on the claimant to show that it is  a  document
    that can be relied on.

32. What was not considered is the guidance in  paragraph  29  of  PJ  (Sri
    Lanka) in that "the circumstances of particular cases may exceptionally
    necessitate an element of investigation by the  national  authorities".
    It was however stressed that this step will frequently not be  feasible
    or may be unjustified or disproportionate.

33. In paragraph 30, guidance is given that simply because  a  document  is
    potentially capable of being verified, does not mean that the  national
    authorities have an obligation to take this step.  It may be  necessary
    to verify the authenticity of a document when it is at the centre of  a
    request for protection, and when  a  simple  process  of  enquiry  will
    conclusively resolve its authenticity and reliability.

34. In paragraph 31 of PJ (Sri Lanka) it is stated,  in  summary,  that  if
    national authorities are in breach of their obligations to undertake  a
    proper process of verification, the Secretary of State would thereafter
    be unable to mount an argument  challenging  the  authenticity  of  the
    documents unless and until the breach is rectified by proper enquiry.

35. In paragraph 32 it is stated that it is for  a  court  or  Tribunal  to
    decide whether there was an obligation on the  Secretary  of  State  to
    undertake particular enquiries,  and  if  it  is  concluded  that  this
    requirement existed, it is for the court or Tribunal to resolve whether
    the Secretary of State sustainably discharged the obligation.

36. It seems to  me  that  the  documents  in  question,  those  being  two
    summonses, an arrest warrant and a letter from a lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka
    confirming the authenticity of  those  documents  are  central  to  the
    Appellants' request for protection.  If these documents can  be  relied
    upon, then the Appellants would be at risk if returned  to  Sri  Lanka.
    This is confirmed at paragraph 7(d) of the head note to GJ  and  others
    (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) because if there is an  extant  court
    order or arrest warrant in force, then the person who is the subject of
    that court order or arrest  warrant  would  appear  on  a  computerised
    "stop" list accessible at the airport in  Sri  Lanka.   The  Respondent
    appears to have accepted at the previous FTT hearing in June 2015, that
    the documents are at the centre of the request for protection,  and  it
    would not be difficult to make enquires  to  conclusively  resolve  the
    authenticity and reliability of  those  documents.   That  is  why  the
    adjournment application was made and granted.

37. The  FTT  was  in  a  difficult  position  on  23rd  October  2015,  an
    adjournment request having been refused the  previous  day,  and  there
    being no Presenting Officer in attendance to advise whether  there  had
    been any attempt to verify the authenticity of the documents.

38. I accept that there is some force in the point made on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants, that they were aware that the hearing in June 2015 had been
    adjourned for verification enquiries to be  made,  and  that  they  had
    relied upon those enquiries being made.  It  was  therefore  unfair  to
    reach adverse  findings  on  the  documents,  in  the  absence  of  any
    information as to what if any verification enquiries had been made.

39. I therefore conclude that a material  error  of  law  is  disclosed  by
    Grounds 1 and 2  of  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  and
    therefore the FTT decision is  unsafe  and  must  be  set  aside.   The
    documents in question are at the centre of the  claim  for  protection,
    and I find that the error infects  other  findings,  and  therefore  no
    findings of fact can be preserved.

40. Both representatives suggested that if an error of law was  found,  the
    appeals should be remitted to the FTT.  I have considered  paragraph  7
    of the Senior President's Practice Statement which is set out below;

         "7.1 Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

         7.3  Re-making rather than remitting will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of
             law is found, even if some further fact-finding is necessary."



41. In my view the Upper Tribunal should not be  the  primary  fact-finding
    Tribunal.  I am  conscious  that  this  appeal  has  been  heard  twice
    previously in the FTT, but in view of the fact that no findings can  be
    preserved, I consider, reluctantly, that it is necessary to remit  this
    appeal once again to the FTT to be heard afresh.

42. The appeal will be heard by the FTT at the Manchester Hearing Centre by
    an FTT Judge other then Judge Agnew and  Judge  Birrell.   The  parties
    will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in due course.

Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT.

Anonymity

No anonymity order has previously been in force.  As this  is  a  claim  for
international protection, I consider that  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an
anonymity order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules  2008.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, the  Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellants  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 5th August 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This must be considered by  the
FTT when the appeal is re-heard.






Signed                              Date 5th August 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
