
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03732/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30th June 2015                        |On: 2nd July 2015                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     A K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on  10th  March  1996.   She
    came to the UK on 29th September 2012 and was  put  into  the  care  of
    Social services.  On 23rd November 2012 she claimed asylum.  Her  claim
    for asylum concerns an allegation of forced marriage  arranged  by  her
    father to an older man.  On 22nd May 2014 the  respondent  refused  her
    asylum claim and she appealed.  On 12th January 2015 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Clayton dismissed her appeal on all grounds.  However  on
    5th February 2015 permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  all  grounds
    submitted by the appellant by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R A Cox.
     Rule 24 and Rule 25 letters submissions were made by the parties.  The
    matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal  had
    erred in law.

Submissions

 2. Ms Savage explained that she had not been  able  to  contact  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer who was on holiday and that while  she  could
    not concede that there had been procedural errors of law  she  did  not
    have much to say on the matter, and if I were to find that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law on the basis  of  procedural  unfairness
    she was content that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I did not require any evidence to be put by Ms Kiai as I had
    read the grounds of appeal and was content that there had been an error
    of law on the basis of procedural unfairness for the  reasons  set  out
    below.

 3. I was  also  concerned  by  other  grounds  of  appeal  that  contended
    supporting evidence in the form of reports had not been properly placed
    in the balance. However it is not necessary to make findings  on  these
    grounds, and the further ones, given  my  conclusion  on  the  lack  of
    fairness of the proceedings.

Conclusions - Error of Law

 4. The grounds of  appeal  set  out  that  there  had  been  a  number  of
    procedural irregularities in the hearing before Judge  Clayton.   There
    had been issues with Judge Clayton requiring material to be taken  from
    the bundles.  There had been issues with Judge Clayton  preventing  the
    interpreter from making eye contact with the appellant whilst  she  was
    giving  her  evidence.   The  judge  had  also  prevented  simultaneous
    interpretation by the interpreter,  thereby  preventing  the  appellant
    from understanding the hearing in full. The judge had  interrupted  the
    appellant telling her to answer yes or no to  questions  and  not  give
    full answers.  The judge had also prevented the Presenting Officer from
    asking open questions and attempted to sign  off  the  interpreter  and
    tell the appellant to "go shopping for the afternoon" when it  came  to
    submissions.  Judge Clayton was also said to have commented that if the
    appellant was suffering from depression  she  would  not  be  sat  here
    smiling.

 5. These allegations were supported by evidence  from  Counsel  (Ms  Priya
    Solanki) in the form of a witness statement who had represented at  the
    hearing and a further witness statement from Counsel, Mr  Iain  Palmer,
    who was also  present  in  Taylor  House  on  that  day.   The  witness
    statements of the two counsel are also supported by a statement by  the
    appellant herself and by an  email  from  Arvinder  Karda  who  is  the
    appellant's social worker.  Counsel  has  also  appended  her  original
    contemporaneous notes of  the  hearing  and  note  to  her  instructing
    solicitors dated three days after the hearing (23rd November 2014), and
    thus prior to the result of the  hearing  being  known,  in  which  she
    describes the hearing as "extremely absurd" and the  judge's  behaviour
    as "very strange".  Judge Clayton was given the opportunity to  provide
    her views on the hearing in the light of the grounds of appeal but  has
    chosen not to do so.

 6. Considering all of the evidence before  me  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    hearing was not conducted in a way which enabled the appellant to  give
    her evidence in full, particularly as she was and is a young adult aged
    just 19 years old who has provided some evidence of being  anxious  and
    depressed.

 7. In the circumstances it is  appropriate  in  accordance  with  Practice
    Statement on Remittal 7.2 to remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for the further conduct of the hearing as the error was such to deprive
    the appellant of a fair hearing.

Decision

 1. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 2. The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clayton is  set  aside
    in full.

 3. The decision is remitted to  be  re-made  de  novo  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any other form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original appellant.   This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm arising to  the  appellant
from the contents of her protection claim.



Signed   Date 1st July 2015

Judge Lindsley
Upper Tribunal Judge

