
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03446/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 May 2013                                |On 3 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     H S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney of Duncan Moghal Solicitors & Advocates.
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

The Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 11 January 1994.   He
    claims to have arrived in the UK in June 2009.  He claimed asylum on 15
    June 2009 having been arrested by the police.

 3. The appellant claimed that his father had been shot in  the  eye  by  a
    group whom the appellant thought was the Taliban.   The  appellant  and
    his brother were held by the group for about a  month  before  the  men
    forcibly handed the  appellant  over  to  an  agent.   Thereafter,  the
    appellant left Afghanistan on foot  travelling  to  Pakistan  where  he
    remained for about a month before being taken in a number  of  vehicles
    through a number of unknown countries eventually arriving in the UK.

 4. On 1 December 2009, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for asylum and humanitarian protection.   However,  as  the
    appellant was a minor, the  appellant  was  granted  limited  leave  to
    remain in the UK until 1 July 2011 in accordance with the  Home  Office
    policy in relation to unaccompanied minors.

 5. On 29 June 2011, the appellant applied for an extension of  that  leave
    relying again on his fear from the group (which he believed to  be  the
    Taliban) who had previously shot his father and detained  him.   On  21
    March 2012, the Secretary of State again refused the appellant's  claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection.  On that date the Secretary  of
    State made a decision refusing to  vary  his  leave  and  also  made  a
    decision to  remove  him  by  way  of  directions  under  s.47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The First-tier Tribunal

 6. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Following  a
    hearing, Judge C J Woolley dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 7. First, he found the appellant not to be credible and did not accept his
    account that his father had been shot by a group (believed  to  be  the
    Taliban) or that the appellant had been detained by that group and that
    they had handed him over to an agent paying for his travel to  the  UK.
    The judge did not accept that the appellant was  at  risk  of  forcible
    recruitment by the Taliban or that otherwise he would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return.

 8. Secondly, the judge did not accept that there was a real risk that  the
    appellant would commit suicide on return to  Afghanistan  or  that,  on
    account of his diagnosed  major  depressive  disorder,  his  return  to
    Afghanistan would breach Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 9. Finally, the judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. On 18 June 2012, the First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Campbell)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The appellant's
    grounds of appeal raise, in  essence,  two  potential  errors  of  law.
    First, the judge erred in law in his assessment of, and the  weight  he
    had  given  to,  the  evidence  of  Dr  Budd,  a  Consultant   Clinical
    Psychologist, in reaching his finding that the appellant had failed  to
    establish that there was a real  risk  of  him  committing  suicide  on
    return to Afghanistan and therefore  that  he  had  not  established  a
    breach of Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  Secondly, the judge erred  in  law
    in failing to find that the respondent has failed to  comply  with  her
    duty to trace the appellant's family and accordingly had  wrongly  made
    the factual finding that the appellant would have family (including his
    father and uncle) who could support him on return to Afghanistan.

11. In granting permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal did  not  find
    either of these grounds  arguable  but  granted  permission  to  appeal
    instead on the unarticulated  ground  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to make a removal decision  under  s.47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was not  in  accordance  with  the  law
    following the Upper Tribunal's decision in Ahmadi (Section 47 decision;
    validity; Sapkota) [2012] UKUT 00147 (IAC).

12. The grounds do not challenge the judge's  adverse  credibility  finding
    and the dismissal of the appeal on asylum grounds.

13. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

14. Before me, it was accepted that the removal decision under s.47 was not
    in accordance with the law.  That follows from  SSHD  v  Ahmadi  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 512.

15. Ms Fenney, on behalf of the appellant, despite DJ Campbell's view  that
    they were not arguable, relied upon the two  grounds  set  out  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

16. She submitted that the judge had wrongly discounted  Dr  Budd's  expert
    opinion on the basis that that opinion had only  been  founded  on  the
    appellant's own account.  She submitted that, in fact, Dr Budd referred
    in his report to what he had been told by Ms Edwards,  a  Systemic  and
    Family Psychotherapist who had seen the appellant  on  five  occasions.
    At para 9.3 of Dr Budd's report, having spoken to Ms Edwards, he  noted
    that:

         "She indicated that at that time she had been  concerned  he  might
         become a suicide risk due to his relative  isolation,  noting  that
         his mood had improved significantly as soon as he had moved into  a
         supportive family environment."

17. Further, Ms Fenney pointed out that at paragraph 8.2 of his report,  Dr
    Budd referred to a letter from  the  appellant's  GP,  Dr  Gwynne,  who
    stated that he was taking an antidepressant and on a scoring  test  for
    the severity of depression, the  appellant's  condition  "qualified  as
    mild depression".

18. Mr Hibbs submitted that the judge had  properly  considered  Dr  Budd's
    report.  Mr Hibbs pointed out that Dr Budd had been unable to carry out
    a full assessment because, as he notes at paras 5.1-5.3 of his  report,
    he was unable to administer the Million Clinical Multi-Axil Inventory -
    Third  Edition  (MCMI-III)  to  the  appellant.   Therefore,  Mr  Hibbs
    submitted that Dr Budd's assessment was based entirely on his interview
    with the appellant.  As regards the risk of suicide, Mr Hibbs submitted
    that the judge had correctly dealt with the expert evidence in relation
    to the two possible causes of the risk; namely,  as  a  result  of  the
    appellant's objective fear on return to Afghanistan and as a result  of
    separation from a support network  of  friends  or  family.   Mr  Hibbs
    submitted that at paras 43-44 of his determination, the judge  assessed
    the evidence and came to a conclusion that he was entitled to in law.

Discussion

19. The judge dealt  with  Dr  Budd's  evidence  in  two  passages  in  his
    determination.  First at paras 38-39, the judge said this:

         "38. ... In my findings in relation to  his  asylum  claim  I  have
             indeed not found him to be credible in his account  of  events
             in Afghanistan.  I note that the appellant  was  not  able  to
             complete  the  MCMI-III  test  which  is  a  'well   validated
             psychometric  test'  which  contains  a  validity  index,   an
             assessment  of  personality   patterns,   severe   personality
             pathology and clinical syndromes.  The  report  was  therefore
             completed purely on the basis of the interviews with  Dr  Budd
             and his assessment of the appellant's presentation without any
             validation from any psychometric  test.   In  respect  of  his
             history in the UK Dr Budd had access to information  from  his
             foster family and from Ms  Edwards  (Family  psychotherapist).
             In respect of the history in Afghanistan Dr Budd relied solely
             on what he was told by the appellant.   Dr  Budd  reached  the
             diagnosis of  PTSD  (DSM-IV  criteria)  from  the  appellant's
             account but I have not found this  to  be  credible.   Insofar
             therefore as Dr Budd relied on the appellant for  the  history
             in Afghanistan in diagnosing PTSD, his diagnosis rested  on  a
             version of events that has not been found to be credible.  The
             diagnosis  must  therefore  be  undermined.   Dr   Budd   also
             diagnosed a major depressive disorder.  This appears  to  have
             resulted also from events in Afghanistan as well as  from  the
             prospect of having to leave the United  Kingdom,  although  Dr
             Budd  at  17.2  does  not  particularise  the  causes  of  the
             depression.  Dr Budd adds at 17.3 that the appellant is likely
             to become a serious suicide  risk  if  he  were  compelled  to
             return to Afghanistan but does not provide any explanation  of
             this finding beyond saying that  his  UK  relationships  would
             thereby end, and  does  not  evidence  any  previous  suicidal
             ideation or attempt.  This finding appears to be  again  based
             on what the appellant told Dr  Budd  at  interview  (paragraph
             11.3).

         39.  Miss Fenney referred me to AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  521  (at
             pages 59-60 of the bundle) as to the  attitude  that  must  be
             taken to expert reports.  The Court of Appeal in that decision
             held  that  a  psychologist's  report  must  be  regarded   as
             independent  evidence,  even  if  it  depended  in   part   on
             formulating the opinion  in  the  light  of  the  account  the
             psychologist had been given.  AM went on  however  to  explain
             that 'whether evidence amounts to  proof,  on  any  particular
             standard ... is a matter of weight and assessment'  (paragraph
             30).  While accepting Dr Budd's report as independent evidence
             I have therefore to go on and assess the weight  that  can  be
             attached to it in the light of all the  evidence.   His  major
             conclusion of PTSD has been reached on  a  version  of  events
             that I have not found to be  credible.   I  do  not  therefore
             place any weight on any conclusions  that  Dr  Budd  may  have
             reached based on that reached again on what he was told by the
             appellant in interview.  This assessment is unsupported by any
             previous recorded history of  suicidal  ideation  or  attempt.
             While it can be accepted that the appellant may  be  depressed
             at the prospect of leaving his foster family and friends in an
             environment which on any assessment has been  better  than  he
             experienced in Afghanistan, there is no evidence that Dr  Budd
             has considered any support mechanisms that may be available in
             Afghanistan to lessen such a risk.  I do  not  therefore  find
             that weight can be placed on the report's conclusions that for
             this reason alone that his depression 'in the mild to moderate
             range' will result in a 'serious suicide risk'."

20. Then, having set out relevant case law, including the House  of  Lords'
    decision in N v SSHD [2003] UKHL 31 and the Court of Appeal's  decision
    in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629, the judge continued at paras 43-44  as
    follows:

         "43. Applying the tests as set out in J v SSHD I do not  find  that
             all the evidence including the medical evidence, even taken at
             its highest, demonstrates a real risk that the appellant would
             commit suicide in the UK.  He  has  an  extensive  network  of
             support, including not only his foster family and his  friends
             in  Newport  but  also  the  support  of   a   mental   health
             professional and his own GP (Ms Edwards and Dr Gwynne).  There
             have been no reports of any suicidal ideation in the past  and
             Dr Budd reaches his conclusion that he is  a  serious  suicide
             risk on the one comment made to him in  interview.   While  it
             may be expected that  the  notification  of  the  decision  to
             remove the appellant may have an effect on his mental state  I
             take note that the Home Office is able to employ procedures to
             safeguard the appellant in this process.  In  respect  of  the
             risk of suicide on return to Afghanistan I have not found  his
             account of his experiences there to be credible.  I  have  not
             found that the appellant has established that  his  father  is
             dead, and in his first statement he referred to his  uncle  as
             helping to pay for the agent to remove him  from  Afghanistan.
             I find that he does have a family network in Afghanistan of at
             least his uncle to which he could return and  which  would  be
             able to give him support.  I have not found that he has  shown
             that he is of any interest  to  the  Taliban  as  I  have  not
             accepted  his  account  that  they  targeted  his  father   or
             imprisoned himself.  His subjective fear of ill  treatment  in
             Afghanistan is not therefore objectively well founded.   While
             treatment for depression cannot be regarded as  being  of  the
             same standard in Afghanistan as in  the  UK,  as  Mr  Hammonds
             points out Afghanistan is not a medical wasteland and the  OGN
             confirms that 80% of the population  does have access to basic
             healthcare.  On return to Afghanistan he will have the support
             of a family network.  As a young man who has demonstrated  his
             tenacity in making the arduous journey from Afghanistan to the
             United Kingdom for a period of a year, and who has established
             a network of friends in Newport, I do not find  that  he  will
             have any difficulty in similarly  establishing  a  network  of
             friends in Afghanistan.  There is no indication that  Dr  Budd
             took into account the mechanisms which are and which  will  be
             in place to minimise the risk of suicide both  in  the  United
             Kingdom and in Afghanistan.  I conclude  that  the  conditions
             applicable to the appellant in both the United Kingdom and  in
             Afghanistan reduce the risk of suicide sufficiently  to  bring
             it below the Article 3 threshold as defined in N v SSHD.  I do
             not that Article 3 would be breached by the appellant's return
             to Afghanistan.

         44.  I accept that Dr Budd has  also  diagnosed  the  appellant  as
             suffering from Major Depressive Disorder with symptoms in  the
             mild to moderate range.  Dr Budd has  not  given  the  precise
             aetiology of the appellant's condition but I take note that  a
             major factor in this depression may be the prospect of  losing
             his family and friend's  support  network  in  Newport.   Miss
             Fenney explicitly reminded me of this in her closing  address.
             While I  accept  Dr  Budd's  conclusions  on  the  appellant's
             depressive condition I do not find that this condition reaches
             the high threshold set by N v SSHD, given the availability  of
             a support network in Afghanistan and the appellant's  capacity
             to create a new group of friends there.  I  do  not  therefore
             find that Article 3 is breached by the return of the appellant
             in a depressive condition to Afghanistan."

21. In my judgment, the judge did adequately and properly take into account
    the evidence of Dr Budd.

22. First, the judge correctly noted that Dr Budd's report had  been  based
    solely on  interview  and  without  the  aid  of  the  "well  validated
    psychometric test", namely MCMI-III test.

23.  Secondly,  the  judge  clearly  noted,  and  took  into  account,  the
    "internal" evidence of Ms Edwards and Dr Gwynne (see paras 38 and  43).
    Further, the judge clearly distinguished between the potential risk  of
    suicide to the appellant because of his fear from a group (perhaps  the
    Taliban) and because of his potential social isolation. As regards  the
    former, the Judge did not accept that the risk  was  well-founded.   As
    regards the latter, the evidence of Ms Edwards set out at para  9.3  of
    Dr Budd's report goes no further than saying that at an  earlier  point
    in time she had been concerned  that  the  appellant  "might  become  a
    suicide risk due to his relative isolation".  She went on to note  that
    his mood  had  improved  as  a  result  of  him  having  moved  into  a
    "supportive family environment".  The judge was not wrong to point  out
    both in paras 38 and 39 that there was no  evidence  of  "any  previous
    suicidal ideation or attempt".  Ms Edwards' evidence  was  not  to  the
    contrary.

24. Thirdly, the judge was entirely  correct  to  state,  in  assessing  Dr
    Budd's report, that the evidence of what the appellant claimed to  fear
    on return to Afghanistan and, therefore, to the extent that that return
    was said to create a risk of suicide, was  based  wholly  on  what  the
    appellant  told  him.   The  judge,  of  course,  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's evidence.  He found him not to be credible and that finding
    is not now challenged.  The judge was  entitled,  at  para  43  of  his
    determination, to find, therefore, that in stating  that  there  was  a
    "serious suicide risk", Dr Budd  was  basing  that  assessment  on  the
    appellant's evidence of what he feared on return to Afghanistan  (which
    was not factually established) and also  that  he  would  return  there
    without any family support.  However, as the judge found  in  para  43,
    the appellant had not established that his father was dead.

25. Before me, there was some argument as to whether or not  the  appellant
    had ever said in his interview (see question 52) that he had  an  uncle
    in Afghanistan who had made arrangements for his leaving the  UK.   The
    judge,  in  fact,  dealt  with  this  evidence  at  para  32   of   his
    determination.  As question 52 makes plain,  this  arose  from  an  SEF
    statement made by the appellant.  Neither Ms Fenney nor  Mr  Hibbs  was
    able to produce that statement.  At para 32 the judge said this:

         "The account is further confused by the contradictory statement  in
         the SEF statement that it had been his uncle who had paid  for  the
         agent.  The appellant claimed that he had not wanted  to  say  this
         and that interpreter had 'messed up' his account.  He  had  however
         accepted in his interview that what was said in the  statement  had
         been correct and I do not find that he has produced any evidence to
         show that he was so completely misunderstood or  misrepresented  in
         his SEF statement that the account of  his  uncle  paying  for  the
         agent must be rejected."

26. The judge took this contradictory evidence into account in reaching his
    adverse credibility finding.  No challenge is made to that finding  and
    the judge's reasoning in para 32 properly justifies the finding that he
    has made.

27. Looking at the Judge's decision as a whole, in para 43 the  judge  gave
    cogent and adequate reasons for finding that the appellant  has  failed
    to establish a real risk  of  suicide  on  return  to  Afghanistan  and
    therefore a breach of Art 3 of the ECHR.  The judge took  into  account
    that the appellant has failed to establish that  he  would  be  of  any
    interest to the Taliban or any such group or that they  had  previously
    targeted his father or  imprisoned  him.   The  judge  also  took  into
    account that the appellant will have family on  return,  including  his
    father and uncle.  The judge found, on a basis entirely  open  to  him,
    that the appellant will also  have  no  difficulty  in  establishing  a
    network of friends in Afghanistan.  The judge noted that  Dr  Budd,  in
    reaching his opinion, did not take into account  the  mechanisms  which
    will minimise the risk of suicide both in the UK  and  in  Afghanistan.
    Likewise, at  para  44,  whilst  noting  that  Dr  Budd  diagnoses  the
    appellant as suffering from major depressive disorder with symptoms  in
    the "mild to moderate  range",  the  judge  again  has  regard  to  the
    availability of a support network in Afghanistan and his  finding  that
    the appellant's depressive condition would not be such as to engage the
    high threshold for Art 3 set out in N v SSHD is a finding that was  not
    only properly open to him, but probably was inevitable.

28. For these reasons, I reject this ground of appeal.

29. Turning now to the second ground, this arises out of  para  45  of  the
    judge's determination which is in the following terms:

         "45. Miss Fenney submitted that no family tracing exercise has been
             completed, as required by DS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA
             Civ 305.  The respondent has explained that no family  tracing
             took place at the time of the initial decision in 2009  as  DS
             had not then been decided.  They explain the efforts that have
             been  made  in  respect  of  tracing,  and  I  find  that  the
             respondent has endeavoured to trace the family as required  by
             Regulation 5 of  the  Asylum  Seekers  (Reception  Conditions)
             Regulations 2005.  The respondent  is  not  required  to  have
             succeeded in the tracing exercise (which  might  obviously  in
             some cases never be  possible)  but  simply  to  endeavour  to
             trace.  In any event, as  was  explained  in  DS  itself,  the
             obligation to endeavour to trace is a separate  exercise  from
             the asylum claim.  I do not therefore find that the fact  that
             the tracing exercise has not been completed  reflects  on  the
             asylum decision and subsequent appeal."

30. Ms Fenney submitted that the Secretary of State had failed to carry out
    her duty under the Asylum Seekers  (Reception  Conditions)  Regulations
    2005 (SI 2005/7).  She referred me to the Court of Appeal's decision in
    KA (Afghanistan) and Others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1014.  She  accepted
    that the Secretary of State had, albeit belatedly, sought to trace  the
    appellant's family.  My attention was drawn to a letter written to  the
    appellant's social  worker  dated  21  February  2012  (at  H1  of  the
    respondent's bundle) and the response dated 9 March 2012 (at I1 of  the
    respondent's bundle) and, finally, an email addressed  to  the  British
    Embassy in Kabul giving the appellant's details together with  that  of
    his father and brother seeking to trace them dated 22 March 2012 (J1 of
    the respondent's bundle).

31. I drew both representatives' attention to the  subsequent  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in EU (Afghanistan) and Others v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 32.

32. Ms Fenney submitted that the judge was not entitled to  find  that  the
    appellant had an uncle and father in Afghanistan  given  that  she  had
    not, until at least recently, sought to fulfil her duty under the  2005
    Regulations.

33. Mr Hibbs submitted that, following EU and in particular [34], the judge
    was entitled to find in all the circumstances that  the  appellant  had
    family and other support in Afghanistan and that his return  would  not
    put him at risk.

34. It is accepted that the Secretary of State has, indeed, sought to carry
    out  her  duty  to  endeavour  to  trace  the  appellant's  family   in
    Afghanistan since February of last year.  No  further  information  was
    put before me concerning any response from the  British  Embassy  since
    the enquiry made on 22 March 2012.

35. It is clear from the most recent decision of the Court of Appeal in  EU
    (Afghanistan) and Others that any breach by the Secretary of  State  of
    her duty may, but will not necessarily, have an impact on the  judicial
    consideration of an  individual's  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection
    claim.  The 'protective principle' referred to in  KA  may  advance  an
    individual's case beyond her asylum claim,  for  example  under  Art  8
    (see, EU and others per Sir  Stanley  Burnton  at  [6]).   However,  an
    appellant cannot simply succeed in an asylum claim  because  there  has
    been a breach of the duty to endeavour to trace.  A Judge  must  assess
    the  contemporaneous  risk  to  the  individual  on  return.    In   KA
    (Afghanistan) and Others, Maurice Kay LJ (at [18]) rejected the  notion
    that there was a bright line, when assessing risk on return, which  was
    crossed at the age of 18 (applying DS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 305 per  Lloyd  LJ  at  [54]).   That  point  was  also  made,  and
    amplified, by Sir Stanley Burnton in EU  (Afghanistan)  and  Others  at
    [34] where he said:

         "It is also contended for [the appellant]  that  the  Secretary  of
         State's delay in determining his claims resulted in prejudice  that
         should be remedied by the grant of leave to remain,  since  if  his
         claims had been timorously decided,  he  would  have  been  granted
         asylum.  This  contention  is  inconsistent  with  the  fundamental
         principle of asylum law and practice, upheld by this Court in [KA],
         that claims are decided on the  basis  of  facts  at  the  date  of
         decision.  It is inherent in this context that  decisions  made  at
         different times may have different outcomes.  Delays on the part of
         the Secretary of State in  determining  claims,  at  least  if  not
         deliberate, do not justify their determination on artificial  basis
         of obsolete facts."

36.  That  latter  point  deals  with  Ms  Fenney's  submission  that   the
    respondent's grant of leave to the appellant  indicated  that  she  was
    satisfied the appellant had no family  in  Afghanistan  to  return  to.
    Even if that were the case, and it is very doubtful if that necessarily
    follows because the unaccompanied minor policy is applied, it  was  not
    the case by the time of the hearing.  The evidential  findings  of  the
    Judge were to the contrary.

37. Here, the appellant is no longer a child but the Judge did not approach
    the appellant's case as if a 'bright line' existed at 18.    The  Judge
    found the appellant not to be credible.  The appellant was  disbelieved
    that he had no family in Afghanistan.  The Judge was entitled  to  make
    that finding.  In respect of the tracing,  the  appellant  provided  no
    information about to his uncle,.  In respect of  both  the  appellant's
    father and brother, he provided a name and his own last known  address.
    However, the Secretary of State's endeavours to  trace  them  have,  it
    would seem, proved fruitless in any event.  It  is  impossible  to  see
    what the appellant can gain from showing that the  Secretary  of  State
    has only belated sought to trace his family.

38. The Judge fully considered the circumstances of the appellant on return
    and concluded that he was not at risk for the purposes  of  his  asylum
    claim and also in breach of Art 3 of the ECHR.  Despite  the  delay  in
    the  Secretary  of  State  carrying  out  her  duty  under   the   2005
    Regulations, I see no basis upon which either discreetly or as part  of
    the appellant's claim to be a refugee  that  failure  can  provide  any
    remedy.

39. For these reasons I reject this ground of appeal also.

40. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection
    grounds and under Arts 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

41. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Arts  2,
    3 and 8 of the ECHR did not involve the making of an error of  law  and
    its decision to dismiss the appeal on those grounds stands.

42. However, the respondent's removal decision under s.47 of the  2006  Act
    was not in accordance with the law.  To  that  extent,  the  appeal  is
    allowed such that the appellant is not subject to a removal decision.




                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
