

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03776/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Determination Promulgated
On 14th November 2014  On 26th November 2014
Prepared 20th November 2014


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     O P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Gibson-Lee (counsel, instructed by Lloyds PR
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. For the sake of convenience and continuity of terminology the Secretary
   of State is referred to as the Respondent and O P is referred to as the
   Appellant. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn promulgated on the 25th of
   July 2014 in which the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his
   asylum claim was allowed. The initial application for permission to
   appeal, made to the First-tier Tribunal, was refused, the renewed
   application to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
   Chalkley on the 13th of October 2014.

2. The Appellant arrived in the UK on the 25th of June 2004 on a visit
   visa, he overstayed and on the 12th of October 2011 he claimed asylum
   relying on events he said had taken place in Sri Lanka before he came to
   the UK and on his political affiliation. The claim was refused for the
   reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 22nd of May 2014, there were a
   number of reasons given which included the Secretary of State questioning
   the Appellant's nationality and political party membership.

3. The Appellant appealed the decision. It appears that by the hearing the
   Home Office had lost original documentation that had been submitted by
   the Appellant in support of his application. At the hearing the Home
   Office representative accepted the Appellant's nationality, it does not
   appear that any concession was made in respect of any other aspect of the
   case. The submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings and are
   referred to where relevant below.

4. For the reasons given below I am satisfied that the Judge made material
   errors of law such that the determination of Judge Flynn has to be set
   aside and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on
   all matters. The relevant form was completed at the conclusion of the
   Upper Tribunal hearing on the 14th of November 2014.

5. The grounds relied on by the Secretary of State are to the effect that
   the Judge materially misdirected himself in relation to the risk
   categories set out in the country guidance case of GJ and others (Post
   Civil War: Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and that the
   Appellant did not come into the category relied on. It was also argued
   that the Judge did not give proper reasons for making findings on
   material matters and related to this was a failure to taken into account
   and resolve issues on material matters.

6. The Judge was faced with the task of assessing evidence in the absence
   of originals which ought to have been produced by the Secretary of State
   but which had been lost. I accept that does cause difficulties for the
   Appellant although that does not apply to all of the documents, for
   example there was not an original of the press report from 2004 and
   apparently there never had been.

7. The Respondent had relied on the Refusal Letter which set out concerns
   over the lack of the Appellant's political knowledge and rejected his
   claimed membership of the UNP. There is a reference in paragraph 58 to
   the Appellant's membership of the UNP in the UK and a statement that the
   Respondent did not challenge his membership of the party. This is
   incorrect as the Refusal Letter clearly indicates that his party
   membership was not accepted and this point was not conceded in contrast
   to the position on his nationality.

8. In the course of the determination the Judge did not deal with matters
   that had been raised in the Refusal Letter and which remained relevant.
   There was the Appellant's lack of knowledge of the party that he had been
   a member of and that had to be considered in the light of his later
   evidence to the Tribunal. The Judge erred in assessing one set of copies
   against a different of copies and did not give reasons for finding that
   the first, accepted, copy was accepted as reliable.

9. The finding that the Appellant fell into one of the risk categories
   cannot be sustained. The principal factor placing an individual at risk
   is the threat they pose to the future territorial integrity of Sri Lanka
   as a single state. There is no sustainable finding that the Appellant
   poses such a threat. The finding that the Appellant falls into the risk
   category identified is not sustainable.

10. I find that the errors identified above have a cumulative effect and
   render the determination unsustainable. Accordingly the determination
   cannot stand and the matter will have to be re-heard in the First-tier
   Tribunal. Directions have already been provided.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all
issues.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 which is continued.

Fee Award

In remitting the decision to the First-tier Tribunal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 26th November 2014


