


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03315/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on: |
|On 4 August 2016                              |On 6 October 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                                     K J

                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I continue an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   set  removal  directions  to  Sri  Lanka  after  refusing   international
   protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  humanitarian  protection
   grounds, or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. At a hearing on 26 May 2016,  it
   was agreed that the appellant is a Tamil from Kavali in the Vanni who was
   tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities within 6 months before  22  August
   2014, and that he has scarring which is  diagnostic  of  that  treatment;
   PTSD and depression.

3. He is a person to whom paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules HC395  (as
   amended) applies. He has been the subject of persecution  and/or  serious
   harm before coming to the United Kingdom and the Rules require that to be
   regarded as a serious indication of a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
   for a Refugee Convention reason or real risk of  suffering  serious  harm
   engaging the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC, unless  there  are  good
   reasons to consider that such persecution or serious  harm  will  not  be
   repeated.

4. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal  decision  and  ordered  that  it  be
   remade on a date to be fixed, but that a further oral hearing  might  not
   be necessary, depending on the submissions  received  from  the  parties,
   according to the directions set out at paragraph 9 of  my  decision.   So
   far as relevant to this decision, the directions were as follows:

      "(a)  Within 21  days  of  the  sending  out  of  this  decision,  the
      appellant shall file and serve written submissions (limited to  10  A4
      pages) in both electronic and hard copy format, setting out  concisely
      all issues and arguments in relation to the remaking of  the  decision
      in this appeal on which the  appellant  relies,  in  particular  those
      arising out of the  Upper  Tribunal's  decisions  in  KV  (scarring  -
      medical evidence) [2014]  UKUT  230  (IAC)  and  GJ  (post-civil  war:
      returnees) Sri Lanka CG (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

      (b)   If the appellant considers that an oral hearing is required,  he
      should explain why in his submissions and  provide  a  time  estimate,
      indicating whether any witness will be  called  (attaching  a  witness
      statement for each such witness) and whether an  interpreter  will  be
      required.

      (c)    Within  21  days  from  receipt  of  the  appellant's   written
      submissions, and in any event, within 42 days from the sending out  of
      this decision, the respondent shall file and serve written submissions
      (limited to 10 A4 pages) in both  electronic  and  hard  copy  format,
      setting out concisely her response to any submission by the appellant,
      and all issues and arguments  in  relation  to  the  remaking  of  the
      decision in this appeal on which the appellant relies,  in  particular
      those arising out of the Upper Tribunal's decisions in KV (scarring  -
      medical evidence) [2014]  UKUT  230  (IAC)  and  GJ  (post-civil  war:
      returnees) Sri Lanka CG (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

      (d)   If the respondent considers that an oral  hearing  is  required,
      she should explain why in her submissions and provide a time estimate,
      indicating whether any witness will be  called  (attaching  a  witness
      statement for each such witness) and whether an  interpreter  will  be
      required. ...

   h) Liberty to apply."

   My decision was sent out on 4 June 2016.  On 27 June 2016,  slightly  out
   of time, submissions were received from the appellant.  No submissions in
   reply have been received from the respondent and no application has  been
   made for an extension of time under the liberty  to  apply  given  in  my
   directions.

5. I therefore proceed to determine this appeal on the basis of  the  agreed
   facts and the submissions of the appellant.

Appellant's submissions

6. Mr Lewis for the appellant submits that the respondent cannot be said  to
   have identified any good reason to conclude that the serious  harm  which
   this appellant suffered in Sri Lanka would not be repeated.  He relies on
   the concession made by the respondent in GJ and others  (post-civil  war:
   returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  that  'individuals  in
   custody in Sri Lanka continue to be at risk of physical abuse,  including
   sexual violence, and that such risk is persecutory'.

7. The appellant emphasises that during his detention in June  2014  he  was
   accused of having a continuing involvement with the LTTE, and  asked  (as
   set out in his statement) to give  away  the  identities,  locations  and
   plans of the LTTE.  His explanation, that he had only a very  minor  role
   in the LTTE, for just a few months, dealing with small jobs  relating  to
   logistics, was not accepted.  He had been tortured to obtain  information
   about the current whereabouts of senior members of the LTTE, and its arms
   caches, neither of which he possessed.  The appellant's statement  stated
   that he was released on payment of a bribe but had signed what he thought
   was a confession document, written in Sinhala.  The appellant  relies  on
   the Secretary of State's concession in GJ that given  the  prevalence  of
   bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka, leaving through the airport  without
   difficulty was not  probative  of  a  lack  of  adverse  interest  in  an
   individual.

8.  The  appellant  relies  on  country  evidence,  including  that  of  the
   respondent's Country of Origin report, that the risk to those thought  to
   have ongoing LTTE links remained, again as set out by the Upper  Tribunal
   in its country guidance in GJ.  He notes that his  interrogation  was  as
   recent as 2014 and contends that he remains at risk.

Secretary of State's case

9. As already stated, the Secretary of State has chosen not  to  respond  to
   those submissions.  Her Country of Origin Unit has published  a  document
   entitled Tamil Separatism, Sri Lanka, August 2016, approved  on  13  July
   2016.  At section 6 of that document it indicates  some  improvement  but
   that Tamils continue to be  monitored,  and  human  rights  abuses  still
   occur, including torture.  Tamil returnees from overseas continue  to  be
   arrested at the airport, interrogated and detained.

10. I have regard to the severity of the appellant's scarring and  his  PTSD
   and depression.  Absent any submissions from the  respondent,  I  am  not
   satisfied that in his case, there are good reasons to consider  that  the
   persecution and serious harm he has suffered will not be repeated.

DECISION

11. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law and has been set aside. I remake the  decision  by  allowing
   the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.



Date: 4 August 2016                     Signed     Judith AJC Gleeson
                                        Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



