
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03504/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|On 20 February 2015          |
|On 11 February 2015                           |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                          mrs naima sleman alsalim
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Counsel instructed by Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case claims to be a citizen  of  the  Palestinian
    territories and she appealed  against  a  decision  by  the  respondent
    refusing her claim for asylum.  She claimed that she had a well-founded
    fear of persecution in  the  Palestinian  territories  because  of  her
    imputed political opinions and that the authority  of  the  Palestinian
    territories was unwilling or unable sufficiently to protect her.  It is
    not necessary for the purposes of this determination to  do  more  than
    summarise her claim.

 2. The appellant's appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy,
    sitting at Manchester Hearing  Centre  on  6  August  2014,  and  in  a
    determination signed the following day the judge dismissed  the  appeal
    in about as strong terms as is possible.  At  paragraph  14  the  judge
    found as follows:

         "Rarely in my judicial career have I encountered a  more  dishonest
         appellant than this one.  Her dishonesty is  so  comprehensive  and
         sustained that I cannot be satisfied even to the lower standard  as
         to her claimed identity, far less her nationality  or  events  that
         she says happened to her in the past.  I am  satisfied  to  a  high
         level of probability that the appellant is a Jordanian national, as
         are all her dependants."

 3. The judge then gave substantive reasons which  justified  the  findings
    that she made.  Were this all I would have no hesitation in  concluding
    that the findings she made are properly reasoned and the  determination
    itself does not contain on its face any arguable error of law.  However
    this appeal has not been brought on the basis of any  direct  challenge
    to the judge's findings.  What is  said  is  rather  that  the  judge's
    conduct during the hearing was such as to exhibit bias or at  the  very
    least the appearance of bias.  I have had  the  benefit  of  a  witness
    statement not just from  the  appellant  but  from  her  solicitor,  Mr
    Mahmood, who represented her before Judge Foudy as well as  a  response
    from the judge.  I was also given a further witness statement from both
    Mr Mahmood and the appellant, in Mr Mahmood's case dealing with some of
    the matters contained in the judge's  reply.   I  have  had  very  full
    regard to the statements made both by Mr Mahmood and also by the judge.
     I have also had regard to the notes made by the Presenting Officer who
    was present at the hearing although it is fair to say that  his  notes,
    perfectly properly, are less full than those of  Mr  Mahmood.   I  have
    also had regard to the Record of Proceedings.

 4. Permission to appeal  having  been  granted  by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Appleyard, a Rule 24 response was received on behalf  of
    the respondent in which it was stated (and this is  correct  because  I
    have seen the notes) that the minute of the Presenting  Officer  "makes
    no mention of any misconduct or  apparent  misconduct  by  the  judge".
    However it would be unlikely that it  would  because  this  was  not  a
    matter which directly affected the respondent.   I  do  not  doubt  the
    integrity of the Presenting Officer and it may well be  the  case  that
    had there been very obvious bias the Presenting Officer would have made
    a note of it, but the fact that he did not is not  necessarily,  in  my
    judgment, of decisive importance in this appeal.

 5. It is as I have already noted quite clear that the  judge's  conclusion
    was that the appellant was a thoroughly dishonest witness and  she  has
    given what on  its  face  are  compelling  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion, which was open to her.  What I have to  decide  however  is
    whether or not it is arguable  that  she  may  have  shown  during  the
    hearing (or given the appearance) that she had reached that conclusion,
    or at least started from the basis that the appellant's claim  was  one
    which could not succeed and that she had closed her mind to  any  other
    possibility.  It is not possible on the basis of the evidence which has
    been put before me to make a finding as to whether or not the judge had
    already made up her mind because part of the complaint relates  to  the
    manner in which questions were asked, in what is said to  have  been  a
    sarcastic tone, and what is said to have been the judge's inappropriate
    demeanour.  I have no reason  however  to  doubt  that  Mr  Mahmood  is
    sincere when he expresses  the  criticisms  which  he  believes  to  be
    justified and I note that at paragraph 6 of his first witness statement
    he refers to  the  "cynical  and  sarcastic  manner"  of  some  of  the
    questions asked by the judge which he  believed  were  akin  to  cross-
    examination.  It is also the case, according to Mr Mahmood  (and  as  I
    say I have no reason to doubt, whether well-founded or  not,  that  his
    criticism and his evidence is honestly given) that  (as  he  states  at
    paragraph 7 of his original witness statement), he sought to object  to
    the manner in which the trial was being conducted by the judge but,  he
    says, "I was denied the  opportunity  and  was  directed  to  make  any
    observations I had during my submissions".  He then says  that  he  was
    told when making these submissions and  raising  his  objections  again
    that he should "take it up with the Upper Tribunal".  He says that when
    he asked (he says  "pressed")  the  judge  to  make  a  record  of  his
    observation on the court file the judge responded by telling  him  that
    "what I record on the court file is a matter for me".   Although  Judge
    Foudy does not remember actually saying this, she has stated  that  she
    might have done so, because that is what she believes would have been a
    correct response. (In the judge's own words "I can well imagine that  I
    may have told a representative that what was recorded on the record  of
    proceedings was a matter for me as that is exactly what  I  believe  is
    correct".)

 6. In her comments regarding this witness statement the judge  has  stated
    among other matters that the questions that she had asked "could not be
    fairly described as cross-examination" but "were necessary  to  clarify
    some of the appellant's evidence only because  her  own  representative
    pointedly failed to deal with the central issues in  the  case  of  the
    true identity and nationality of the appellant" which  the  judge  then
    goes on to  suggest  Mr  Mahmood  had  "avoided...  because  they  were
    particularly weak parts of the appellant's asylum claim".  However,  in
    his further witness statement responding to the judge's observations Mr
    Mahmood points out  that  the  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
    identity and nationality were contained within a  statement  which  she
    had adopted in examination-in-chief.  (This  statement  is  within  the
    file and Mr Mahmood would appear to have been correct on  this  point.)
    It would seem that the person who  should  perhaps  more  appropriately
    have been testing the  appellant's  evidence  on  this  point  was  the
    Presenting Officer although it is certainly the case that  a  judge  is
    not necessarily precluded where some  parts  of  the  evidence  trouble
    him/her from raising these matters him/herself.  It is though important
    that when a judge does so this is done in a way that is  not  perceived
    to be combative.  It is unfortunate that although  the  judge,  as  she
    says in her response, considers that she has "developed a  rather  more
    tolerant attitude in court than many of my colleagues"  such  that  she
    "would suggest that I am regarded as  one  of  the  more  user-friendly
    judges in our  jurisdiction",  this  was  clearly  not  the  impression
    conveyed to Mr Mahmood.

 7. Although, as I have said, I  cannot  say  in  terms  that  the  judge's
    behaviour showed that she was definitely biased or had definitely  made
    her mind up, that is not the question I have to ask myself.  I have  in
    mind in particular the guidance given by the House of Lords in the well-
    known case of Magill v Porter [2002]  2  AC  357  in  which  the  court
    endorsed (with modification) the formulation adopted by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Re Medicaments (No.2) [2001] 1WLR 700 such that the  question
    that must now be asked is "whether  the  fair-minded  observer,  having
    considered the facts, would conclude that there was a real  possibility
    that the Tribunal was biased".

 8. So, although I cannot be  satisfied  that  the  judge  was  necessarily
    biased, having considered the evidence very carefully and in particular
    the evidence given by a practising solicitor whom I have no  reason  to
    believe is not at the very least sincere in  the  impression  which  he
    formed, I cannot rule out the serious possibility  that  a  fair-minded
    observer, having considered all the facts and having  been  present  at
    the hearing, might at the very least conclude that there  was  "a  real
    possibility" that the Tribunal was biased.  That is as I  have  already
    indicated a lower test than my finding that the Tribunal  was  actually
    biased but in these circumstances, without making a formal finding that
    the Tribunal actually displayed bias, nonetheless I conclude that I  am
    obliged to find that there was a  procedural  irregularity  within  the
    hearing (in that there may have been the appearance of bias) such  that
    the decision will have to be re-made.

 9. I now turn to consider  what  the  appropriate  course  is  and  in  my
    judgment, given my finding that there may have been the  appearance  of
    bias at the hearing, it must follow that the technical decision of this
    court must be that the appellant did not  receive  a  fair  trial.   In
    those circumstances I consider that the appropriate course is to  remit
    the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal where it can be re-heard  by
    a  judge  other  than  Judge  Foudy  and  I  will  so  order.   In  the
    circumstances of this appeal I will give  directions  that  the  appeal
    should be listed initially for a  case  management  conference  at  the
    Manchester Court Centre.

Decision

The  Upper  Tribunal  having  determined  that  there   was   a   procedural
irregularity in the hearing of this appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy is set aside and the  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester for  re-hearing
before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy.



Signed:

[pic]    Date: 17 February 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

