
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03517/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                 |
|On 7 March 2016                           |On 21 March 2016            |
|                                          |                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                    M M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain (Solicitor) Lei Dat and Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnston, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Knowles QC dated  4  August  2015.  The
    appeal relates to  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Birkby
    promulgated on 18 May 2015.  The Judge at the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    dismissed the appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

2.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal can be summarised as follows:

    1) The Judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
       situation in Libya had  not  changed  to  such  a  degree  that  the
       conclusions reached in the Country  Guidance  case  were  no  longer
       effective;
    2) The Judge had failed to engage properly with  the  country  material
       submitted;
    3) There were no reasons for dismissing the evidence. For  example  the
       Human Rights Watch report;
    4) The Country Guidance case was heard in November 2013 and matters had
       moved on significantly since then.




3.    At the hearing before me  Mr  Hussain  said  that  there  had  been  a
    material error of law in respect  of  the  assessment  of  Humanitarian
    Protection. He said he relied on the detailed  grounds  of  application
    which had been submitted to both the First-tier and the Upper Tier. The
    Judge had said that there had been no change in the situation since the
    Country Guidance decision but that was wrong. It was submitted that the
    Judge had made contradictory findings. At paragraph 48  the  Judge  had
    said there was indiscriminate violence but then  at  paragraph  50  had
    said there was not. The Country Guidance situation was  very  different
    at that time.

4.    Mr Hussain said that his second point  was  that  the  Judge  had  not
    engaged with the evidence in any event. There were a number of  reports
    that the Judge was provided with such as UN Reports, an Amnesty  Report
    and a Human Rights Watch  Report.  These  reports  had  post-dated  the
    Country Guidance. He submitted it was pertinent material  evidence.  It
    was necessary for the Judge to deal with it. Mr Hussain said he was not
    seeking to appeal on asylum grounds and clarified that the  appeal  was
    not based on  human  rights  grounds  either.  The  appeal  related  to
    humanitarian protection. He said the decision ought to be set aside and
    for there to be a rehearing.

5.    Ms Johnston said that she would be brief. She said she relied  on  the
    Rule 24 Reply. There was  nothing  irrational  about  the  findings  at
    paragraphs 47 and 48 of the Judge's decision and therefore there was no
    material error of law. She said that was all she wanted to say.

6.    Mr Hussain was invited to reply but declined the offer.

7.    I had reserved my decision.

8.    It is clear that the Judge has said  he  had  considered  all  of  the
    evidence at paragraph 38. He listed some  of  the  background  evidence
    reports at paragraph 48 of his decision. The difficulty which arises is
    that there is no real analysis or findings in respect of those  reports
    at paragraph 50 of the decision or elsewhere. In my  judgment  although
    the Judge was entitled to conclude that there was no sufficient  change
    since the Country Guidance he needed to set out why that was so.  It is
    of course the position that there has to be good reason to depart  from
    Country Guidance. In this case the Appellant's real ground of appeal is
    that there were good reasons put forward as to why the County  Guidance
    ought not to be followed. Those good reasons were in the  form  of  the
    various reports which were part of the background evidence presented to
    the Judge by the Appellant. The reports were all since the decision  in
    the Country Guidance.

9.    In my judgment there is a material error of law. The Judge has  failed
    to set out with adequate reasoning why the numerous  reports  submitted
    by the Appellant ought not to have led  to  his  appeal  succeeding  in
    respect of humanitarian protection.

10.   Mr Hussain made it clear that the  appeal  is  based  on  humanitarian
    protection issues only.

11.   I therefore disagree with the brief Rule 24 from  the  Respondent  and
    with the brief oral submission made by Ms  Johnston.  In  my  judgement
    there is a material error of law.

12.    Accordingly  I  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal.  There  shall  be  a
    rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal. The rehearing shall be restricted
    to humanitarian protection issues only. The  asylum  and  human  rights
    aspect of the appeal remain dismissed. In any event there was no appeal
    in respect of those aspects. The findings of fact made by the Judge  at
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall  also  remain.  In  particular  noting
    paragraph 46 of the Judge's decision. The only issue that the rehearing
    will consider is whether there is a sufficient risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence to this Appellant with findings already made.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law. I set it aside to the extent  referred  to  above.  There  shall  be  a
rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal in respect of  humanitarian  protection
issues only with preserved findings of fact.

An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                       Date: 7 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
