
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: AA/03703/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London           |Determination Promulgated |
|On 5 November 2014                     |On 7 November 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                        Appellant
                                     and

                        KAILAINAYAGI SIVAPATHASUNDRAM

                                                     Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr R Rai, instructed by Waran & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in  the
    determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. She has been in the UK  since
    2001 and she claimed asylum in 2011. Her  application  for  asylum  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 19  May  2014.  The  Secretary  of
    State also decided that the removal of the appellant would  not  breach
    her right to private and family life under Article 8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on both grounds. First-tier Tribunal Judge G A Black dismissed
    the appeal on asylum grounds  but  allowed  it  under  Article  8.  The
    decision in relation  to  the  asylum  issue  is  not  challenged.  The
    Secretary of State now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The application the subject of this appeal was made in 2011, before the
    introduction of the changes to  the  Immigration  Rules  introduced  by
    HC194 which came into effect on 9 July 2012.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge decided that as the application was made before 9 July  2012  the
    'new Rules' did not apply. The Judge went on to consider the Article  8
    appeal in accordance with the case law and outside of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The Secretary of State contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in so doing because she did not consider the approach taken
    by the Court of Appeal in Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558. Ms Sreeraman relied  on  paragraphs  40
    and 41 of the Court of Appeal's decision in Haleemudeen  and  submitted
    that the Judge materially erred in failing to consider the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

 4. However there is a tension between the decision in Haleemudeen and that
    of the Court of Appeal in Edgehill & Anor v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402. Ms Sreeraman  submitted  that  the
    decision in Edgehill was limited to private life and to  the  facts  of
    that case. She submitted that  the  transitional  provisions  of  HC194
    which were relied on by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Edgehill  were  only
    relevant where there is an equivalent  provision  in  the  'old  Rules'
    which covers and appellant's situation. She submitted that an Article 8
    application made prior to 9 July 2012 was not provided for in the Rules
    and  could  therefore  be  distinguished  from  Edgehill.  She  further
    submitted that the Judge's error was material  as  the  Judge  had  not
    undertaken an adequate assessment of the public interest.

 5. Mr Rai submitted that the Judge was right to consider the appeal  under
    Article 8 and  not  under  the  'new  Rules'.  He  submitted  that  the
    arguments made by Ms Sreeraman were similar to those  put  forward  and
    rejected in Edgehill. He submitted that the Court  in  Haleemudeen  did
    not consider the transitional provisions which apply in this  case.  He
    submitted that there was no material error in any event  as  the  Judge
    considered all relevant factors and that, even if the  Judge  had  been
    obliged to consider paragraph 276ADE of the 'new Rules' she could  have
    decided to  go  on  to  consider  Article  8  due  to  the  exceptional
    circumstances in this case.

 6. I accept Mr Rai's submission that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Edgehill
    rejected submissions similar to those put forward by Ms  Sreeraman.  In
    Edgehill Jackson LJ asked whether it is lawful to reject an  Article  8
    application made before 9 July 2012 in reliance  upon  the  applicant's
    failure to achieve 20 years' residence, as specified in the new  rules.
    The relevant extracts from his  judgment  under  that  heading  are  as
    follows;

      "24.     Mr Charles Bourne, for the respondent, points  out  that  the
      old rule 276B provided that  14  years'  continuous  residence  was  a
      substantive ground  upon  which  the  Secretary  of  State  may  grant
      indefinite  leave  to  remain.  The  new  rule  276ADE,  by  contrast,
      specifies requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain
      under ECHR article 8. He goes on to submit  that  an  application  for
      leave to remain under ECHR article 8 is not an application  under  the
      rules. Therefore the second paragraph of the  transitional  provisions
      does not apply to it.


      25.     This interpretation, which is  advanced  upon  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State, is one of some subtlety. I must  confess  that  it
      did not occur to me when I was reading  the  transitional  provisions.
      Since rule 276ADE  regulates  article  8  applications,  it  might  be
      thought that such applications are made under the rules.


      ...
      29.     Aided by this guidance, I now return to the central  issue  in
      the two current appeals. Mr  Bourne  submits  that  applications  made
      under article 8 before 9th July 2012 did not fall  under  any  of  the
      Immigration Rules, either old or new. The decision maker simply had to
      apply article 8, taking into account the wealth of  guidance  provided
      by Strasbourg and the domestic courts.


      30.     The next stage in  Mr  Bourne's  argument  is  that  appellate
      tribunals make article 8 decisions by reference to the  current  state
      of affairs, not  by  reference  to  the  state  of  affairs  when  the
      Secretary of State reached her decision. In both of the present  cases
      the current state of affairs included new  rule  276ADE,  providing  a
      requirement for 20 years' continuous residence.


      31.     I admire the  dexterity  of  this  argument.  Nevertheless  it
      produces  the  bizarre  result  that  the  new   rules   impact   upon
      applications made before 9th July 2012, even though  the  transitional
      provisions expressly state that they do not do so.


      32.     The Immigration Rules  need  to  be  understood  not  only  by
      specialist immigration counsel, but also by ordinary people  who  read
      the rules and try to abide by them. I do not think  that  Mr  Bourne's
      interpretation  of  the  transitional  provisions  accords  with   the
      interpretation which any ordinary reader would  place  upon  them.  To
      adopt the language of Lord Brown in Mahad, "the natural  and  ordinary
      meaning of the words, recognising that  they  are  statements  of  the
      Secretary of State's administrative policy," is that the Secretary  of
      State will not place reliance on  the  new  rules  when  dealing  with
      applications made before 9th July 2012.


      33.     Accordingly, my answer to the question posed in this  part  of
      the  judgment  is  no.  That  answer  is  subject  to  one   important
      qualification. A mere passing reference to the 20 years requirement in
      the new rules will not have the effect of invalidating  the  Secretary
      of State's  decision.  The  decision  only  becomes  unlawful  if  the
      decision maker relies  upon  rule  276ADE  (iii)  as  a  consideration
      materially affecting the decision."

 7. The Court of Appeal in Edgehill therefore considered  the  transitional
    provisions and similar submissions to those made by Ms  Sreeraman.  The
    Court of Appeal's decision is clear. In a case such as this  where  the
    application was made before 9 July  2012  the  transitional  provisions
    meant that the application, and the appeal, should be considered  under
    the 'old Rules'. The First-tier Tribunal Judge therefore made no  error
    in deciding to go straight to an Article 8 assessment in this case.

 8. In any event I also accept Mr Rai's submission that in  her  assessment
    of Article  8  the  Judge  took  all  relevant  factors  into  account,
    including the finding that, although it became apparent  in  2005  that
    the EEA family permit on which the appellant had  entered  the  UK  was
    false, the appellant  believed  it  to  have  been  genuine;  that  the
    Secretary of State took no steps thereafter to remove the appellant,  a
    period of over  nine  years,  during  which  she  continued  to  report
    regularly as required by the Secretary of State. The  Judge  also  took
    account of the fact that the appellant had no meaningful  ties  in  Sri
    Lanka as she had not lived there since 1998.  These  were  all  factors
    which could have led the Judge to conclude  that  there  were  arguably
    good grounds for considering the  appeal  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules had she considered them. These were also relevant factors  to  be
    taken into account in  the  Judge's  proportionality  assessment  under
    Article 8. The Judge's assessment under Article 8 was within the  range
    of permissible decisions open to her.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

Signed
                         Date: 5 November 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



