
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03628/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2018                            |On 13 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    mr am
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Rashid, Counsel, instructed by ASR Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Malik of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  12
    June 2018 dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 24 February 2015 refusing his protection claim.

2.   Amplifying the written grounds, Mr Rashid submitted  that  the  judge's
    decision was vitiated by legal error in two respects:

    (1)  in erroneously assessing credibility; and

    (2)   in  failing  to  conduct  a  proper  Article  8   proportionality
         assessment.

3.   The main target of ground (1) concerns the judge's analysis as set  out
    in paragraph 42:

         "42. The appellant now says an incident occurred in  2012  when  he
             and his family were shot at whilst driving home by a man on  a
             motorbike.  Yet the appellant made no mention of this incident
             in his AI.  Whilst I have considered his explanation(s) as  to
             why, I find this to be self-serving  -  and  even  if  it  was
             raised as part of his (ex-) wife's claim, I am not hearing  an
             appeal for his wife.  If the appellant genuinely had  concerns
             that this incident placed him  (and  his  family  in  danger),
             there is no reasonable explanation as to why, even if  he  was
             stressed at his AI, he did not raise it with the respondent in
             the intervening years.  That he has only made reference to  it
             in his statement now causes me to find it  is  not  reasonably
             likely to be true."

4.   In seeking to develop ground (1) the written grounds  sought  to  argue
    that since the appellant had said he only relied on his latest  witness
    statement of 21 May 2018 the judge erred  in  relying  on  his  earlier
    statements.  That submission has the plain defect that the  appellant's
    previous statements were part of the evidence.  Whether or not  arising
    from recognised weakness of this submission, Mr Rashid's main focus was
    on a different point, namely that if  the  judge  was  minded  to  take
    account of the absence  of  any  mention  in  the  appellant's  earlier
    witness statements of the  2012  incident,  he  should  have  put  this
    discrepancy to the appellant.  The simple answer to this submission  is
    contained in paragraph 29 of the judge's decision:

         "29. It was put to the appellant, at paragraph 5 of his  statement,
             he had mentioned a man in 2012 on a motorbike.  He  was  asked
             why he had not mentioned this in his AI.  He said he  was  not
             able to see the person on the motorbike as they were wearing a
             helmet; he could not find out why they wanted to kill them; he
             was confused and only answered the questions asked of him.  It
             was put to the appellant at Q2 AI, he was asked why  he  could
             not return to Pakistan; he had mentioned all the reasons,  but
             not mentioned the 2012 incident.  He said he was stressed  out
             on medication, separated from his (ex-) wife and children  and
             not able to sleep.  He apologised for not mentioning  it,  but
             said the incidents were real.  It had been raised  at  the  FC
             and  found  the  incident  had  happened;  his  children   and
             witnessed it; they were quite young at the time,  but  it  had
             not  gone  from  their  mind.   (I   asked   the   appellant's
             representative whether he had a report of  this,  but  he  did
             not, nor did the appellant)."

5.   From this it is clear the discrepancy was raised with the appellant  by
    the HOPO and hence there was no  procedural  unfairness  in  the  judge
    taking the view that the issue had been put to the appellant  and  that
    the latter  had  been  afforded  a  proper  opportunity  to  provide  a
    satisfactory explanation but had failed to do so.  At paras 38  and  39
    the judge also recorded the parties' respective  submission  about  the
    significance or otherwise of this discrepancy.  It is to be observed as
    well that the appellant made no mention of the 2012 incident either  in
    his AI or in his statement of 26 May 2018.

6.   I see no force in the contention that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account that the respondent, by granting the appellant's  wife  settled
    status, had accepted that the 2012 incident was credible.  Paragraph 32
    only confirms she had mentioned it as part of her claim.

7.   The appellant's grounds also take issue with the judge's  treatment  of
    the witness evidence.  The judge was aware  that  Mr  M  S  Sharif  had
    mentioned the 2012 incident in his witness statement.   The  judge  was
    entitled to attach limited weight to it.

8.    The  judge's  assessment  of  credibility  was  multi-layered  and  at
    paragraphs 42-49 properly identified a number  of  inconsistencies  and
    implausibilities,  some  of  which  were  assessed   as   having   been
    satisfactorily addressed in the appellant's grounds.   The  judge  also
    gave sound reasons for finding the appellant's documents unreliable.

9.   In  short  the  judge's  adverse  assessment  of  credibility  was  not
    vitiated by legal error.

10.  Turning to ground (2), the grounds contend that  the  judge  failed  to
    follow Court of Appeal authority as set out in MS (Ivory Coast)  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 133 holding that  where  family  proceedings  are  underway  a
    period of discretionary leave should be granted to  enable  the  person
    being removed to remain lawfully in the  UK  to  participate  in  these
    proceedings.

11.  In my judgment the grounds reflect a misunderstanding of the  ratio  of
    MS.  As the Court of Appeal made clear in DS (Jamaica) [2010] EWCA  Civ
    0007 there is no universal obligation that a  period  of  discretionary
    leave must be granted where family proceedings remain  unresolved.   In
    RS (Immigration and family court proceedings) India [2012]  UKUT  00218
    (IAC) the UT identified a number of questions that should be asked when
    a claimant seeks to argue that the existence of  pending  family  court
    proceedings would breach his Article 8 rights.  Whilst  the  judge  did
    not refer to MS or any other case law, I see  no  legal  error  in  his
    assessment at paragraph 59.  At paragraph 59 the judge stated:

         "59. It is not for me to predict the outcome of the FC  proceedings
             and whilst the FC hearing has now been put back to  4  October
             2018, given the appeal before me proceeded at the  request  of
             the appellant, I do not consider this is a case in  which  the
             appellant should be granted some form  of  leave  pending  the
             outcome of the FC proceedings, in circumstances where  he  has
             had no contact with his children for a number  of  years.   It
             may be the appellant's wish to have contact with his children,
             but at the CMR his stated intention then was  to  see  them  a
             minimum of every month.  Weighing up his  intentions,  I  find
             this in itself  does  not  render  the  respondent's  decision
             disproportionate, nor is  there  evidence  before  me  now  to
             suggest the status quo regarding the children  is  detrimental
             to their best interests."

12.  It was open  to  the  judge  to  weigh  in  the  balance  the  evidence
    indicating that not only had the appellant not had any contact with his
    children since December 2013/June 2014  but  that  in  the  context  of
    family proceedings there was nothing to suggest that he sought anything
    more than indirect and limited contact at periodic intervals.   It  was
    also open to the judge to weigh in the balance what  the  evidence  was
    assessed as indicating  regarding  the  appellant's  intentions,  which
    included his stated intention to go to the US on a Green Card.

13.  The judge was also entitled to conclude that  these  circumstances  did
    not indicate  that  the  appellant's  removal  from  the  UK  would  be
    detrimental to the children's best interests.  It is not disputed  that
    he had perpetrated domestic violence on the children's  mother.   There
    was no evidence before the judge to indicate that the  children  wanted
    contact with the appellant.

14.  Far from a parent being left in limbo by the  unresolved  family  court
    proceedings, the appellant had made very concrete plans to live in  the
    US.

15.  For the above reasons I consider the appellant's second ground  is  not
    made out either.

16.  As regards the other matters raised in the grounds, none  of  them  has
    any degree of cogency.

17.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the appeal  must  stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 7 November 2018

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

