
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03226/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                [Bolanle o.]
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mozham, Schaw Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 30 June 2015 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker granted the
    appellant permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    decision and reasons statement of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman
    that was promulgated on 3 June 2015.

 2. When granting permission, Judge Zucker commented:

         "2.  The grounds submit that in issue was the  nationality  of  the
         Appellant's child (said to be a German National).  It is  submitted
         that there was a copy of the child's German passport in the  bundle
         but that the Judge made no reference to it.

         3.   The Judge found that  that  passport  of  the  child's  father
         suggested, if he had any EEA nationality at all,  he  was  "Dutch".
         (In fact it may say "Deutsch" i.e. German).  It is clear  that  the
         judge found the evidence unsatisfactory but it is arguable that the
         judge should have had regard to the child's passport given the  EEA
         law implications following any finding which might have  been  made
         that the Appellant's child was an EEA national."

 3. At the start of the hearing, Mr Mills conceded that Judge Chapman erred
    for the reasons given by Judge Zucker when granting permission.

 4. Mr Mills explained that it had not been possible to concede the  appeal
    when drafting the rule 24 notice on 17 July 2015 because the author  of
    that notice did not have sight of the appellant's  bundle;  but  having
    had sight of that bundle Mr Mills acknowledged that it contained a copy
    of the German passport of the appellant's son.  Mr  Mills  agreed  that
    Judge Chapman had made no finding as to whether the appellant's son was
    German, or what rights he and the appellant might have as a result.  Mr
    Mills accepted that was a material error since the  grounds  of  appeal
    and the statement of additional grounds mentioned EEA rights  and  they
    would have been a relevant factor in the assessment of the  appellant's
    private and family life rights.

 5. Before accepting this concession, I discussed Judge Chapman's  findings
    at paragraph  70  regarding  the  nationality  of  the  father  of  the
    appellant's  son.   In  that  paragraph  Judge  Chapman  rejected   the
    photocopy evidence of the  father's  passport  on  the  basis  that  it
    described the father as Dutch and not German.  Mr Mills  accepted  that
    it was not open to Judge Chapman to make such a finding because it  was
    clearly based on a misunderstanding that  Deutsch  is  the  German  for
    German; it is  reasonable  to  expect  a  judge  to  be  aware  of  the
    nationalities of the Member States even when untranslated, particularly
    in the specialist immigration chamber.

 6. If this finding had been sound, I might have found there to  have  been
    no error because if the evidence that the father was a German  national
    was unreliable then it would be unlikely that the child would be German
    by descent.  But that finding is not sound for the reasons I  discussed
    with Mr Mills.  Therefore, I accept the concession and  find  there  is
    legal error in Judge Chapman's decision and reasons statement  such  as
    to require it to be set aside.

 7. Before moving to consider how to remake the decision, I record that  Mr
    Mozham brought the original  passport  to  the  hearing  and  Mr  Mills
    confirmed that it was a German passport issued for the appellant's  son
    (who was also present at the hearing).  I made not finding  on  whether
    the  child  is  a  German  national  but  it  would  appear  from   the
    conversation that the point would be conceded by the Home Office at any
    re-hearing as the evidence had been produced.  It will  be  appropriate
    for the same evidence to be provided at the next hearing for a  finding
    to be made if case there is no concession.

 8. I discussed with both representatives how the decision might be remade.
     Both requested that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for findings to be made on the relevant issues.  As  no  challenge  was
    brought to Judge Chapman's finding on the protection issues, Mr  Mozham
    accepted that the issues in any  rehearing  would  be  limited  to  the
    following.

          a. Issues relating to  whether  the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             residence as a result of her son being an EEA national.   This
             will of course depend on whether the  appellant's  son  has  a
             right  of  residence  under  a  provision  of  the  2006   EEA
             Regulations, which is by no means obvious since his father  is
             no longer resident here and it is unclear how  he  might  have
             obtained a retained or derivative right of residence given his
             young age and lack of financial evidence.

          b. Issues relating to whether the  appellant's  proposed  removal
             would be a disproportionate interference in  her  private  and
             family life rights and those of her daughters and son.

 9. These issues will need to be explored carefully, particularly in  light
    of the Court of Appeal's reference of certain questions to the Court of
    Justice of the European Union in SSHD v NA (Pakistan) [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    140, which might  have  a  bearing  on  the  outcome.  Those  questions
    consider the interplay of  article  8  ECHR  and  EEA  nationality  and
    residence rights.

10. As there is a need to make fresh  findings  of  fact  and  because  the
    appellant has been deprived from such findings being made by the First-
    tier Tribunal, this is an appropriate case to remit.  I direct that the
    appeal is limited to the issues identified above and that it  is  heard
    by a judge other than Judge Chapman.

11. It is likely that additional evidence will  be  required,  particularly
    about the relationship between the appellant's son and his  father,  so
    that fresh findings can be made.  For  the  sake  of  clarity,  I  give
    permission for the parties to submit such further evidence as they  may
    wish in relation to the issues to  be  considered  so  long  as  it  is
    provided at least seven calendar days before the rehearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Chapman contains an error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

I remit the appeal for a fresh decision as per the directions  in  paragraph
10 above.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
