

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/03251/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 September 2014                          |On 30 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     SAR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                               Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Waithe, instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a national of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against  a  decision  made  by  the  respondent  to  refuse  his
   application for asylum and to remove him from the UK. Judge of the First-
   tier Tribunal Beg dismissed the appeal and the appellant now appeals with
   leave to this Tribunal.

2.    The appellant claims that he  and  MAK,  who  is  also  a  citizen  of
   Pakistan and who is his dependant for the purposes of this appeal, are at
   risk of persecution in Pakistan because of their  sexuality.  They  claim
   have met in a nightclub in the UK in December 2012 and to  have  begun  a
   relationship in January 2013. They entered into a civil partnership on 11
   September 2013.

3.    The Judge heard evidence from the appellant, MAK and a man  who  lives
   at the same address as the appellant. The Judge found that the  appellant
   and MAK were not credible and did not accept their account that they  are
   in a genuine relationship. She considered the case of  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
   UKSC 31 and went on  to  find  that,  even  if  they  are  in  a  genuine
   relationship, they would be able to  live  discreetly  in  Pakistan.  She
   found that there was no evidence that they would live discreetly only for
   fear of persecution, they would do so because of fear of causing distress
   to their families and  that  they  could  relocate  to  another  part  of
   Pakistan away from their immediate families.

4.    There are five grounds of appeal. At the hearing Mr  Waithe  submitted
   that these grounds  of  appeal  can  be  summarised  as  challenging  the
   credibility findings  and  the  Judge's  application  of  the  background
   evidence.

5.    Mr Waithe submitted that the civil partnership certificate  creates  a
   legal presumption that the civil partnership is valid and that it is  for
   the respondent to produce evidence to rebut that presumption. However  Ms
   Everett submitted that the marriage is at the heart of the  asylum  claim
   and that the Judge made extensive credibility  findings  in  relation  to
   that marriage and that she was entitled to do so. She submitted that  the
   law as  it  applies  to  sham  marriages  under  EEA  law  is  completely
   different. I agree with this submission. The appellant claims that he  is
   at risk in Pakistan because he  is  in  a  gay  relationship.  The  Judge
   considered the appellant's evidence along with that of MAK and  concluded
   that they were not credible and did not accept their  account  that  they
   are in a genuine relationship. This is not a case in  which  there  is  a
   shift in the burden of proof. It is for the appellant to  establish  that
   he as at risk of persecution. The Judge was entitled to make findings  on
   the basis of the evidence before her that the appellant is not at risk of
   persecution as his relationship is not genuine.

6.    In granting permission to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
   suggested that the Judge may have erred in failing  to  consider  whether
   the mere fact that a person has entered into a civil partnership will led
   to persecution in  Pakistan.  However  the  Judge  rejected  all  of  the
   evidence from the appellant and MAK  as  to  their  dealings  with  their
   families in Pakistan. The Judge rejected their claims to have told  their
   families about the relationship or the civil partnership.  There  was  no
   evidence before the Judge that anyone in Pakistan would  know  about  the
   civil partnership and nothing before the Judge to justify a finding  that
   the  fact  of  the  civil  partnership  alone,  in  the  context  of  the
   credibility findings,  would  be  enough  to  indicate  a  real  risk  of
   persecution in Pakistan.

7.    Mr Waithe submitted that the Judge erred in making findings  based  on
   her view as to the plausibility of the appellant's  account.  Ms  Everett
   accepted that some of the Judge's findings were based on plausibility but
   submitted that the Judge gave cogent reasons for these findings and  also
   made extensive findings on credibility  based  on  discrepancies  in  the
   account.

8.     The  Judge  did  make  some  findings  based  on  her  views  as   to
   plausibility. If such findings are not reasoned they could amount  to  an
   error of law. However I am satisfied that the Judge did  properly  reason
   these findings. For example,  the  Judge  gave  reasons  for  finding  it
   implausible that Shoaib, a man who was said to be 'narrow minded',  would
   go to a gay nightclub with the appellant, who Shoaib did not  believe  to
   be gay [25][26]. The Judge considered the claim that  the  appellant  and
   MAK slept in the same bed and kissed whilst Shoaib slept on the floor  in
   the same room to be implausible. However  she  also  based  this  adverse
   credibility finding on a significant discrepancy  in  the  evidence;  MAK
   said that Shoaib was in the  same  room  but  the  appellant,  in  cross-
   examination, said that he was in a different room [27].  The  Judge  also
   gave reasons for not accepting as credible the claim that MAK proposed to
   the appellant after meeting twice.

9.    Mr  Waithe  also  submitted  that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  the
   appellant's account as to the actions  of  his  parents  implausible.  He
   submitted that the Judge could not  put  herself  in  the  place  of  the
   appellant's parents. The appellant submitted a newspaper article said  to
   have been placed by  his  parents  which  said  that  they  disowned  and
   disinherited him because of his 'disobedience'. The Judge found that this
   was a 'cynical attempt  by  the  appellant  and  his  family  to  provide
   contrived evidence to bolster his application for asylum' [35]. The Judge
   gave two reasons for this finding. Firstly that there was  a  discrepancy
   between the evidence of the appellant and MAK as to the reaction  of  the
   appellant's family to the news of the  civil  partnership.  Secondly  the
   Judge did not find it plausible that the appellant's  family  would  have
   drawn attention to the appellant's  'disobedience'  and  raise  questions
   about his homosexuality. I am satisfied that this was a properly reasoned
   finding open to he Judge based on the evidence before her.

10. The Judge made many other findings as to credibility.  For  example  the
   Judge, as she was entitled to do so,  took  account  of  the  immigration
   status of the  appellant  and  MAK  when  they  entered  into  the  civil
   partnership and claimed asylum  [38].  She  found  that  the  appellant's
   credibility was damaged by his failure to claim asylum in the  UK  before
   MAK's visit to Pakistan in September 2013. She took account, as  she  was
   entitled to do so, of the fact that the appellant and MAK  had  temporary
   leave to remain in the UK, as students, when they entered into the  civil
   partnership. She further took account  of  the  fact  that  by  then  the
   appellant had dropped out of university. The Judge also took  account  of
   the discrepancy between the evidence of the appellant and that of MAK  in
   relation to their contact with the appellant's family in  Pakistan  [34].
   There was a further significant discrepancy in that the  hospital  letter
   from Pakistan, produced to support the appellant's  claim  that  MAK  was
   beaten by his father and brother when he told them that he was gay and in
   a civil partnership, actually says that the appellant was  injured  as  a
   result of being captured by terrorists and attacked.

11. Mr Waithe submitted that the Judge erred in making  findings  about  the
   issue of the appellant's landlord. I do not agree. The appellant produced
   a witness who said that he shared a house with the appellant and MAK  who
   shared a room and the Judge was entitled to find  as  she  did  that  the
   witness gave contradictory evidence and that his evidence was damaged  as
   a result.

12. Mr Waithe submitted that the Judge erred in relying on only one part  of
   the background evidence. The Judge referred  to  the  Country  of  Origin
   Report (COIR) of 9 August 2013 where she said it  states  that,  although
   consensual same sex  conduct  is  a  criminal  offence  in  Pakistan,  in
   practice the government rarely prosecutes  cases  and  that  the  state's
   wilful blindness has provided enough  space  for  gays  and  lesbians  to
   socialize and even live together discreetly as couples  [39].  The  Judge
   has accurately summarised the COIR report and Mr Waithe did not  rely  on
   any particular part of the COIR report which does not  reflect  what  the
   Judge said.

13. Ms Everett accepted that the Judge did not make any discrete finding  as
   to whether the appellant is gay. However she submitted that the Judge did
   not need to as she considered the case in the  alternative  at  paragraph
   41. Further she submitted that even if the Judge erred in  not  making  a
   clear finding that the appellant is gay it is not material. I agree  with
   these submissions.

14. The Judge found at paragraph 41 that, even if the appellant and MAK  are
   in a relationship they could live discreetly or relocate. In making  this
   finding the Judge took account of the background evidence  and  the  fact
   that neither the appellant nor MAK had ever lived openly as  gay  men  in
   Pakistan. The Judge found that they  would  live  discreetly  because  of
   social pressures and not to avoid persecution. I am satisfied  that  this
   finding was open to the Judge on the evidence. Applying  HJ  (Iran)  this
   finding is sufficient to show that the appellant has  not  established  a
   well-founded fear of persecution.

15.  In summary I am satisfied that the Judge did not err  in  her  approach
   to the evidence or the application of  the  background  evidence  and  HJ
   (Iran) and that she made a decision which was open to her on all  of  the
   evidence before her.

Conclusion:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

Signed
                               Date:  29 October 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).

