
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03993/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2015                           |On 26 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                Fahmida Begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Thathall, UK Immigration Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Fahmida Begum, was born on 3 June 1956 and is  a  female
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  6
    March 2013 as a family visitor.  She claimed asylum but her application
    was refused on 31 May 2014 when a decision was also made to remove  her
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions under Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The appellant appealed  against  that
    decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hillis)  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 12 September 2014, dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I am satisfied that the grounds of  appeal  at  paragraphs  [1]  -  [4]
    amount to no more than a disagreement with the findings of  the  judge.
    There is nothing in the judge's determination to indicate that  he  did
    not consider all the evidence in reaching his determination and  I  can
    identify no error of  law  in  the  manner  in  which  he  treated  the
    appellant's own written evidence.  The focus of the appeal before me at
    Bradford on 18 February 2015 was what Judge Hillis says in his decision
    at [33]:

         There is before me a letter from Dr Britto consultant  psychiatrist
         at Britto Psychiatry Limited  addressed  to  Dr  Mughal  at  Mughal
         Medical Centre dated 26 July 2014.  It is signed by Dr  Britto  and
         states that he is a consultant psychiatrist at the BMI Huddersfield
         Hospital and Cygnet  Hospital  Bierly.   It  is  conceded  by  both
         parties to this appeal that it is not a formal report  and  I  note
         here that it was not addressed to the Tribunal, it does not contain
         a required declaration that he is aware of his duty to the Tribunal
         to be independent and does not  provide  a  detailed  list  of  his
         qualifications and experience.  There is no indication on the  face
         of the letter the doctor is aware that this letter has been  served
         in support of the appellant's application or that  it  is  intended
         for  use  in  any  court  proceedings.   I,  therefore,  place   no
         evidential weight on its contents.

 3. Mr Thathall, for the appellant, submitted that the judge was  wrong  to
    have placed no weight on the report.  The letter in question  is  dated
    26 July 2014 and follows on from a number of previous letters from  the
    same doctor.  I note from the letter that  Dr  Britto  found  that  the
    appellant "appeared less bemused and bewildered as compared to previous
    occasions."  She told the doctor that she could not look after herself.
     Dr Britto reiterated his previous advice that the  appellant  required
    care and support  from  either  family  members  or  in  a  residential
    setting.  He noted that "her mental state and capacity  fluctuates  and
    thus there are times when she is not capable of  providing  information
    in relation to any potential proceedings."

 4. Factually, the judge's observations at [33] are accurate.   The  letter
    from Dr Britto does not contain any declaration as to his  independence
    or duty to the Tribunal.   However,  it  is  clear  that  the  previous
    letters, written in a similar form,  from  the  same  doctor  had  been
    accepted by a previous Tribunal.  Whilst I accept that the  judge  may,
    for the reasons which he has given, have placed limited weight  on  the
    document the indication in his determination is that he has ignored  it
    entirely, having placed "no evidential  weight  on  its  contents."   I
    consider that may have been an error  of  law.   However,  I  retain  a
    discretion as to whether I should set aside a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and, in this instance and notwithstanding the  manner  in
    which the judge has treated Dr Britto's report, I decline  to  exercise
    that discretion by setting aside the determination.  I say that for the
    following reason.  This is a "medical" Article 3/Article 8  ECHR  case.
    The judge noted [26] that the appellant's  claim  did  not  engage  the
    Refugee Convention or  Qualification  Directive.   There  was  also  no
    suggestion that the appellant met the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules (in particular, paragraph 276ADE of Appendix FM).   Further,  the
    appellant does not appear to suggest that her medical condition is such
    as to engage the high threshold of N [2005] UKHL 31.  As I  have  noted
    above, Dr Britto  in  his  letter  of  26  July  2014  noted  that  the
    appellant's condition had improved.  She had no suicidal ideation.  The
    conclusion of his letter does  no  more  than  suggest  that  her  oral
    evidence (if she were required to give it at the forthcoming First-tier
    Tribunal hearing) might be affected  by  her  medical  condition.   The
    doctor did note that there was some evidence of self-neglect  and  poor
    motivation and that  she  had  also  suffered  from  severe  depressive
    episodes in the past.  However, as the recent decision in the Court  of
    Appeal of GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40  reiterates,  where  a  medical
    condition does not justify leave under Article 3 ECHR it makes no sense
    for it to be capable of justifying leave under Article 8.  I find  that
    there was nothing at all in  Dr  Britto's  letter  which  would  engage
    Article 3 or, equally, would give rise to a grant of relief for medical
    reasons under Article 8.  The letter  contains  no  firm  prognosis  or
    diagnosis of the appellant's condition and  it  is  apparent  from  the
    determination [35] that, although he says that he did not attach weight
    to Dr Britto's letter, the judge did have  regard  to  the  appellant's
    "not uncommon medical conditions associated  with  age."   The  judge's
    finding that there was "no reliable evidence before me  to  show  there
    was anything in the appellant's medical conditions which would  prevent
    adequate maintenance of her conditions in Pakistan" is entirely, in  my
    opinion, accurate.

 5. As the Court of Appeal in GS  (India)  held,  Article  8  requires  "an
    additional factor to be weighed in the balance" where a  medical  claim
    under Article 3 has been rejected ([86], quoting MM  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 279).  As the court noted [87] "a specific case has to be made
    under Article 8."  The additional factor in  the  appellant's  case  is
    that she has a family life in the  United  Kingdom.   However,  as  the
    judge noted, no element  of  that  family  life  had  been  capable  of
    enabling the appellant to succeed under Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules.  Leaving aside  her  medical  condition,  it  follows  from  the
    unexceptional family life aspects of her case should not, having failed
    to satisfy the Immigration Rules, allow her to succeed under Article  8
    outside the Rules.  That is the point which Judge Hillis  has  made  at
    [37], relying on the authority of Gulshan (Article 8-new  rules-correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).   In my opinion, even if the judge had
    accepted everything said by Dr Britto in his July 2014 letter, he would
    still have dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  In any event, as
    I have noted above, Dr Britto's letter indicates an improvement in  the
    appellant's condition and seeks to address her ability to  give  cogent
    oral evidence; it provides  no  support  for  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 6. In the circumstances, I find that the appeal should be dismissed.

DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.


Signed        Date 25 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
