








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03009/2014
                                                               AA/03118/2014
                                                               AA/03119/2014
                                                               AA/03120/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 20 January 2015                  |On: 6 February 2015                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Mrs Oluwatoyin Omolara Albert Shoyombo
                       Master Olajiire Albert Shoyombo
                     Master Oluwafikunmi Albert Shoyombo
                       Master Opeyemi Albert Shoyombo
                        no anonymity directions made

                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms N Bustani, counsel (instructed by Paul John & Co)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  "the
    secretary of state" and to the respondents as "the claimants."


 2. The first claimant is the mother of the other  claimants.  She  entered
    the UK on 13 May 2005 as a visitor together with her two sons,  Olajire
    and Oluwafikunmi. They overstayed  their  leave  which  expired  on  29
    October 2005. She became pregnant with her third  child.  Opeyemi,  who
    was born on 20 March 2010. She maintained that  she  has  lost  contact
    with her husband.


 3. In a determination promulgated by First-tier Tribunal Judge Afako on 22
    June 2014, he allowed the appeals under Article 8. He  found  that  the
    first claimant could  not  make  good  a  claim  by  reference  to  the
    immigration rules. She was  unable  to  derive  any  benefit  from  the
    provisions of EX.1 (a)(ii)(cc) and (ii) as she had overstayed in the UK
    for a significant period, having entered as a visitor.  Nor  could  she
    meet the requirements for private life under paragraph 276ADE.


 4. He then had regard to "Article  8  consideration"  [31].  This  was  an
    appropriate case in which to consider Article 8 by  reference  to  "the
    national jurisprudence." He stated that "the considerations are whether
    it is reasonable to remove the mother of two children who  are  settled
    in  this  country  in  circumstances  where  the  mother  has   primary
    responsibility for the upbringing of the children."


 5. Judge Afako had already found that the second and third claimants  were
    entitled to indefinite leave to remain here by reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE of the rules [26]. The secretary of  state  has  not  sought  to
    appeal against that finding.


 6. In considering the mother's appeal with regard to Article 8 as well  as
    the youngest child, he stated that the focus must be on  the  children,
    whose best interests constitute a primary consideration. The  claimants
    live as  a  family  unit.  There  are  uncertainties  in  the  evidence
    regarding the children's father. He does not have leave  to  remain  in
    the UK and his stay is precarious. He did not find the evidence of  the
    first claimant in relation to her husband to be credible. She sought to
    downplay the level of contact she has with him in this country [32].


 7. Both parties accepted that the Judge erred in stating  that  the  first
    claimant's appeal  under  Article  8  "by  reference  to  the  national
    jurisprudence" was to be considered on  the  basis  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable to remove her as the mother of two children settled  in  the
    UK where she has primary responsibility for their upbringing.


 8. However, in granting permission to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Brunnen stated that the Judge may have posed an incorrect threshold for
    the Article 8 assessment in this  case.  The  Judge  did  not  identify
    circumstances that were compelling or which rendered the result of  the
    mother and children's decisions  under  the  Immigration  Rules  unduly
    harsh.


 9. I found that the Judge did not properly assess the circumstances  which
    would render their removal with their mother to be  "unduly  harsh"  as
    opposed  to  merely  unreasonable.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was accordingly set aside following a hearing on 18  September
    2014.


10. The parties submitted that the  Upper  Tribunal  should  make  a  fresh
    decision,  subject  to  preserving  the  findings  of  fact.    Various
    directions were made including the filing and serving of  any  updating
    evidence.


    Hearing on 20 January 2015


11. The claimant attended the hearing and gave evidence.


12. I drew the parties' attention to Appendix FM, with  regard  to  section
    EX: Exception.


13. Section EX  is  an  exception  applicable  in  cases  where  the  other
    requirements of the section are met. It is provided with regard to  the
    immigration status requirement (ELTRPT.3.2) that the applicant must not
    be in the UK in breach of the immigration laws (disregarding any period
    of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less), unless paragraph  EX.1
    applies.


14. At the hearing I drew the parties' attention  to  E-LTRPT:  Eligibility
    for Limited Leave to Remain as  a  Parent.  R-LTRPT.1.1  sets  out  the
    requirements to be met for limited or indefinite leave to remain  as  a
    parent.  All the requirements  from  2.2  to  5.2  must  be  met.   The
    relevant part of E-LTRPT.2.3 provides that the applicant must have sole
    responsibility for the child or  the  child  normally  lives  with  the
    applicant and not the other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled
    in the UK).


15. In this case, the claimant had to meet  the  relationship  requirements
    and in particular E-LTRPT.2.4 (a), namely that  she  provides  evidence
    that she has sole responsibility for  the  child,  or  that  the  child
    normally lives with them and that she is taking and intends to continue
    to take an active role in the child's upbringing.


16. For this appeal to succeed, I must  be  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, the burden being on the claimants, that  they  meet  the
    relevant requirements under the immigration rules or,  if  appropriate,
    under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


17. Ms Bustani produced a written statement from Mrs Shoyombo  with  regard
    to the requirements of E-LTRPT 2.3.


18. Ms Oluwatoyimo Omolara Albert Shoyombo attended the  hearing  and  gave
    evidence. She adopted her further witness statement  dated  20  January
    2015. She has set out her address. She also adopted her earlier witness
    statement at pages 1-5 of the bundle before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    That statement is dated 6 June 2014.


19. She lives with her three children and claims to be  solely  responsible
    for their upbringing. It is she who chose the school which they  attend
    (Coboury Primary School, which is now Bacon's  College  in  respect  of
    Olajire, the second claimant). She has contact insofar as their schools
    are concerned.


20. She shops for them, cooks for them and takes them to the GP  when  they
    are ill and is responsible for meeting all their day to day needs.


21. When she entered the UK in May 2005, she did so together  with  Olajire
    and Fikunmi. Her husband was not with her and they were not in contact.


22. She did meet him again in the UK in 2009. They were  together  for  one
    day. Her husband was attending  a  conference  and  promised  he  would
    return to the family afterwards. This never happened and there has been
    no further contact until she met him again through the church in  2012.
    At that point she decided that she could not  trust  him  and  that  he
    would not make a reliable father.


23. Her third child, Opeyemi, was born on 20 March 2010. He  was  conceived
    on the day she met him in 2009 "for one day."


24. Her husband does not live with them and has no role in  the  children's
    upbringing. He does see the children on average every month. This  used
    to be every two months and is now on a monthly basis. She  allows  this
    contact as she thinks it would be  good  for  the  boys  to  have  some
    relationship with their father. However, he does not feature greatly in
    their lives and does not assist financially or practically.


25. She does not have much of a relationship with him  and  does  not  know
    about his personal life. She feels greatly let down by him  and  cannot
    trust him after previous promises,  especially  having  regard  to  his
    absence when she gave birth to Opeyemi.


26. Opeyemi, her youngest  son,  has  been  diagnosed  with  a  speech  and
    language problem  and  is  currently  undergoing  regular  and  intense
    therapy. She referred to various NHS  letters.  He  presented  abnormal
    behavioural traits such as  tantrums,  difficulties  in  communication,
    aggression and introverted behaviour.


27. She said that she informed her eldest child of the reasons for  refusal
    of their application to remain. His father was there at the time.  This
    was his birthday, and his father had come to see him.


28. In cross examination, she  stated  that  she  did  not  know  what  her
    husband's status is. She does not know whether he is a British  citizen
    or settled in the UK


29. She does not speak to him much during the children's contact  with  him
    each moth because of the grief he gave her.


30. In her witness statement dated 6 June 2014,  she  stated  at  paragraph
    that she has a subsisting relationship with the father of her  children
    in the UK. She was referred to that paragraph. She claimed however that
    she corrected her statement that day.  She  pointed  this  out  to  her
    representative before she came to court.  She  meant  she  had  a  good
    rapport and relationship then.


31. She referred to paragraph 12 of the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where it is expressly  noted  that  she  adopted  her  witness
    statement with the corrections, clarifying that she and her husband did
    not have a subsisting relationship and that he only  came  to  see  the
    children and they did not live together. She said that she amended  her
    witness statement prior to adopting it.


32. She was asked what impact in their lives her husband had had in the UK.
    He only comes to see them and nothing else. She said she does not  know
    whether he lives in the UK. Because he sees them each month, she stated
    that he must be living here.


33. She was asked whether he stays in the house when he sees the  children.
    She leaves them alone with him and she remains in the kitchen.


34. She has not asked him for money for the children. She does not want  to
    "collect anything from him." She obtains vouchers from a food centre in
    Peckham. The voucher does not have a value. It is only  for  food.  She
    did catering for the church and members of the church helped  her  with
    her material things[1].


35. She has not applied for benefits. The  children  do  not  obtain  Child
    Benefit.


36. She was asked why, if she has lived on handouts, she has not asked  the
    children's father for money. That is because she did not trust him  any
    longer as he let her down.


37. The children are all at school. She chose the schools. She obtained her
    first choice. She never discussed this with her husband.  Further,  she
    is the only registered parent in respect of each child at  the  school.
    Her contact at the school is Abeola Yusuff, a family  friend.   She  is
    registered as their carer.


38. In re-examination, she identified various statements from her  friends.
    These include letters from Ms Yusuff dated 8  June  2014  -  p.57.  The
    claimants are church going. At page 47, there  is  a  letter  from  the
    Speech and Language Therapist dated 4 June 2014 with regard to Opeyemi.
    Reference is made to his attendance  at  groups  where  his  mother  is
    engaged with the activities set out.


39. There is a letter from Bacon's College in Rotherhithe from the Pastoral
    Officer dated 4 June 2014, sent to Mrs Shoyombo alone  at  the  address
    she disclosed in her evidence. The letter  confirms  that  Olajire  has
    attended since September 2013. There is a further letter  from  Bacon's
    College to the first claimant  alone  dated  23  April  2014  from  the
    Assistant Head Teacher. Olajire's attendance has been "excellent."


40. She said that  nothing  is  addressed  to  the  father.  There  are  no
    photographs of their father. She referred to  the  respondent's  bundle
    containing the application form. At section 2 there are questions asked
    in respect of any partner living with the claimant in the  UK  who  are
    applying with her for an extension of stay as  her  dependants.  It  is
    mandatory to complete that section. She has  entered  "not  applicable"
    with regard to her partner's full name, nationality and place of birth,
    including date of birth and gender.


41. It is also asked whether she and her partner are  living  together,  to
    which she  has  replied  "not  applicable."  All  the  other  questions
    regarding  the  partner,  including  his  status,  are  answered   "not
    applicable."


42. Finally, she referred to a letter at page 58 from Mrs Animashaun  dated
    6 June 2014 who "confirmed" that the  claimant  and  her  children  are
    known to her for more than eight years. She has  been  supporting  them
    financially, spiritually and materially.


    Submissions


43. Mr Duffy relied on the reasons for refusal. There it is stated that the
    secretary  of  state  was  not  satisfied  that  she  could  meet   the
    requirements of E-LTRPT 3.2 and EX.1(a) and (b). It  is  accepted  that
    the children have been admitted to English  state  education  and  have
    resided here for at least seven years. However, they could re-adapt  to
    life in Nigeria with their mother "and may become reunited  with  their
    father"  who  is  also  a  Nigerian  businessman."  It  is  accordingly
    reasonable for them all to return to Nigeria as a family unit.


44. Mr Duffy relied on the finding by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  with
    regard to sole responsibility. He submitted that the evidence given  at
    the hearing before the Upper Tribunal is  not  credible.  There  are  a
    number of indications suggesting that the father may be on  the  scene.
    As a mother she would have been more active in her awareness as to, for
    example, where he works and lives. He referred to "the negative pull of
    the lies." Accordingly, s.EX.1 falls away.


45. He submitted with regard to s.55  best  interests  and  Article  8.  He
    referred to EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874  at
    paragraph 58. Regard must be had to the "facts in the real world."


46. Looking at the matter outside the rules, the relationship to Nigeria is
    a factor to be taken account in the balance. As to the  proportionality
    of the interference there  are  adverse  findings  in  respect  of  the
    claimant. She has a poor immigration history. Although this is not  the
    children's fault and does not 'factor into the s.55 interests', it does
    affect the proportionality in respect of all the claimants.


47. When looked at as a whole the best interests of  the  children  are  to
    remain  with  their  mother  (or  father).  If  their  mother  has   no
    independent right, the best  place  for  them  to  be  is  in  Nigeria.
    Notwithstanding  relationships  made  in  the  UK,  it  would  not   be
    disproportionate in the circumstances for them to be removed. These are
    capable of being replicated abroad.


48. On behalf of the claimants, Ms Bustani relied on her skeleton argument.
    She submitted that there is no challenge as to  the  second  and  third
    claimant's  appeals  which  were  allowed  outright   under   paragraph
    276ADE(iv). There has thus been no appeal against that finding and  the
    decision stands.


49. With regard to the first claimant, she relied on EX.1 (a)  of  Appendix
    FM. It had been contended before the Upper Tribunal that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's finding that the provisions of EX.1 did not  apply  to
    the claimant as  she  had  been  an  overstayer  at  the  time  of  her
    application [27] was an error. She referred to the wording of paragraph
    3.2 (b) of the requirements relating to eligibility for  limited  leave
    to remain as a parent. The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of
    the immigration laws unless paragraph EX.1 applies.


50. With regard to sole responsibility, she noted the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's concerns relating to the father's role set out at paragraphs 31-
    37, namely that she had sought to downplay the level of contact she has
    had with him in the  UK.  The  Judge  found  at  paragraph  31  of  his
    determination that  the  mother  had  primary  responsibility  for  the
    upbringing of the children.


51. There was  no  mention  of  the  father  in  their  applications.   The
    secretary of state noted in the refusal letter that the  appellant  had
    claimed to have lost contact with her husband although briefly  meeting
    by accident in 2008 and had spent time together. This resulted  in  her
    becoming pregnant with Opeyemi, who was born  on  20  March  2010.  The
    absences of the father on the scene were also questioned by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge [16-17].


52. She referred to paragraph 16 of the determination, where the First-tier
    Judge referred to evidence from the claimant's witness, Mrs Akibor, who
    said that in 2012, she became aware that the family had overstayed when
    she asked for a letter of support. The church has been  supporting  the
    family. The claimant got vouchers and members of the church helped them
    with food and clothes. Her husband used to come off and on, once  in  a
    while. The witness however was not sure  that  she  would  be  able  to
    recognise the claimant's husband. She could not really  say  when  they
    had last met. She was not aware of where her husband was at the moment.


53. A further witness, Ms  Lawrence,  stated  that  she  had  not  met  the
    claimant's husband [17].


54. There is also evidence that the husband  is  not  so  involved  in  the
    children's upbringing. She referred to  the  documents,  including  the
    school letters and the GP letter to the  claimant.  That  included  the
    letter at page 47, with regard to Opeyemi's  language  therapy  groups.
    His mother is engaged with the activities.


55. Accordingly, she submitted that it has been shown  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that it is their mother who has been  involved  in  their
    upbringing.


56. With regard to EX.1, the rules do not seek to reward a person  who  has
    overstayed  in  contravention  of  the  immigration  rules.  The  rules
    recognise the former policy known as DP/5/96.


57. Moving on to Article 8, the  threshold  is  "reasonableness."  The  two
    children have been recognised to qualify for leave to remain. They  are
    entitled to stay. It would be unfair and  inappropriate  to  make  them
    choose. It is not simply because they have been here for  a  number  of
    years.  They  are  in  school.  The  two  older  children  have  social
    connections as well.


58. The situation is that the family unit has spent just under ten years in
    the UK. The two elder children arrived here aged just under  three  and
    one. They are now 12 and 10  respectively.  They  have  never  attended
    school in Nigeria and life in the UK is the only life they are familiar
    with. They both are doing well at school and have formed  social  links
    outside the family unit. The youngest child has spent his  entire  life
    here and will be five years old very shortly. He is receiving treatment
    for speech problems.


59. She submitted that the three children are  settled.  They  know  of  no
    other way of life. They  have  no  connections  with  Nigeria.  Lengthy
    periods of time spent by children in the UK in this way  have  resulted
    in the  formation  of  a  private  life  which,  absent  countervailing
    factors, it would not be reasonable to interfere with.


60. She submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also  appropriately
    took account of the views of the eldest child.


61. She referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Moayed  v  SSHD
    [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC). Both  the  second  and  third  claimants  have
    completed more than seven years  since  the  age  of  four.   That  was
    identified in Moayed as likely to be more significant to a  child  than
    the first seven years when they would be more adaptable.


62. She submitted that if their mother does not have  sole  responsibility,
    the appeal should be considered in accordance with Article 8.


63. She submitted that the mother's appeal succeeds on human rights grounds
    as the mother of two minor children who have spent nearly ten years  of
    their lives in the UK.


    Assessment


64. I have had regard to the submissions by Mr Duffy  that  the  claimant's
    evidence must be carefully considered and in particular her claims made
    in respect of her husband, the father of the children.   This  must  be
    carefully assessed.


65. There is no dispute that the claimant's two sons were under the age  of
    18 and had lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at  least  seven  years
    immediately preceding the date of  application,  as  required  by  EX.1
    (a)(i)(aa) - (cc). Their appeals have been  allowed  under  the  rules.
    There has been no attempt made by the secretary of state  to  challenge
    the finding of the Judge that they are entitled to remain in the UK.


66. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  stated,  when  considering  Article  8,
    whether it is reasonable to remove the mother of two children  who  are
    settled  here  in  circumstances  where   the   mother   has   "primary
    responsibility" for the upbringing of the  children  [31].  Ms  Bustani
    recognises that that is not the  wording  of  Appendix  FM  where  sole
    responsibility is one of the relevant requirements applicable  in  this
    case. The immigration status of the children's father is unknown.


67. It is a requirement for limited leave to remain as a  parent  that  the
    applicant must meet all the requirements of  E-LTRPT:  Eligibility  for
    Leave to Remain as a Parent, and  in  her  case,  that  she  meets  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.2  -2.4  and   E-LTRPT.3.1   and
    paragraph EX.1 applies. In this case, the claimant must show  that  she
    has sole responsibility for the children.

68. The meaning of "sole responsibility" has given rise to a body  of  case
    law, including cases  decided  before  the  Court  of  Appeal.   In  TD
    (paragraph 297(i)(e)): "Sole Responsibility" Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049,
    the Tribunal examined the case law relating  to  the  notion  of  "sole
    responsibility"  in  considerable  detail.   It  concluded  that  "sole
    responsibility" is  a  factual  matter  to  be  decided  upon  all  the
    evidence.  Where one parent is not involved in the  child's  upbringing
    because he or she had abandoned or abdicated responsibility, the  issue
    may arise between the remaining parent and others who  have  day-to-day
    care of  the  child  abroad.   The  test  is  whether  the  parent  has
    continuing control and direction over the child's upbringing, including
    making all the important decisions in the child's life.  However, where
    both parents  are  involved  in  a  child's  upbringing,  it  would  be
    exceptional that one of them will have "sole responsibility".

69. The Tribunal noted that the Court of Appeal saw  "sole  responsibility"
    as a practical rather than an exclusively legal exercise  of  "control"
    by the UK based parent over the child's upbringing,  including  whether
    what is done by the carer  is  done  "under  the  direction"  of  their
    parent.

70. The  Tribunal  set  out  the  proper  approach  to  questions  of  sole
    responsibility under this rule (paragraph 52).  It emphasised that  the
    term "responsibility" in the Immigration Rules should not be understood
    as a theoretical or legal obligation, but rather  as  a  practical  one
    which, in each case, looked to who in fact is exercising responsibility
    for the child.  That responsibility may have been for a short  duration
    in that  the  present  arrangements  may  have  begun  quite  recently.
    Wherever  the  parents  are,  if  both  parents  are  involved  in  the
    upbringing of the child, it would be exceptional that one of them would
    have sole responsibility.

71. In paragraph 52(ix), the Tribunal stated that the test is  not  whether
    anyone else has day to day responsibility, but whether the  parent  has
    continuing control and direction of the child's  upbringing,  including
    making all the important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If  not,
    responsibility is shared and so not "sole".


72. Mr Duffy has pointed out that the evidence of the  claimant  should  be
    carefully considered, having regard  to  the  misgivings  expressed  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  regarding  the   children's   father.   In
    particular, he found that the claimant had sought to downplay the level
    of contact she has with him in the UK.


73. I have however had regard not only to the claimant's evidence regarding
    her assertions  as  to  the  children's  upbringing  but  also  to  the
    documentary evidence produced in support of her assertion  that  it  is
    she who has been responsible for the making of all important  decisions
    in their lives.


74. That includes decisions relating to their schooling, their health needs
    and evidence from other sources, including acquaintances  and  friends,
    who have referred to or at least implied the absence of the father from
    their lives.


75. I have had  regard  to  the  letters  from  the  school  regarding  the
    claimants' attendance; the NHS letters with regard to  the  speech  and
    language therapy given to Opeyemi  and  letters  from  the  church  and
    friends.


76. The evidence from  these  sources  provide  support  for  the  mother's
    contention that it is she who has participated in their  schooling.  It
    is she alone who has been  sent  documentation  from  the  school.  The
    letters are sent to her in her name only. That  is  the  position  with
    regard to the medical evidence including the treatment received.  There
    is no reference at all to any participation by their father.


77. I have noted the claimant's evidence that the father has, to a  limited
    extent, had contact with the children, at least once a month.  However,
    that does not appear to be regular or predictable.


78. She also stated that the father has never  provided  any  financial  or
    other support for the children. The evidence as to  their  support  has
    been confirmed by a letter in which reference is made to the supply  of
    food vouchers and the like to the family.


79. There is no evidence from any source suggesting that their  father  has
    been jointly  responsible  for  important  decisions  relating  to  the
    children's welfare and needs. The claimant has contended that she  does
    not have much of a relationship with their father. She  does  not  know
    about his personal life. She particularly feels let  down  by  him  and
    cannot  trust  him  after  he  has  made  promises  in  the  past.   He
    particularly disappointed her having regard to  his  absence  when  she
    gave birth to Opeyemi.


80. Having regard to the evidence as a whole, I  am  accordingly  satisfied
    that the sponsor has shown on the balance of probabilities that she has
    had sole responsibility for her children's upbringing.


81. I accordingly find that she has satisfied the  requirements  under  the
    Immigration Rules, and in particular EX.1 which applies to her  in  the
    circumstances. Her two sons were under the age of 18 and have lived  in
    the UK continuously for at least seven years immediately prior  to  the
    date of application.


82. I accordingly find that she is the  mother  of  the  second  and  third
    claimants and having regard to their status in the UK, it would not  be
    reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK  -  EX.1(a)(i)(cc)and  (ii).
    Insofar as the youngest child is concerned, he is four  years  old  and
    his status is, I accept, "intertwined"  with  that  of  his  mother  as
    contended by Ms Bustani. He is her dependant.


83. I have also considered in the alternative the appeals of the  claimants
    under Article 8.


84. I have had regard to the recent authority from  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    including MM and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985. Ms  Bustani  relied
    on the judicial review decision by the Upper  Tribunal  in  R  (on  the
    application of Oludoy and Others) v SSHD (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon)  and
    Nagre) 1 JR [2014] 00529 (IAC).


85. Having reviewed the authorities, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  found  that
    there was nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or Shahzad  that  suggests  that  a
    threshold test was being suggested as opposed to making it  clear  that
    there was a need to look at the evidence to see if there  was  anything
    which has not already been adequately considered in the context of  the
    immigration rules and which could lead to a successful Article 8 claim.


86. These authorities should not be read as  qualifying  or  fettering  the
    assessment of Article 8. There is no  utility  in  imposing  a  further
    intermediate test - paragraph 128 of MM, supra, as a preliminary  to  a
    consideration of Article 8 claims beyond the relevant  criterion  based
    rule.


87. In assessing the issue of proportionality, I have  had  regard  to  the
    former policy of the secretary of state referred to by Ms Bustani which
    attaches significant weight to the fact that a child may have  spent  a
    period of seven years in the UK - DP5/96. That  policy  was  withdrawn.
    The ministerial statement in that regard - statement by Mr Phil Woolas,
    December 2008 - noted that the original purpose of and the need for the
    concessions has been overtaken by the Human Rights Act and  changes  to
    the Immigration Rules.


88. The fact that a child has spent a significant period of their  life  in
    the UK will continue to be an important factor to be taken into account
    by case workers when evaluating whether the removal of their parent  is
    appropriate.


89. I have also considered the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Moayed,  supra,
    which considered the issue of the likely nature  of  any  private  life
    formed by a young child. As already  noted,  the  Tribunal  found  that
    seven years from age 4 is likely to be more significant to a child than
    the first seven years. The younger child is more likely to  be  focused
    upon their parents and would not have formed social bonds  outside  the
    family unit. The older child, however, is more likely  to  have  formed
    social networks with peers and others. The impact of removal  upon  the
    "older" children's  private  lives  is  therefore  likely  to  be  more
    disruptive.


90. In this context I have also had regard to the need to consider the best
    interests of the children pursuant to s.55 of the 2009 Act.


91. Having directed myself in accordance with Razgar, I find that the first
    four questions are answered in the affirmative.


92. I accordingly move to question 5 of Lord Bingham's questions,  where  I
    am required to, and do, conduct a balancing exercise under Article 8. I
    consider all the factors already referred  to  including  the  personal
    circumstances of the claimant, her children and  the  consequences  for
    them of a return to Nigeria. I consider the cumulative impact  of  such
    factors.


93. The two elder children have  had  a  lengthy  period  of  stay  in  the
    country, as noted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The children are 12
    and 10. I  have  had  regard  to  their  school  report.  I  have  also
    considered the statement by Olajire himself who has written  about  the
    impact of the decision that he is to be removed. He received this  news
    on his birthday.


94. The youngest child was born in the UK. As already  noted  he  has  been
    diagnosed with speech  and  language  difficulties.  The  documentation
    testifying that he has been  undergoing  regular  and  intense  therapy
    under the NHS has been produced. His problems would  be  likely  to  be
    exacerbated were he to be removed from the UK.


95. Moreover, the children have never  attended  school  in  Nigeria.  They
    arrived here when they were three and one years old. Both have not only
    done well in school but have formed social  links  outside  the  family
    unit. The youngest child will be five in two months.


96. I find no countervailing factors to displace  the  recognition  by  the
    respondent's policy that lengthy periods of time spent by  children  in
    the UK result in the formation of a private life, in respect  of  which
    it would not be reasonable to interfere.   I have  taken  into  account
    the legitimate aim of proper immigration control.


97. However, the inevitable result of removing the mother from the UK would
    be that her two elder children who have indefinite leave to  remain  in
    the UK, would follow her.


98. Having regard to the  cumulative  impact  of  the  adverse  effects  of
    removing the claimant and the lives of her children, I  find  that  the
    proposed interference is disproportionate in the circumstances.


    Notice of Decision


    I dismiss the secretary of state's appeal.


    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Dated 3 February 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

-----------------------
[1]  She also stated that before the First-tier Tribunal as recorded in the
determination.

