
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03272/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2014                              |On 17 November 2014           |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               CS (Sri Lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as
    otherwise requiring international protection.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    made an anonymity direction, and I consider it is appropriate that this
    direction should continue for these proceedings in the Upper  Tribunal.



 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date  of  birth  is  13
    June 1981.  He first entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  on  6
    January 2011.  He made a claim for asylum  on  21  February  2013.   He
    claimed that between 2003 and 2008 he had been  forced  to  assist  the
    LTTE.  On 15 October 2005 he was detained by Karuna Group for  thirteen
    days.  He was tortured but released on payment of a bribe  upon  giving
    an undertaking that he would cease supporting the LTTE.  The  appellant
    continued his activities with the LTTE, because he had no  choice.   He
    was arrested again on 29 April 2009 by the Sri Lankan Army and detained
    for twenty days.  He was again tortured, and released upon payment of a
    bribe.  Following this experience,  the  appellant  decided  he  should
    leave Sri Lanka.  He successfully applied for a student visa.  He  came
    here in fear of his life, but did not claim asylum.  On 6 October  2011
    he returned to Sri Lanka because his mother was seriously  ill.   On  9
    October 2011 he was detained by the Karuna Group and handed over to the
    Sri Lankan Army.  He was tortured but, as before, released upon payment
    of a bribe.  On 27 November 2011 he left Sri Lanka via Colombo  Airport
    with the assistance of an agent, and arrived in the United Kingdom  via
    Qatar.

 3. On 20 March 2013 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    the  appellant's  application  for  asylum.   The  Secretary  of  State
    identified a  number  of  alleged  discrepancies,  inconsistencies  and
    implausibilities in his account such as to lead to the following stated
    conclusion at paragraph 28 of the refusal letter:

         In summary, for the reasons clearly outlined within paragraph 11 to
         27, whilst accepting that you are an ethnic Tamil from  Sri  Lanka,
         it is not accepted you were a low level member of the LTTE,  it  is
         not  accepted  that  you  were  arrested,  detained,  tortured  and
         released on a bribe on three separate occasions, it is not accepted
         an agent facilitated  your  safe  exit  from  Colombo  Airport  and
         therefore it is not accepted that you are of any  adverse  interest
         to the Sri Lankan authorities.

 4. On the issue of risk on return, the Secretary of State applied her then
    current country guidance of EG v the  United  Kingdom  41178/08  [2011]
    ECHR 846 and TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009]  UKAIT  0049.
    Although he was of Tamil ethnicity and had claimed asylum in the UK, it
    was not accepted that he had had any involvement with the LTTE.  He had
    no previous criminal record and he had a valid passport.  The  scarring
    on his body would not attract undue attention.  Therefore the case  law
    indicated he would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.






The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heynes
    sitting in the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester on 10  December  2013.
    Mr Paramjorthy appeared on behalf of the appellant  and  Mr  Armstrong,
    Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.

 6. In his subsequent determination, Judge  Heynes  addressed  the  medical
    evidence on scarring at paragraphs 15 to 26.  He addressed the  medical
    evidence relating to the appellant's mental health at paragraphs 27  to
    34.  He addressed the letters purportedly sent from  relatives  of  the
    appellant in Sri Lanka at paragraphs 36 to 37.  At paragraphs 38 to 53,
    the judge made his findings  under  the  heading  of  "Credibility  and
    Findings of Fact".  At paragraph 38, he observed that in  the  broadest
    terms the account given by the appellant was capable  of  occurring  in
    Sri  Lanka.   At  paragraphs  39  to  42,   he   addressed   the   main
    inconsistencies relied upon by the respondent.  He reached a conclusion
    that, given the possibility of the appellant having  suffered  torture,
    it  was  not  safe  to  draw   an   adverse   conclusion   from   these
    inconsistencies, such as the number of times he had  been  arrested  or
    detained and the fact that he had not  referred  to  instrumental  rape
    when describing his torture during his substantive interview.

 7. The judge found that the  crucial  credibility  issue  related  to  the
    appellant's immigration history.  By his own evidence he  had  come  to
    the country in January 2011 in fear of his life  having  been  brutally
    tortured on two occasions, but he made no attempt to  claim  asylum  on
    arrival at any time before he returned to Sri Lanka.  Still  apparently
    fearing for his life, the appellant returned to Sri Lanka  nine  months
    later.  He claimed that the Karuna Group  realised  he  was  likely  to
    return to see his mother, and were watching  out  for  him.   This  was
    speculation on his part.  The fact the group detained him suggested, if
    true, that the Sri Lankan authorities had a continuing interest in him.
     But this was very unlikely be the case.  If the authorities  had  that
    level of interest in the appellant, it was reasonable  to  assume  that
    they would have detained him whilst he was living in  Sri  Lanka  quite
    openly between the time of his 2009 detention to the time when he  left
    the United Kingdom.

 8. The appellant has claimed that he was able to pass for  a  second  time
    through the  airport  in  Colombo  without  difficulty.  This  was  not
    impossible, but it placed a considerable strain upon the credibility of
    his account (paragraph 46). It required the agent had been sufficiently
    well funded to have been able to bribe a series of officials  to  allow
    the appellant to pass through unchallenged.

 9. Even that fact had paled into insignificance  in  comparison  with  the
    appellant's subsequent immigration  history.   The  appellant  made  no
    attempt to claim asylum upon return.  He did not do so when he  claimed
    to have abandoned his studies, upon the basis of  which  his  visa  had
    been granted.  He did not claim asylum when the visa expired.  He  went
    to an immigration firm to make an  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain.  Their letter falsely claimed that the appellant was  currently
    a Tier 4  Student  on  a  continuing  course,  and  that  he  had  made
    progression in his studies.  Discretionary leave was sought solely  for
    the purpose of completing the course that he had progressed so well on.
     The application made on the appellant's behalf was based on a lie.

10. At the hearing,  the  appellant  claimed  that  he  had  not  told  his
    representatives about his troubles in Sri Lanka.   He  claimed  he  had
    tried to ask about claiming asylum, but the  representatives  had  told
    him that  he  should  make  an  application  for  further  leave.   His
    explanation for his failure to claim asylum was that he  was  confused.
    The judge asked him at the hearing whether he tried to find out on  the
    internet how to make a claim.  He replied that he only  had  access  to
    the internet at the college.

11. The judge found that the appellant's  persistent  failure  to  make  an
    asylum claim had not been explained  adequately  and  was  incompatible
    with his account of  events  (paragraph  50).   The  appellant  was  an
    intelligent man who had studied in Sri Lanka apparently with a view  to
    obtaining an MBA.  It was not credible that he was so confused for such
    a continuous period of time that he was unable to make an asylum  claim
    to save his life.  The judge continued:

         51.  For the appellant to prove his case,  it  is  not  for  me  to
             establish where the truth lies.  My findings are that, on  the
             one hand, the appellant had some signs of  wounds  that  could
             have been the result of torture whilst, on  the  other,  I  am
             certain that he is not telling the truth in claiming  to  have
             been detained and tortured in Sri Lanka in 2011.  That version
             of events is incompatible with his claimed  treatment  by  the
             authorities, with the fact that he was  not  of  any  apparent
             interest to them from his release from detention  in  2009  to
             his departure for this country in 2011, with  the  absence  of
             any medical or other objective evidence that  he  returned  to
             this country in 2011 less than  three  weeks  after  suffering
             brutal torture or with his persistent failure to have  made  a
             claim for asylum.

           52.    I find that the appellant, in circumstances that have  not
             been proved to the lowest  standard  applicable  and  at  some
             point  in  the  past,  suffered  wounds  that  may  have  been
             inflicted upon him during  torture  or  some  other  traumatic
             event.  If he ever was, the appellant ceased to be of interest
             to the Sri Lankan authorities at least from  early  2009.   He
             was able to leave Sri Lanka on the basis of  his  visa  openly
             without the need for an agent.  He returned to  Sri  Lanka  in
             2011 without any fear for his safety.  Whilst  there,  he  was
             not detained or tortured.  He left openly.

12. In paragraphs 54 to 64, the judge addressed the  question  of  risk  on
    return, applying the country guidance of GJ and Others (Post civil war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and concluded that  the
    appellant would be of no interest to the authorities upon his return.


The Application for, and Initial Refusal of, Permission to Appeal

13. Mr Paramjorthy settled an application for permission to appeal  on  the
    appellant's behalf, asserting that the judge had  materially  erred  in
    law in various respects.  The  application  was  initially  refused  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 15 January 2014 for the  following
    reasons:

         The weight to be attributed to any piece of evidence was entirely a
         matter for the judge.  Contrary to what is stated in the ground, in
         a careful and well reasoned determination the  judge  set  out  the
         pertinent issues, law, and evidence relating to the  facts  of  the
         appeal.  In appeals of this nature it is the task of the  judge  to
         make findings of fact on the  basis  of  the  evidence  to  provide
         adequately clear reasons for those  findings.   That  is  precisely
         what the judge did.  The findings made by the judge  were  properly
         open to him on the basis of the evidence before him.  In a  careful
         determination extending to some eight pages and 67 paragraphs,  the
         judge manifestly demonstrated that  he  had  in  mind  the  correct
         approach to the evidence that  he  had  dealt  with  all  pertinent
         issues providing adequate reasons  for  his  findings.   The  judge
         carefully considered the appropriate recent country guidance  which
         applied properly in the context of the particular evidence of  this
         appeal.


The Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

14. Miss Amanda Walker, a colleague of Mr Paramjorthy's chambers, settled a
    renewed application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. She
    submitted  that  Judge  Osborne  had  failed  to  appreciate  that  the
    appellant was  not  simply  asserting  that  weight  should  have  been
    attached differently, but was asserting that the real  material  errors
    in the judge's recording of the evidence and in his findings of fact.

15. On 26 February 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge  Warr  granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         This is rather a borderline application, but I have concluded there
         may be scope for argument (and I put it no higher than that) on the
         issue of the appellant's explanation  for  delay  in  applying  for
         asylum (ground 4) being attributed by the judge to confusion and it
         may be the other grounds (for example ground 1) arguably go further
         than a simple factual challenge.  All the grounds of appeal may  be
         argued.


The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16.  At the hearing before me, Mr Paramjorthy developed the five grounds of
    appeal advanced by Miss Walker.  Both  Mr  Melvin  and  Mr  Paramjorthy
    directed me to passages in the typed Record of Proceedings (produced by
    Mr Paramjorthy) and other documents (such  as  the  interview  record),
    upon which they particularly relied.  As a result of this exercise,  Mr
    Paramjorthy withdrew ground  2.   In  addition,  in  the  light  of  KV
    (Scarring-medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 IAC, Mr Paramjorthy did not
    pursue ground 5.

17. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Melvin  essentially  took  the
    same position as that taken by Judge Osborne  when  initially  refusing
    permission.  He also relied  on  VHR  (unmeritorious  grounds)  Jamaica
    [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC).


Discussion

18. It is convenient to begin this discussion with ground 4,  as  this  was
    the ground identified by Judge Warr as being potentially the strongest.
     The reason why it appeared to Judge Warr to be the strongest point was
    that it was asserted that the judge had made a material  error  in  his
    recording of the appellant's oral evidence on his explanation  for  the
    delay in claiming asylum.

19. The judge held that the appellant's  explanation  for  his  failure  to
    claim asylum was that  he  was  confused.   Counsel  submitted  in  the
    grounds of appeal that at no point in either the appellant's written or
    oral evidence did he give this explanation.  The grounds of  appeal  go
    on to set out verbatim Counsel's note of the appellant's oral  evidence
    in cross-examination.

20. There is no reason to doubt the  accuracy  of  Counsel's  note  of  the
    evidence, and I readily accept that the appellant did not  say  in  his
    oral evidence that the reason for his failure to claim asylum was  that
    he was confused.  However, the error of law  challenge  overlooks  what
    the appellant said in interview.  At question 37 it was put to him that
    his visa expired on 31 May 2012, and therefore why  did  he  not  claim
    asylum at that point?  The appellant gave  the  following  answer:  "At
    that time I was not with an intention of applying for asylum because  I
    was confused state of mind."

21. When referring to this explanation in his findings, the judge  was  not
    purporting to quote specifically from what the appellant  had  said  in
    cross-examination.  So the judge did not make an error in  his  summary
    of of the appellant's evidence, and the error of  law  challenge  falls
    away.

22. Ground 1 relates to the documents from Sri Lanka discussed by the judge
    at paragraph 35 to 37.  The judge directed himself, in accordance  with
    Tanveer Ahmed, that it was for the appellant to prove that any document
    upon which he sought to  rely  was  reliable.   He  accepted  that  the
    translations of letters purportedly sent by the appellant's  uncle  and
    stepfather,  although  limited  in  detail,  were  supportive  of   the
    appellant's account.   The  judge  continued:  "I  approach  them  with
    caution.  Both these people are closely associated with the  appellant.
    I cannot ignore the possibility the authors have  written  whatever  is
    required to assist the  appellant  in  his  quest  to  remain  in  this
    country."

23. It is argued in ground 1 that the approach taken by the judge  is  both
    highly  irrational  and  unfair,  amounting  to  an   error   of   law.
    Alternatively, it is argued that no finding is made on the weight  that
    is to be attached to these letters.

24. I consider that this error of law challenge has no merit.  Although  he
    did not cite Tanveer Ahmed, the judge's self direction is  entirely  in
    line with Tanveer Ahmed, as is his approach to  the  letters  from  the
    appellant's relatives. It was legitimate for the judge to approach  the
    letters  with  caution,  precisely  because  they  emanated  from   the
    appellant's relatives, who would have a strong motive  to  misrepresent
    the truth so as to assist the appellant.  The letters did  not  emanate
    from an independent, unbiased and verifiable source.

25. So there was no irrationality or unfairness in  the  judge's  approach.
    It is also wrong to characterise the judge as having placed  no  weight
    on  the  letters.   For  he  acknowledged  that  they   supported   the
    appellant's account.  He  did  not  find  that  the  letters  had  such
    probative value as to tip the scales in the appellant's favour  on  the
    core issue of credibility, but that does mean that he gave no weight to
    the letters at all.  All it means is that he placed  little  weight  on
    the letters. As stated by Judge Osborne when refusing  permission,  the
    weight to be attributed to a piece of evidence is entirely a matter for
    the judge.

26. In ground 3, it is argued that the judge made a material error  of  law
    at paragraph 46 by making a finding  that  is  inconsistent  with  "the
    accepted background evidence".  The finding which is  attacked  is  the
    judge's finding that the appellant's claim that he was able to pass for
    a second time through the airport in  Colombo  without  any  difficulty
    placed considerable strain upon the credibility of his account.  It  is
    argued that the judge failed to engage with the background evidence set
    out at paragraph 394 of GJ, where the Tribunal held as follows:

         The principal challenge remaining is  the  appellant's  ability  to
         travel through Colombo Airport unhindered, if he were  of  interest
         to the Sri Lankan authorities as claimed.   Given  the  substantial
         sum paid to the agent the  evidence  before  us  on  the  pervasive
         bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka, applying the  lower  standard,
         we accept this element of the appellant's account.

27. The Tribunal's finding at paragraph [394]  of  GJ  does  not  have  the
    ramifications relied on by the appellant.   All  it  shows  is  on  the
    particular facts  under  discussion  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been able to travel through Colombo  Airport  unhindered,
    despite being of adverse interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities.   It
    does not mean that for every applicant there is an a priori  assumption
    that he can travel through Colombo Airport unhindered, despite being of
    adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

28. Moreover, it was not just that the evidence of  pervasive  bribery  and
    corruption which led  to  the  finding  at  [394],  but  also  specific
    evidence of a substantial sum being paid to the  agent.   In  contrast,
    there was no specific evidence here of a substantial sum being paid  to
    the agent.

29. Given the appellant's alleged profile, it  was  entirely  open  to  the
    judge, notwithstanding the background evidence of pervasive bribery and
    corruption in Sri Lanka, to find that his account  of  exiting  Colombo
    Airport unhindered for a second time strained credibility.  As observed
    in the refusal letter at paragraphs 23 and 24, he had  to  negotiate  a
    security  checkpoint  and  all  the  airport  security  using  his  own
    passport, without being identified  and  arrested.   In  terms  of  his
    explanation that the agent was able to facilitate this,  the  appellant
    could offer no details as to how this was achieved, who was bribed  and
    just how the agent managed to bribe so many people.

30.  In  summary,  I  am  in  complete  agreement  with   Judge   Osborne's
    characterisation of the judge's determination.  The judge has done  his
    job properly, and there is no merit in the  appellant's  error  of  law
    challenge.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson  17 November 2014

