

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03741/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 4 October 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     MR C M G OCKELTON, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                               MRS QIUTING WU
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr G Rea, Maguire Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is  an  appeal  with  permission  against  a  decision  of  a  panel
   comprising Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dennis and Dr C W Winstanley.
    The panel dismissed an appeal by  the  appellant  on  asylum  and  human
   rights grounds.

2) The appellant is a national of China.  She came to the  UK  in  September
   2006 as a student but she abandoned  her  studies  after  less  than  two
   years.  She then carried on working part time and stayed with friends  or
   acquaintances in various different parts of the UK.  In July 2012 she met
   a man referred to for the purpose of this appeal as CY,  who  is  also  a
   Chinese national.  They began a relationship for a  short  period  during
   which the appellant became pregnant.  The  appellant  then  lost  contact
   with CY until the following January, when she was reunited  with  him  in
   Glasgow.  They then each made claims for asylum.

3) The First-tier  Tribunal  found  the  account  of  events  given  by  the
   appellant as the  basis  for  her  asylum  claim  to  be  wholly  without
   credibility.  The Tribunal took into account that the appellant would  be
   returning to China with her child, which was a few months old at the date
   of the hearing.  The Tribunal  heard  that  the  appellant  and  CY  were
   married in March 2013.  The Tribunal was  satisfied  the  appellant  left
   China legitimately and found no appreciable risk to her  or  her  son  on
   return.

4) The panel went on to consider the appellant's right to private or  family
   life.  Any private  life  the  appellant  established  here  was  in  the
   knowledge that the appellant would have to return.  The panel  considered
   the best interests of the appellant's son  as  a  primary  consideration.
   His best interests lay in being with his mother and  this  would  not  be
   compromised if the mother and child were returned  to  China,  where  the
   child would have no difficulty in adapting to life there.  He  would  not
   be subject to any bureaucratic discrimination or any risk on return.

5) The Tribunal considered the alleged relationship  between  the  appellant
   and her husband CY.  The Tribunal accepted that the  marriage  had  taken
   place and that CY was identified as the father of the child.  He did not,
   however, give evidence or  participate  in  any  manner  in  the  present
   appeal.  The Tribunal  recognised  that  this  might  have  been  not  to
   compromise his own outstanding claim for asylum.   Nevertheless,  on  the
   evidence the Tribunal could not be satisfied that there was  family  life
   between the appellant and her son, on the one hand, and CY on the  other.
   The Tribunal accepted, however, that if it were to be established in  her
   husband's asylum claim or any subsequent appeal  that  there  was  family
   life between CY and the appellant and her child then the  Tribunal  would
   accept that the return of one to China without the  other  partner  would
   constitute an interference with family life.  The proportionality of this
   would remain to be assessed.  The Tribunal  concluded  that  were  family
   life to be so established and the appellant's husband found not to be  at
   risk of persecution or serious harm on return, then the  removal  of  the
   appellant with her husband and child would not be disproportionate so far
   as the circumstances of the appellant and her child were concerned.

6) Following the Tribunal's  decision,  an  application  for  permission  to
   appeal was made to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  was  refused.   An
   application was then made to the Upper Tribunal in relation to Article  8
   issues only.  Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the  ground
   that arguably the  panel's  consideration  of  family  life  between  the
   appellant and her child and her husband needed to await resolution of the
   husband's asylum claim.  Permission to appeal was  granted  so  that  the
   Tribunal could be told at the first opportunity  what  was  happening  in
   relation to this.

7) The appeal was listed before us for mention only in  order  to  ascertain
   the status of the appellant's husband's asylum claim.  We  were  informed
   by Mrs O'Brien that this was refused on 20 September 2013,  although  she
   had no details of any subsequent  appeal.   For  the  appellant,  Mr  Rea
   informed us that he understood an appeal to have been lodged by  Latta  &
   Co, who are acting on behalf of the appellant's husband.  He  asked  that
   the hearing of the present appeal should  be  deferred  until  after  the
   appellant's husband's appeal had been determined.

8) There was then a discussion about the ground on which the present  appeal
   to the Upper Tribunal was made.   Mr  Rea  confirmed  that  this  was  on
   Article 8 grounds only.  It was put  to  Mr  Rea  that  the  grounds  for
   permission to appeal made to the Upper Tribunal disclosed no error of law
   and that the only reason why  the  appellant  ought  not  to  be  removed
   immediately was to await a decision on her husband's appeal.

9) Mr Rea submitted that if the appellant's husband's appeal was  successful
   then the appellant would have a good Article 8 claim.  In response it was
   put to Mr Rea that if the husband's appeal succeeded, then the  appellant
   should expect to be granted leave as his dependant.  There was,  however,
   no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect  of
   the appellant.  In response Mr Rea stated that he had no instructions  to
   withdraw the appeal.  He consented  to  the  for  mention  hearing  being
   treated as the hearing of the appeal.

10) Mr Rea very properly did not seek to argue before us  that  the  grounds
   on which the application for permission to appeal was made  disclosed  an
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Indeed, we  see
   no error of law arising  from  them.   The  Tribunal  found,  as  already
   stated, that it would not be disproportionate for the appellant  and  her
   child to be removed together.  The panel accepted that the appellant  and
   CY are married and that CY is the father of the child.   Because  of  the
   almost complete absence of  evidence  on  whether  there  was  continuing
   family life between the appellant  and  her  husband,  the  Tribunal  was
   unable to conclude that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
   appellant and her child without her husband.   These  were  findings  the
   Tribunal was entitled to make for the reasons which they gave.

11) The position now is that it  is  for  the  appellant's  husband  in  his
   appeal to establish that he enjoys family life with the appellant and her
   child.  If this is established, we would accept that  there  might  be  a
   disproportionate interference with family life were the appellant and her
   child to be removed to China without the appellant's husband.  A definite
   finding to this effect would depend upon evidence as to  the  appellant's
   husband's circumstances, which should be forthcoming in his appeal.

12) If, on the other  hand,  the  appellant's  husband  establishes  in  his
   appeal that he has a well founded fear of persecution or serious harm  in
   China as well as showing that he has family life with the  appellant  and
   her child, then we would anticipate that  the  appellant  and  her  child
   would be permitted to stay along with the appellant's husband.

13) As far as the present appeal is concerned, however, we find no error  of
   law in the determination by the First-tier Tribunal and  accordingly  its
   decision will stand.

Conclusions

14) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

15) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

16) The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  a  direction  for  anonymity  and
   having received no application for an order to this effect,  we  make  no
   such order ourselves.


Signed                                             Date 4th November 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

