
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03557/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                          |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 September 2014                            |On 22 December 2014        |
|Given extemporary at the hearing.               |                           |


                                   Before

                    UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RICHARD CHALKLEY


                                   Between

                         MR BASHR FARAG ALI AL-NAHDI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Julia Weatherall, Counsel instructed by Miles
                    Hutchinson & Lithgow, Middlesbrough
For the Respondent:    Ms H Rackstraw. Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Yemen and possibly also Saudi Arabia  and
    is aged 45 years.

 2. He previously visited the United Kingdom as a tourist in 1980, again in
    2006 and in 2007.  He used his own Yemen passport to enter  the  United
    Kingdom on the 11 January 2011 gaining entrance as  a  Tier  1  General
    Migrant valid from 1 March 2009 to the 1 March 2012.

 3. The appellant's dependent family  members  joined  him  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the 5 February 2010.  On the 1 March 2012 the Appellant made
    an application for an extension of his visa which was refused.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision and on the 11 September  2011  his
    appeal was allowed to the extent that it remained for the Secretary  of
    State to consider the Appellant's Article 8 grounds.  Having considered
    it, the Appellant's Article 8 appeal was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State for reasons set out in a refusal letter of the 9 May  2014.   The
    Secretary of State also refused the Appellant's claim for  a  grant  of
    asylum under Paragraph 366 of Statement of  Changes  Immigration  Rules
    HC395 (as amended), and on the 7 February 2014 gave notice of  decision
    to remove the Appellant by way of directions under Section  10  of  the
    1999 Immigration and Asylum Act.

 5. The Appellant appealed the decision and his  appeal  came  for  hearing
    before First Tier Tribunal Judge Gordon at North Shields on the 30 June
    2014.  She dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal  and  dismissed  the
    Article 8 claim.

 6. The Appellant subsequently obtained leave to appeal on the  basis  that
    the First Tier Tribunal Judge may arguably have erred in law by failing
    to find that Article 8 private life rights were engaged in  respect  of
    the children, despite the fact  that  the  children  are  in  full-time
    education in the United Kingdom.  She failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for her findings and failed to note that the eldest child in particular
    is about to embark on a GCSE course.

 7. Before me today, Ms Weatherall accepted that the  Appellant  could  not
    bring his Article 8 claim within the Immigration Rules, as he failed to
    meet the requirements of those Immigration  Rules.   She  asserted  one
    child  in  particular  is  about  to  embark  on  a  GCSE  course   and
    examinations and relying on Paragraphs 32-37 of  EV  (Philippines)  and
    Others [2004] EWCA Civ 874 she said that  it  was  necessary  that  the
    judge should have looked at the best  interests  of  the  children  and
    should have born in mind that the  eldest  child,  being  in  education
    since 2010, is about to undertake GCSE  examinations.   In  considering
    the best  interests  of  the  children  that,  she  submitted,  was  an
    important matter  to  consider  and  was  an  exceptional  circumstance
    justifying the grant of of the appellant's Article 8 appeal outside the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. Ms Rackstraw for the Respondent pointed out that the child's  education
    is not at a critical stage.  The eldest child along  with  her  sibling
    has had the benefit of an education in the  United  Kingdom  since  her
    arrival, which will obviously stand her in good stead on her return  to
    Yemen where there are educational facilities available.  She invited me
    to dismiss the appeal.

 9. The Immigration Rules dealing with Article 8 are set out at Appendix FM
    and Paragraph 276ADE of Statement of Changes in immigration  rules,  HC
    395, as amended.

10. It was made clear in Nagre, R (on the application of)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) at  paragraph  29
    in respect of Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE that:

         "....... the new rules do provide better explicit coverage  of  the
         factors identified in case-law as relevant to  analysis  of  claims
         under Article 8 than was formerly the position, so  in  many  cases
         the main points for consideration in relation to Article 8 will  be
         addressed by decision-makers applying the new rules. It is only if,
         after doing that, there remains an arguable case that there may  be
         good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
         reference to Article 8 that it will  be  necessary  for  Article  8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new  rules  to
         require the grant of such leave."

11. I conclude that there was nothing at all about  the  appellant  or  his
    circumstances (or those of his wife and children) which could  properly
    be said to be exceptional which would have permitted  Judge  Gordon  to
    allow the appeal under Article 8 outside the rules.  Her  determination
    is slightly confused, but she appears to have proceeded  on  the  basis
    that if the appellant does not meet the requirements of the  rules  she
    still has to consider Article 8 under Strasbourg  Jurisprudence.  Nagre
    and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT
    00640 (IAC) have made the position much clearer.  She  found  that  the
    Article 8 appeal could not be allowed outside the  rules  and  I  agree
    with her.

12. The making of the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gordon did  not
    involve making an error law.  Her decision is upheld.




Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated: 24 September 2014
