
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03083/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 10 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Khan, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Turnock made following a hearing at Bradford on 10th July 2015.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 27th  January  1970.   She
    arrived in the UK on 18th October 2000 as a visitor.  She  subsequently
    made an application to remain as the spouse of a British citizen  which
    was ultimately refused and she became appeal rights exhausted in 2005.

 3. On 11th March 2005 she was convicted of conspiracy to  supply  class  A
    controlled drugs (heroin and  crack  cocaine)  and  sentenced  to  four
    years' imprisonment.  She applied for asylum  on  the  basis  that  she
    would be at risk on return to Jamaica from fellow gang members  against
    whom she had given evidence.

 4. On 11th December 2012 she was convicted on two counts of conspiracy  to
    supply class A controlled drugs and sentenced to three  years  and  six
    months' imprisonment.  A notice of liability to  automatic  deportation
    was served and a further  asylum  interview  conducted.   She  appealed
    against the making of the deportation order on the basis that  she  was
    entitled to be granted refugee status and her rights under  Articles  3
    and 8 of the ECHR would be breached by her removal.

 5. The judge discharged the certificate issued by the Secretary  of  State
    under the provisions of Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and concluded that the claimant was not  excluded  from
    consideration as to whether she  was  entitled  to  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention, but he dismissed the asylum appeal because  he  was
    not satisfied that the evidence presented  established  that  informers
    against gangs could be considered as a particular social group.

 6. He went on to consider whether the appellant had shown that  she  would
    be at risk from non-state agents from which the state would not be able
    to provide reasonable protection and  accordingly  whether  the  appeal
    should be allowed under Article 3 of the ECHR.

 7. The Secretary of State accepted that she was a witness  for  the  Crown
    Prosecution Service and that she was threatened by her co-defendants in
    2005. The judge recorded that it was the view of the  police  that  the
    claimant was at risk of reprisals in 2005.   She  did  not  go  into  a
    witness protection programme in the UK although it was offered  because
    she thought that she was unlikely to  be  attacked  here  and  her  co-
    accused did not know where she was when she came out of prison.

 8. The claimant did not argue that there  had  been  direct  threats  made
    against her since 2005.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  evidence  of
    allegations to threats to members of her  family  in  Jamaica  was  not
    coherent or consistent and  was  unsupported  by  other  evidence.   He
    observed that if  a  ruthless  gang  member  were  seeking  retribution
    against family members of the claimant it was surprising that they were
    not more effective in doing so.  He then wrote as follows:

         "What I find makes the assessment of risk  more  difficult  is  the
         absence of information which I consider would have  a  considerable
         bearing on that issue.  Her co-accused were  sentenced  to  lengthy
         periods of  imprisonment.   [P]  was  sentenced  to  eleven  years'
         imprisonment and [D] to ten years' imprisonment.  In  each  case  a
         recommendation for deportation was made.  In the case of [M] he was
         sentenced  to  six   years'   imprisonment   but   there   was   no
         recommendation for deportation made in his case.  It is  reasonable
         to assume that both [P] and [D] were deported but what is not known
         is what happened to him on his release.  Was he deported to Jamaica
         or did he remain in the UK?  More  important  is  the  question  of
         whether it is the case, as the appellant claims,  that  he  is  the
         cousin of Dudus and Liverty Coke and does he have any connection to
         the Shower Posse?  I appreciate that the burden is on the appellant
         but having raised these issues in her claim  I  consider  that  the
         respondent should have responded appropriately.

         I have little doubt that those  against  whom  the  appellant  gave
         evidence would wish to seek to take action  against  the  appellant
         should the opportunity arise.  In 2006 at the  time  of  the  trial
         there is little doubt that was the case when the  evidence  of  the
         police officers  is  considered.   I  accept  that  they  would  be
         considerably more likely to achieve that  goal  in  Jamaica  rather
         than in the UK.  If her co-accused were linked to the Shower  Posse
         then they are more likely to have the resources to be able to  find
         where she is living than if they have no such connection.   If  she
         were to come into contact with any of her co-accused in  Jamaica  I
         am satisfied that she would be at considerable risk."

 9. The judge then went on to consider whether the claimant would  be  able
    to call upon the authorities for protection.  At paragraph 137 he said:

         "137.    It would have  been  helpful  to  have  had  a  definitive
             answer, or as near to that  as  could  be  achieved  from  the
             Jamaican authorities  as  to  whether,  given  her  particular
             circumstances,  the  appellant  would  be  admitted  into  the
             witness protection programme and if so what form of protection
             would be offered to her.

         138. The information as to whether  McFarlane  and  the  other  co-
             accused were deported and what connections  he  has,  if  any,
             would also have assisted in the analysis as to  whether  there
             would be  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  appellant  in
             Jamaica.

         139.  I  find  that  the  country   information   produced   raised
             considerable doubt  as  to  whether  the  appellant  would  be
             admitted to the witness protection programme and if  she  were
             whether it would provide adequate protection to her.   In  the
             absence  of  admittance  to  the  programme  I  conclude  that
             relocation would not provide adequate protection for her."

10. On that basis he allowed the appeal with respect to Article 3.

11. With respect to Article 8 and the Zambrano principle, he said  that  he
    was not satisfied that the two children  currently  residing  with  the
    claimant would be compelled to leave the UK if she were to be deported.
     However, if they went with her it would have an adverse impact on them
    and would not be in their  best  interests  as  British  citizens.   He
    wrote:

         "On the respondent's own case they would  have  severe  limitations
         placed upon them as a result of being  in  the  witness  protection
         programme and/or being severely limited  as  to  where  they  could
         live.  Their contact with their extended family in the UK would  be
         curtailed.  If they were to remain in the UK there is a great  deal
         of uncertainty as to  what  their  living  arrangements  would  be.
         Taking account of all of the factors set out above I have concluded
         that there are very compelling  reasons  why  the  removal  of  the
         appellant would breach her rights under Article 8 of the ECHR."

The Grounds of Application

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on three grounds.

13. First, the judge had reversed the burden of proof  in  concluding  that
    the claimant's appeal should  be  allowed  under  Article  3.   He  had
    required the Secretary of  State  to  produce  information  as  to  the
    current whereabouts of the co-accused, to say  whether  they  had  been
    deported to Jamaica, to show whether they were  related  to  Dudus  and
    Liverty Coke and whether they had any connection to the  Shower  Posse.
    These were matters that the claimant had to prove as part of her asylum
    claim.  If she had received any threats from the  co-accused  emanating
    from Jamaica she could have asserted  that  in  her  evidence  and  its
    credibility assessed.   It  is  not  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    substantiate facts as asserted  by  her.   The  judge  had  misdirected
    himself in law.

14. His consequent  finding  that  the  co-accused  were  looking  for  the
    claimant in Jamaica was unduly speculative, having made no finding that
    they were there or related to Dudus and Liverty Coke or that  they  had
    any connection to the Shower Posse.

15. Second, the judge's approach was inconsistent with the country guidance
    case of AB (Protection - criminal gangs - internal relocation)  Jamaica
    CG [2007] UKAIT 00018, which requires an assessment of risk in the home
    area.  The judge had not properly addressed  his  mind  as  to  whether
    there was a viable internal relocation option  without  being  admitted
    into the witness protection programme.  There were no  findings  as  to
    the reach of the co-accused and whether she would be tracked or traced.
     AB Jamaica does not support the view that internal  relocation  is  an
    unsafe or unreasonable option in Jamaica in  general.   The  judge  had
    wrongly jumped to  the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  needed  to  be
    admitted to the witness  protection  programme  in  order  to  be  safe
    without first finding a real risk of persecution in her home area based
    on proper findings of fact.  In the alternative he had applied too high
    a standard of proof in respect of whether she would  be  admitted  into
    the programme in  requiring  a  definitive  answer  from  the  Jamaican
    authorities as to whether she would be or not.  If the claimant  cannot
    prove whether there was a  real  risk  of  persecution  from  non-state
    actors in Jamaica because she had no information about them,  it  could
    not amount to a breach of Article 3.

16. Finally the judge had erred in finding that there were very  compelling
    circumstances in respect of Article 8.  The findings were  premised  on
    the flawed Article 3 decision that the claimant would have to  be  live
    under the witness protection programme when there was  no  evidence  of
    persecution in her home  area.   Absent  such  evidence  she  would  be
    returning to Jamaica with her two children and  there  is  no  evidence
    that it would be unduly harsh for them to accompany their mother.

17. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P J G White for  the  reasons
    outlined in the grounds on 25th August 2015.

Submissions

18. Mrs Petterson unfortunately did not have her file but was in a position
    to make submissions on the error of law grounds on the basis of a  copy
    of the  determination  and  the  grounds,  which  she  relied  on;  she
    submitted that the judge had materially erred.  She also observed  that
    he had  made  contradictory  findings  since  he  had  disbelieved  the
    evidence in relation to threats since 2005 but had then speculated that
    she would be at risk on return.

19. Miss Khan strenuously defended the decision. She submitted  that  there
    was no misapplication of the burden of proof.  It was not  unreasonable
    for the judge to say that the Secretary of  State  could  easily  check
    whether the gang members had in fact  been  deported.   The  fact  that
    there had been no  reprisals  in  the  interim  was  because  the  main
    perpetrators had been given very lengthy jail sentences.

20. The evidence from the claimant had been set out in a clear  and  cogent
    manner.  The judge had set out in great detail the police evidence from
    2006 and 2009. The claimant had given evidence against the network as a
    whole. It was clear that this  operation  involved  Jamaican  nationals
    using other Jamaican nationals and  there  was  a  serious  history  of
    violence and  fear  of  future  violence  surrounding  members  of  the
    conspiracy.  She rejected the argument that the judge had not  assessed
    the risk in the home area  -  the  decision  was  not  founded  upon  a
    decision as to whether or not she would  be  admitted  to  the  witness
    protection programme.

21. The judge had considered the case on the basis that the claimant  would
    be at risk as a consequence of having been an informer in 2006  and  on
    the basis that that risk would  be  elevated  if  her  co-accused  were
    linked to the Shower Posse and in Jamaica.  The foundation of risk  was
    established even if neither were true.

Consideration of whether there is a material Error of Law

22. In very many ways this is an absolutely outstanding determination. This
    judge has done an exceptional amount of work on this case.  He  clearly
    took a great deal of care in analysing the evidence,  and  was  clearly
    frustrated that key facts could not be established.

23. I have carefully considered  Miss  Khan's  submission  that  the  judge
    allowed the appeal both on the basis  that  the  claimant's  co-accused
    were linked to the Shower Posse and in Jamaica, and on the  basis  that
    that had not been established.  However, that is simply not clear  from
    the text of paragraph 125.

24. Moreover in saying that the Secretary of State  should  have  responded
    appropriately, by which I presume he meant  by  providing  evidence  in
    relation to the  deportation  of  the  co-accused,  the  judge  clearly
    reversed the burden which always remains with the claimant to prove her
    case, which is that she would be at risk from them in Jamaica.

25. Furthermore the judge has not based his assessment of  real  risk  upon
    findings of fact but upon a number of surmises.   It  would  have  been
    open to him to reasonably conclude that [P] and [D]  were  deported  to
    Jamaica since they were recommended for deportation and had served  ten
    year sentences.  Equally it would be open to him to conclude that  [M],
    having been sentenced to six years, was  in  all  likelihood  deported.
    However, that is not how he phrased his decision.

26. So far as Ground 3 is concerned, if the judge erred in  his  assessment
    of risk, his view of whether there were very compelling reasons why the
    claimant's removal would breach her Article 8 rights and those  of  her
    children is flawed.

27. There is less merit in Ground 2.  The judge assessed  the  evidence  in
    relation to the  witness  protection  programme  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude at paragraph 139 that on the basis of the country  information
    provided there were considerable doubts as  to  whether  she  would  be
    admitted and if she were, whether it would provide adequate  protection
    for her.  He was entitled to conclude that in the absence of admittance
    to the programme relocation would not provide adequate protection.

28. Mrs Petterson was not in a position to assist with the remaking of this
    decision without her file. I canvassed with  the  parties  whether  the
    appropriate course, unusually, would be to remit this  matter  back  to
    the same judge and neither had any objection.

29. In view of the amount of work that the judge has already put into  this
    case, and his familiarity with it, the most economical course would  be
    for this case to be remitted back to him to make an assessment of  risk
    on return on the basis of the facts that he has already made.  He needs
    to clarify whether it  is  his  view  that  the  co-accused  have  been
    deported to Jamaica. If the Secretary of State chooses not  to  provide
    any evidence about deportation at the next  hearing  that  could  be  a
    reasonable inference.  He  also  need  to  say  whether  it  makes  any
    difference to his decision that they have any connection to the  Shower
    Posse.  If it  does,  then  it  is  for  the  claimant  to  prove  that
    connection.

30. This matter is remitted back to Judge Turnock.  There is  no  challenge
    to his conclusions on the asylum claim, nor to  his  findings  of  fact
    which are preserved, namely that the claimant was at risk of  reprisals
    in 2006 but there is no evidence of threats to members of her family in
    Jamaica since then and none to her.

Notice of Decision

The judge erred in law for the reasons set out in ground 1.  The  appeal  is
remitted to Judge Turnock so that he can reassess the risk on return to  the
applicant..

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
