
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03923/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 June 2016                          |On 5 July 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mr B O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                        Respondent/ Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Salam, Solicitor, of Salam & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born  on  [  ]  1956.   He  left
    Nigeria in 1995 for Germany and arrived illegally in the United Kingdom
    in 2005.  He made an application under Article 8 of the  ECHR  in  July
    2010 which was refused.  On 4 January 2013 he sought asylum  and  other
    protection. That claim was refused in  a  decision  dated  27  February
    2015.

2.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Phull  on  15  February  2016.   The
    claimant claimed asylum and/or humanitarian  protection  in  accordance
    with paragraph 339C of the  Immigration  Rules.   Further  it  was  his
    contention that his removal from the United Kingdom would be in  breach
    of Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  At the hearing the claimant  gave  no
    evidence but relied upon a report from a  consultant  psychiatrist,  Dr
    Ganapathy, dated 13 July 2015.

3.   In terms of his asylum claim, it was his case that he would be at  risk
    from his family in Nigeria on account of his change  of  religion  from
    Muslim to Christianity.  It  was  also  his  claim  that  he  would  be
    perceived as being  homosexual  and  would  suffer  accordingly.    The
    Judge, for reasons set out in the determination, did not find that  his
    account was plausible or that he was at any risk upon return because of
    those matters.

4.   The claim for humanitarian protection was based  essentially  upon  his
    mental health and the risks associated with his return  to  Nigeria  on
    that account, in particular the absence of any medication and treatment
    for his mental condition and the violence and intolerance shown by  the
    general population to those individuals who were  perceived  as  having
    mental problems.  The Judge upheld those concerns.

5.   The claimant met [R] his wife in December  2010  and  married  on  [  ]
    2015.  She is a British citizen and has family  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Judge found significant obstacles  to  family  life  being
    enjoyed in Nigeria and allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   The respondent has sought to appeal against that decision on  a  number
    of grounds and hence the matter has come before us to determine whether
    those grounds have substance or not as disclosing a material  error  of
    law.

7.   The first challenge that is made to the  assessment  of  Article  3  is
    that the Judge has failed to look holistically at  all  the  background
    material  as  presented  to  determine  whether  or  not  treatment  is
    available to the claimant.  As has been indicated, reliance was  placed
    essentially upon the psychiatric report prepared by Dr Ganapathy of  13
    July 2015 as appears at pages 194 to 217 of the  hearing  bundle.   The
    claimant has a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder which currently is
    controlled by medication.  In addition the  claimant  receives  psycho-
    social support from his care  coordinator.   The  anti-psychotic  drugs
    which  he  requires  to  manage  his  condition  are   quetiapine   and
    haloperidol.

8.   In the Secretary of State's  decision  of  27  February  2015  detailed
    consideration is given to Article 3 particularly at paragraphs 68 to 71
    of that decision.   The report of the  World  Heath  Organisation  2011
    Mental Health Atlas for Nigeria noted  that  there  was  an  officially
    approved mental health policy which existed with a mental health  plan,
    a dedicated mental health legislation.  The nature of the mental health
    care delivery was set out particularly  by  reference  to  the  primary
    care, although there seemed to be a lack of  referral  procedures  from
    primary care to secondary or tertiary.

9.   The decision went on to deal with the 2012 Journal of Public  Heath  in
    Africa Report which spoke of the limited availability of mental  health
    services in  Nigeria.  It  spoke  of  psychiatric  care  being  largely
    provided at the few large  mental  hospitals  in  the  big  cities,  in
    particular eight federally funded psychiatric hospitals and  six  state
    funded mental hospitals.  There was a facility in  Lagos.   Information
    from medical advisors in the country indicated that mental health drugs
    were available and those included quetiapine and haloperidol.

10.  The Judge, in considering the availability of drugs at paragraph 36  of
    the decision, made reference to the US State Department Report of  2014
    and the COI report of 2014, which reports are said to have stated  that
    mental health care facilities were almost non-existent.   Unfortunately
    those two reports do not seem to feature in the  court  bundle  and  no
    reference is made by the Judge to the evidence cited by  the  Secretary
    of State, otherwise than a passing reference to the reports  as  quoted
    in paragraph 33 of the determination.

11.  Dr Ganapathy in his report, at pages 214 to 215, cites the  WHO  report
    Mental Heath System in Nigeria published in 2006, which  report  speaks
    of the fact that although a list of essential medicines exist they  are
    not always available. Many admissions to the community based in-patient
    psychiatric units are involuntary, 33%  of  the  population  have  free
    access to essential psycho-tropic medicines, but  the  traditional  and
    spiritual healers  deliver  the  bulk  of  mental  health  services  in
    Nigeria.  Mental health services are largely absent  save  in  some  EU
    funding projects.

12.  It seems to us that it was incumbent upon the Judge,  before  making  a
    finding that no drugs were available to the claimant, to have conducted
    a balanced consideration of all the evidence that  was  presented.   We
    find that that was not done.

13.  Even were there to be an absence of drugs, what is perhaps  of  greater
    concern to us is that there was no proper  analysis  of  Article  3  by
    reference to the established case law which sets the burden at  a  very
    high level indeed.  See GS and EO (Article  3  -  health  cases)  India
    [2012] UKUT 00397 (IAC) which was a decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    which an extensive consideration was given to the approach to be  taken
    to mental health and to Article 3, taking into account  of  course  the
    jurisprudence in relation to D v United  Kingdom  [1997]  24  EHRR  423
    (ECtHR and N v United Kingdom [2008] 4 EHRR  39  (ECtHR).   Indeed  the
    fact that life expectancy is dramatically shortened by  the  withdrawal
    of medical treatment is in itself incapable of amounting  to  a  highly
    exceptional case which engages the Article 3 duty.

14.  There have been more recent cases and indeed one  was  cited  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb in  his  decision  of  16  May  2016,  namely  the
    decision M'bodj v Etat Belge [2015] 1 WLR 1539.

15.  Even going back further, the decision in  Bensaid  was  a  decision  in
    which schizophrenia as an illness was very much in  evidence  and  that
    again was a decision which did not result in the finding of Article  3.



16.  We find it is a significant omission on the part of the  Judge  and  an
    error of law not to have considered this matter with a proper  analysis
    of the jurisprudence.

17.  In relation to Article 8, once again the case of  GS  and  EO  made  it
    very  clear that Article 8 was not to be used to circumvent the  proper
    considerations relating to Article 3.

18.  We are also concerned with what are potentially contradictory  findings
    of fact by the Judge.  One the one hand  the  Judge  accepts  that  the
    claimant  has  no  ties   or   contacts   with   anyone   in   Nigeria,
    notwithstanding that the basis of the asylum claim  was  that  he  did.
    Indeed in the submissions made on his behalf by solicitors in a  letter
    of 30 January 2015 reference is made to the fact that  his  father  had
    been married thirteen times and had 37 children. "This means our client
    has a very large family in Nigeria and they live all over Nigeria".  Of
    course this is a very relevant consideration to the  issue  of  support
    and seems largely to have been ignored by the Judge.  At  paragraph  38
    the Judge relies heavily in the findings upon  the  absence  of  family
    support.  It may be that that factually is inaccurate.

19.  Mr Saleem invites us to find that, notwithstanding the shortcomings  in
    relation to Article 8 or Article 3 based on the mental condition of the
    claimant, that there were clear findings by the Judge that the claimant
    satisfied the Appendix FM ten year partner  route,  given  the  finding
    that the claimant satisfies Appendix FM EX.1 as a partner. For our part
    we do not find that the Judge's conclusions are clear  but  rather  the
    contrary, given particularly that succeeding under Appendix FM was  not
    a ground upon which the appeal is in fact allowed. Further we note  the
    comment at paragraph 45 of the determination "the claimant however does
    not meet all the eligibility requirements as a partner and therefore  I
    turn to consider paragraph EX1".  That of course  requires  that  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to family life with a  partner  continuing
    outside the United Kingdom.

20.  The difficulty with that assessment is, as  we  so  find,  that  it  is
    tainted by an inaccurate approach to  the  background  material  as  to
    medication and family support.  The situation  is  not  helped  by  the
    evidence of the claimant's wife herself that she would not find work in
    Nigeria at the same salary but has not looked for  such  work.   It  is
    said that the claimant's parents were deceased and she did not know  of
    any other family in Nigeria.  That of course begs the question  of  the
    many potential relatives.  It also perhaps  does  not  assist  that  no
    enquiry as to whether she would be able to work has been made let alone
    established.  The absence of work was something again which  the  Judge
    held very much in the findings.

Notice of Decision

21.  In general, therefore, we find there to be  merit  in  the  grounds  as
    submitted by the Appellant to this appeal, such as to conclude that the
    errors of law are material to the outcome of a proper deliberation  and
    decision in this matter.  In those circumstances the  determination  is
    set aside.

22.  Given the substantial factual findings that will need  to  be  made  in
    this case and the substantial background material that will need to  be
    considered we deem it appropriate to remit the matter back to the First-
    tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  determination  by  another  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, in accordance  with  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement at paragraph 7.2.

23.   Any  directions  that  are  appropriate  will   of   course   be   the
    responsibility of the First-tier Tribunal when seized of the matter.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 5th July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD



FEE AWARD

We make no fee award as the outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

