
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/03102/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 February 2016                       |  On 30 March 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     KG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:         Not represented
For the Respondent:      Mrs S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 27 June 1986. He is
   appealing against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge
   Harrington, promulgated on 11 August 2015, whereby his appeal against the
   respondent's decision to refuse his application for asylum was dismissed.


2. The background to this appeal is that the appellant entered the UK on 10
   March 2013 with leave as a visitor and with the intention, as notified to
   the respondent, of joining the British army. Whilst in the UK he was
   notified of rule changes that rendered him ineligible to join the army.
   He then applied for asylum.

3. Most of the appellant's family live in Zimbabwe. However, his sister
   lives in the UK and he has resided with her. He has never been
   politically active or experienced difficulties with the authorities in
   Zimbabwe but believes that he would be at risk on return because the
   authorities in Zimbabwe are aware he sought to join the British army
   (having tampered with a letter he received from the British army). In
   addition, he believes that his brother in law, who is divorcing his
   sister, has informed the authorities in Zimbabwe about him.

4. The respondent refused the appellant's application. It was not accepted
   that the Zimbabwean authorities have, or have ever had, an interest in
   him or that he would be at risk on return.

5. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard on 27 July 2015 by Judge
   Harrington. The FtT dismissed the appeal. It found, inter alia, that:
     a. The appellant has no political affiliation although his father is
        an MDC supporter.
     b. The letter from the British army that the appellant believed was
        tampered with was more likely damaged in transit or opened in
        error.
     c. The authorities in Zimbabwe did not have any particular interest in
        the appellant or desire to prevent him travelling to the UK. They
        would be aware that he travelled for employment purposes.


6. In assessing the risk the appellant would face on return to Zimbabwe the
   FtT first considered the risk at the airport, applying HS (Returning
   asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094  as affirmed more recently
   in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT
   00059(IAC). The FtT found that even if the appellant revealed his attempt
   to join the British army he would not be seen as requiring a second stage
   interview and would be able to safely pass through the airport.

7. The FtT then considered the risk the appellant would face in his home
   area. Applying CM, the FtT found that because the appellant did not have
   an MDC profile and would be returning to an urban area he would not face
   risk on return in his home area.

8. The FtT also considered the appellant's Article 8 claim and determined
   that it was unable to succeed either within or outside of the Immigration
   Rules.

9. The grounds of appeal argue that the FtT failed to properly assess the
   risk to the appellant of being subjected to persecution at Harare
   International Airport and that the FtT's conclusions as to the absence of
   risk were not consistent with the Country Guidance case law given, in
   particular, the appellant's effort to join the British army and his
   father's involvement with the opposition. The grounds also argue that
   Country Guidance case law was not followed in respect to the risk the
   appellant would face upon return to his home area.

10. At the error of law hearing, Mr KG was not represented. He relied on
   his grounds of appeal and a detailed skeleton argument (which I confirm I
   have read carefully). At the hearing he highlighted the risk he would
   face at the airport arising from the suspicion caused by his attempt to
   join the British army and his father's involvement with the opposition.

11. Mrs Sreeraman's response was to argue that the FtT had undertaken a
   comprehensive assessment and directed itself to, and properly applied,
   the relevant authorities. She maintained that this is a clear and well
   reasoned decision where the judge has explained which evidence was
   accepted and which was not.

Consideration

12. The appellant's strongest argument is that the FtT failed to properly
   assess the risk he will face upon arrival at Harare International airport
   given that he travelled to the UK to join the British army.

13. It was common ground that the Country Guidance case of HS, despite its
   age, was applicable in this appeal and should be applied in respect of
   the risk the appellant will face at the airport in Harare on being
   returned to Zimbabwe. HS identifies a two stage interview process for
   people being returned to Zimbabwe through Harare International Airport.
   The first stage is an initial interview at the airport to establish
   whether the person is of interest to the authorities. This stage does not
   carry with it a risk of mistreatment.  If someone is of interest to the
   authorities a second stage interrogation may follow, which does entail a
   serious risk of mistreatment. HS states that a Zimbabwean being returned
   will be of interest, such that there is a real risk of them being
   subjected to the second stage interrogation, in the following
   circumstances.

            "249...The deportee will be of interest if questioning reveals
           that the deportee has a political profile considered adverse to
           the Zimbabwean regime. Further interrogation away from the
           airport may also follow if enquires reveal aspects of a military
           history to be followed up such as being absent without leave or
           being involved in military activities outside Zimbabwe..."

14. The FtT correctly identified, at paragraph [39], that the key issue for
   it to resolve was how the authorities will view the appellant's aborted
   attempt to join the British army. In analysing this issue, the FtT found
   that the appellant will be believed if he tells the authorities he was
   unsuccessful in his effort to join the British army because the change in
   rules preventing him from doing so were well publicised and the time he
   has spent in the UK is insufficient for him to have served in the army.
   The FtT then found that a second interview would not be required because
   the appellant will not be of interest as someone who tried but failed to
   join the British army and as someone who has never been of interest to
   the authorities and has no MDC profile.

15. The appellant challenges this analysis as being inadequate and
   speculative, arguing that the suspicion of his involvement with the
   British army will be enough to trigger the second stage interview.
   However, the FtT has engaged with, and applied, the relevant Country
   Guidance; and it has given clear reasons for its findings. Reviewing both
   HS and the factual matrix in this appeal as a whole, it is clear that it
   was open to the FtT, for the reasons it gave, to conclude that the
   appellant's history will not be seen by the Zimbabwean authorities as
   requiring a second stage interview following his arrival at the airport
   in Harare upon being removed from the UK.

16. The appellant also contends that the FtT erred in not recognising the
   risk he would face returning to his home area. I do not accept that there
   is merit to this argument. The FtT found that the appellant would be
   returning to an urban, not rural, area and therefore, following CM, would
   not be at risk, as a failed asylum seeker, of having to demonstrate
   loyalty to ZANU-PF. The FtT also noted that the appellant had lived and
   worked in Zimbabwe throughout the worst of the political troubles without
   difficulties. I am satisfied that the FtT's finding is consistent with CM
   where a distinction is drawn between the risk faced in rural and urban
   areas.

17. In the appellant's skeleton argument he argued that the distinction
   between urban and rural areas has no relevance in the province from which
   he originates and cited part of paragraph [189] of EM and Others
   (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) in support of this
   contention. The wording quoted in the skeleton argument is as follows:


         "...serious concerns as to the position of a Zimbabwe citizen
         without ZANU-PF connections, returning from the United Kingdom
         after a significant absence to live in Mashonaland West,
         Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East, Manicaland, Masvingo or
         Midlands province"

18. However, when the extract of paragraph [189] cited by the appellant is
   placed in its context it becomes apparent that the Tribunal in EM did
   distinguish rural and urban areas and that the extract cited by the
   appellant does not support the argument he is purporting to make. The
   full paragraph [189] from EM states (emphasis added):

         Although, as a general matter, the risk of persecution and other
         serious ill-treatment in Zimbabwe, including the rural areas, has
         significantly declined, as at 28 January 2011, compared with the
         position under review in RN, the evidence before us raises serious
         concerns as to the position of a Zimbabwe citizen without ZANU-PF
         connections, returning from the United Kingdom after a significant
         absence to live in Mashonaland West, Mashonaland Central,
         Mashonaland East, Manicaland, Masvingo or Midlands province.  Such
         a person, returning to a rural part of such a province, where the
         chief or headman is likely to be an acolyte of ZANU-PF, may well
         find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to serious
         ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF authority figures and those they
         control, unless, of course, the Immigration Judge is entitled to
         conclude that the returnee is likely to be associated with such
         elements.

19. I am satisfied that the grounds of appeal, both individually and
   cumulatively, fail to establish that the FtT made a material error of law
   and that the FtT reached a decision that was open to it on the evidence
   and consistent with the Country Guidance case law.

Decision

    a. The appeal is dismissed.

    b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of a material error of law and shall stand.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 14 March 2016                 |

