
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03185/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                         MR JEEVARAJA KANAPADIPILLAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Turner, of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M Paul  promulgated  on  20  July  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 6
    February 2015 refusing the appellant's claim for asylum.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  24  June  1986.   The
    appellant applied for a Tier 4 Student  visa  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 11 April  2011.   This  visa  was  granted  valid  until  22
    September 2014.  The appellant travelled to Qatar on 11 June 2011 on  a
    fake passport supplied by an agent.  The appellant flew to  the  United
    Kingdom on his own passport arriving on 11 June  2011.   The  appellant
    claimed asylum on 12 September 2014 and was issued with form IS.151A as
    an illegal entrant.  The respondent  rejected  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim as she did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  credible  and
    consistent and did not therefore accept the appellant's claim  to  have
    been arrested, tortured and found guilty of being a member of the  LTTE
    in Sri Lanka.  The respondent also rejected the appellant's claim to be
    at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for humanitarian protection  and  that  there
    was not a real risk of treatment that  would  amount  to  a  breach  of
    either Articles 2 or 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    ("ECHR").  The respondent considered Article 8 in  respect  of  private
    life and found that the appellant did not meet  the  Immigration  Rules
    and that there were no exceptional circumstances that would  warrant  a
    grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the decision of the  respondent  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Tribunal found, in relation to the  documents
    submitted by the appellant, that there was no proper  audit  trail  and
    that the originals had not been provided and neither had there  been  a
    formal witness statement producing the documents.  The Tribunal did not
    accept that the appellant's claim to have been detained and tortured in
    Sri Lanka was credible.  The Tribunal considered that the lack  of  any
    evidence as to the provenance of the funds used to bribe to obtain  his
    release was a weakness in the appellant's  case.   The  Tribunal  found
    that the injuries sustained were not indicative that  he  was  detained
    and tortured  as  alleged.   The  Tribunal  therefore  found  that  the
    appellant was not at risk  of  any  ill-treatment  if  he  were  to  be
    returned to Sri Lanka.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    assert that the judge failed to engage with the appellant's explanation
    as to why he did not claim asylum for three years and when his  student
    leave was about to lapse.  It was also submitted that the  judge  erred
    at paragraph 41 when stating that there was no audit trail linking  the
    certified copy of the Sri Lankan court file to the Sri Lankan attorney.
      It  was  further  asserted  that  the  judge   erred   in   requiring
    corroboration for the appellant's account.  On 13  August  2015  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Heynes granted the appellant permission to  appeal.
    The grant of permission sets out that it is arguable that the  findings
    of the judge from paragraph 45 onwards are inadequate.



The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the beginning of the hearing  Mr  Turner  referred  to  two  letters
    submitted with the grounds of  appeal.   These  were  letters  dated  2
    August 2015 and 21 December 2014 from Mr  Dharmasena  -  a  Sri  Lankan
    lawyer.  These letters were not before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    I indicated that they had not been served with the grounds of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal despite being referred to as appendices.  Mr  Turner
    contacted his instructing solicitor and  a  further  faxed  bundle  was
    received by  me  after  the  hearing  which  contained  those  letters.
    However, as the letters were not before the First-tier Tribunal I  have
    not taken them into consideration when considering the  submissions  on
    error of law.

Summary of Submissions

The Appellant's Submissions

 6. The first ground of appeal asserts that the  judge,  at  paragraph  39,
    found that the appellant's credibility was damaged by the fact that  he
    did not claim asylum until his student leave was about to  lapse.   The
    judge took into  account  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.   It  is  submitted  that,
    although the judge set out the  factual  summary,  he  failed  to  have
    regard to the fact that the appellant had sought to address  the  issue
    of delay and had done so in an arguably credible and congruent  manner.
    The appellant asserted that he approached a solicitor  in  Wembley  who
    advised him to  keep  a  low  profile  under  a  student  visa  as  the
    government had arranged a charter flight to  clear  Sri  Lankan  asylum
    seekers.  In 2013 the appellant sought  advice  from  another  firm  of
    solicitors but was not properly advised  or  served  by  them.   It  is
    asserted  that  this  firm  was  later  intervened  by  the  Solicitors
    Regulation Authority.  The grounds assert that the  delay  in  claiming
    asylum was as a result of bad advice by those with licences to practise
    law.  The case  of  FP  (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 13 is relied on.

 7. Mr Turner submitted that, at paragraph 40 of the  decision,  the  judge
    does not deal with the appellant's account as to why he did  not  claim
    asylum.  The appellant explained in detail in his interview that he had
    approached a firm of solicitors shortly  after  entering  the  UK.   He
    explains that he was advised not to make an asylum claim at that  point
    because the Home Office had arranged for charter flights  and  for  Sri
    Lankan asylum seekers to be returned home.  Mr  Turner  submitted  that
    that was factually accurate at that time as the Home Office  was  doing
    that.  I indicated to Mr Turner that he was giving evidence  in  making
    such an assertion.  He submitted that the appellant gave details of who
    he contacted with the names of solicitors at questions 137, 138 and 139
    of his interview and explained why he did not claim asylum at that time
    at question 144.   At  paragraph  39  the  judge  makes  absolutely  no
    reference to the appellant's explanation holding the delay against  the
    appellant as affecting his credibility.  He submitted that the  finding
    that the delay affects the appellant's credibility infects the findings
    at paragraph 40 in relation to a failure to contact his lawyer  in  Sri
    Lanka during the period he was in the UK prior to making his claim  for
    asylum.

 8. Ground 2 - the grounds assert that the judge erred at paragraph  41  in
    stating that there was no audit trail that  would  link  the  certified
    copy of the Sri Lankan  court  file  to  the  Sri  Lankan  attorney  Mr
    Dharmasena.  It is submitted that the finding  cannot  be  regarded  as
    factually correct.  It is  asserted  that  the  appellant's  solicitors
    wrote to Mr Dharmasena on 28 November 2014  and  a  link  response  was
    provided on 1 December 2014.  The appellant refers to a letter from  Mr
    Dharmasena dated 21 December 2014 and 2 August 2015 which confirm  that
    he was a Sri Lankan  attorney  who  supplied  the  case  file.   It  is
    asserted that this letter delivers a fatal blow to the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal especially  given  that  the  authenticity  and
    credibility of the attorney have not been challenged.

 9. Mr Turner submitted that  the  judge  has  placed  no  weight  on  that
    evidence firstly because the judge found that it was a curious  feature
    of the case that the appellant had not been in contact with his  lawyer
    in Sri Lanka to establish whether or not there was any  arrest  warrant
    or whether any action had been taken once it had been  discovered  that
    he had fled the country during the time that the appellant was  in  the
    UK prior to his claim for asylum.  The judge, at paragraph 41,  appears
    to find it curious that after more than three years the  appellant  was
    able to contact his lawyer in Sri Lanka.  He submitted that  there  was
    no  challenge  to  the  bona  fides  of  the  Sri  Lankan  attorney  Mr
    Dharmasena.   He  submitted  that  the  documents  obtained  were  good
    corroborative evidence that the appellant  was  detained  and  appeared
    before the Sri Lankan court and was granted bail.  The judge has failed
    to engage with the fact that the appellant  in  interview  referred  to
    obtaining documents from his lawyer for example at questions 86, 83, 81
    and 80 the documents were not produced at the last minute. He submitted
    that the letter from the lawyer in Sri Lanka has  to  be  seen  in  the
    context.  The court documents submitted show that Mr Dharmasena was the
    lawyer appointed therefore there is a link between the court  documents
    and the appellant's lawyer in Sri Lanka.

10.  It  is  asserted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  applied   an
    excessively high burden of proof despite  rehearsing  the  standard  of
    proof required at  paragraph  36  as  being  that  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The appellant relies on the  case  of  Chiver  (Asylum;
    Discrimination; Employment; Persecution) (Romania) [1994]  UKIAT  10758
    (24 March 1994).

11. Ground 4.  It is asserted that the  judge  has  fallen  into  error  in
    requiring corroboration for the  appellant's  account.   The  appellant
    relies on the case  of  Kasolo  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (13190) and on the  case  of  ST  (Corroboration  -  Kasolo)
    Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119.

12. Mr Turner submitted that the judge placed undue weight on the need  for
    corroborative evidence.  He referred to paragraph  45  of  the  judge's
    decision and submitted that there was no real evaluation of the  report
    provided by Dr Arnold.  The judge  refers,  at  paragraph  39,  to  the
    report  but  comments  that  the  appellant  had  not  sought   medical
    assistance at the time of his injuries in Sri Lanka.   He  referred  to
    paragraph 43 of the judge's decision wherein the judge cites that it is
    self-evident   that   whenever   injuries   have   been   sustained   a
    contemporaneous record is by far the best tool for assessing  what  has
    happened.  He submitted that it was not put to the  appellant  that  he
    could have scarred his own back.  The appellant gave an account of  his
    detention and torture in Sri Lanka.  He has obtained a  report  from  a
    reputable doctor that states that the location and multiplicity of  the
    scars makes it virtually impossible that they could be  self-inflicted.
    The doctor concluded that  the  scars  are  diagnostic  of  torture  by
    branding.  He submitted that the judge rejected the doctor's report  on
    the basis that there was no contemporary report.  He asserted that this
    was frankly not good enough in respect of an  asylum  claim  where  the
    standard of proof is to a lower standard.  He referred to paragraph  45
    of the decision where  the  judge  set  out  "I  do  not  discount  the
    possibility that he may have received injuries to his back."  Mr Turner
    submitted that it is clear from this passage  that  the  judge  doubted
    even that there were injuries and scars.  This is  completely  contrary
    to the evidence as  the  report  shows  that  the  appellant  did  have
    injuries to his back.  The judge has not explained why he rejected  the
    doctor's evidence but it appears to be that the only reason was because
    the appellant did not get contemporaneous medical reports. He submitted
    that there is no requirement or  obligation  to  provide  corroborative
    evidence in an asylum claim but in any event in  this  case  there  was
    good corroborative evidence that consisted of the  medical  report  and
    the court documents.  He asserted  that  the  judge  has  not  properly
    recorded at paragraph 41 the contents of the letter and has not engaged
    with the first part of that letter where Mr Dharmasena confirms that he
    attended at court  and  represented  the  appellant  and  made  a  bail
    application for him.  That of itself is corroborative evidence.  In the
    absence of any challenge to the bona fides of the lawyer the judge  was
    wrong to find that there was no  corroborative  evidence.  He  asserted
    that the appellant would be at risk on return falling within  paragraph
    356(iv) of GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  The appellant would be detained because there
    was an arrest warrant out for him and because he had skipped bail.   If
    detained, he would be at risk of ill-treatment.

The Respondent's Submissions

13. The respondent served a Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules  2008)  response.   The  respondent  asserts  that  the
    appellant's complaint about the judge's lack  of  engagement  with  the
    appellant's explanation of having  been  let  down  or  ill-advised  by
    representatives in the UK is flawed.  It  is  submitted  that  numerous
    cases have made clear that any such allegation is a  serious  one  that
    must be made with those accused given the chance to  provide  rebuttal.
    The respondent relies on the case of BT Nepal  [2004]  IAT  and  Azimi-
    Moayed UKUT [2012].  It is further submitted  that  in  any  event  the
    judge is clearly taking a broader point about credibility  relating  to
    the appellant's  alleged  injuries  and  the  absence  of  any  medical
    assistance.  With regard to the complaint made in the grounds about the
    burden of proof it is asserted that the  appellant  suggests  that  the
    correct burden of proof is that of the balance of probabilities.   This
    is obviously incorrect.  The respondent submits that the judge was  not
    confused as he states the standard correctly at paragraph 38.

14. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response.  He asserted that  the  judge
    did no more than what he had to. He sifted the evidence and arrived  at
    his conclusion.  The judge was entitled to make the finding he  did  in
    relation to Section 8.  The appellant had not sought medical assistance
    in Sri Lanka.  He asked the  doctor  to  prepare  the  report  for  the
    purpose of his asylum claim.  The findings at paragraph 40 and 41  were
    entirely open to the judge to make. Regarding the finding at  paragraph
    41, that the Sri Lankan  lawyer  said  that  the  court  file  was  not
    available and might be furnished  in  due  course,  led  the  judge  to
    consider that he was not satisfied as to  the  circumstances  regarding
    the production of the documents from Sri Lanka. He submitted  that  the
    comment of the judge  at  paragraph  43,  regarding  a  contemporaneous
    record, is  simply  an  observation  by  the  judge.   He  referred  to
    paragraph 44 and noted that the judge took into consideration  that  no
    evidence was provided with regard to where the funds came from  to  pay
    the bribe.  He submitted that the key points were at paragraph 45.  The
    judge considered what the risk on return was.  The judge is required to
    make credibility findings and paragraph 46 does just that.  In response
    to a question that I asked regarding whether or not the Home Office had
    ever questioned the bona fides of Mr Dharmasena,  Mr  Tarlow  indicated
    that there had not been any assertion  that  the  bona  fides  of  this
    attorney had been questioned.  He referred to the letter of 3 July 2015
    and the general letter from the  High  Commission  (in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal bundle) which sets out that the majority of letters  from  Sri
    Lankan attorneys are not credible.

Discussion

15. The judge sets out clearly at paragraph 38 that the burden  is  on  the
    appellant to show, to the requisite low standard, that he is at risk of
    persecution or significant ill-treatment if he is to be returned to Sri
    Lanka.  Although the judge was entitled to arrive at  a  decision  that
    failure to claim asylum for  a  period  of  nearly  three  years  after
    entering  the  United  Kingdom  undermined  the  credibility   of   the
    appellant's claim. However, the appellant had given an explanation  and
    whilst it might be open to the judge to have rejected that  explanation
    he ought to have engaged with the explanation given and  given  reasons
    for rejecting it.  The explanation has been given by the  appellant  in
    his asylum interview and in his witness statement before the  Tribunal.
    Whilst I do not accept that there was any obligation on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State to make  the  enquiries,  and  it  might  have  been
    helpful had the appellant obtained some confirmatory  evidence  of  his
    visits to solicitors, the judge ought to have considered whether or not
    that explanation was accepted or rejected by him.   I  also  accept  Mr
    Turner's submission that that explanation was relevant as to why he may
    not have contacted his lawyer in Sri Lanka until the time of making his
    asylum claim.  The judge at paragraph 40 sets out

         "The very least that one would have expected is that he would  have
         been in contact with his lawyer there to establish whether  or  not
         there was any warrant for his arrest or whether any action had been
         taken once it had been discovered that he had fled the country."

16. If the appellant was acting on incorrect advice from a  solicitor  this
    would have explained the reason for  not  contacting  his  lawyer.   At
    paragraph 41 the judge appears to find it curious  that  the  appellant
    was able to contact his lawyer in  Sri  Lanka  after  more  than  three
    years.  Whilst it is open to the judge to take that into  consideration
    it does not appear that the appellant was asked to explain why  he  was
    able to contact his lawyer after such a period of time.

17. The judge was entitled to take into consideration the lack of the audit
    trail and  that  there  was  no  letter  or  formal  witness  statement
    producing the documents asserting to be a certified  copy  of  the  Sri
    Lankan court's file when considering the weight to  be  placed  on  the
    documents.  The judge was also entitled to take into consideration that
    the letter from Mr Dharmasena of 1 December 2014  mentioned  only  that
    the case record is not available and that a  certified  copy  might  be
    furnished in due course.  However, what the judge  did  not  take  into
    consideration is the first part of that  letter  which,  as  Mr  Turner
    submitted,  confirms  that  Mr  Dharmasena  appeared   for   the   bail
    application on behalf of the appellant for a court case on 24 May 2010.
     The judge has made no finding with regard to whether or not he accepts
    that Mr Dharmasena did attend on behalf of the  appellant  at  a  court
    hearing in May 2010.  In the appellant's interview at  question  37  he
    indicates that he was produced to the court on 10  May  2010.   At  the
    very least the judge ought to have given  reasons  for  rejecting  that
    letter as corroborative of the appellant's account given  in  interview
    with regard to appearing in court on that date.

18. The judge has not given sufficient or adequate reasoning as to  why  he
    rejects the medical report produced by Dr Arnold.   The  judge  records
    that so far as the scars on the back are concerned no specific time was
    put on those (paragraph 42) then at paragraph 43 the judge notes:

         "It is self-evident that whenever injuries have been  sustained,  a
         contemporaneous record is by far the best tool for  assessing  what
         has happened.  I take into account that, although the appellant was
         tortured in a way in which he claimed in Sri Lanka, he never sought
         to obtain any medical help whilst in Sri  Lanka.   That  meant,  of
         course,  therefore  that  there  was  no  independent  source   for
         confirming that the injuries had been  inflicted  at  the  time  he
         claimed."

19. In paragraph 45 the judge sets out:

         "... I do not discount the possibility that he  may  have  received
         injuries to his back - although I have serious doubts as to whether
         the injuries to his arm were caused by  a  third  party.   However,
         those injuries (in my view) are not in this case indicative that he
         was detained and tortured as alleged."

20. Whilst that was a finding that would be open to a judge  in  this  case
    the judge has failed to give adequate reasons as to how he  arrived  at
    that conclusion in light of the medical report which indicated that the
    location and multiplicity of the scars  made  it  virtually  impossible
    that they could have  been  self-inflicted  and  that  the  scars  were
    diagnostic of torture by branding.

21. I am mindful of the anxious scrutiny required in considering appeals in
    asylum claims. Although a judge does not  have  to  set  out  extensive
    reasons or refer to every single piece of evidence  in  this  case  the
    judge has failed to engage sufficiently with important aspects  of  the
    evidence and has failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the  findings
    reached.

22. I find that there are material errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision and I set aside that decision pursuant to section 12(2)(a)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

23. I considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings.
    I am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact finding that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

24. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case  to  be  heard
    before a different judge pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and  12(3)(a)  of
    the TCEA. The case is to be listed  at  Taylor  House  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before any judge other than Judge N M  Paul  the  date  of  the
    hearing to be fixed at the next available opportunity.

25. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of  law.
The decision is set aside accordingly.  The case is remitted to  the  First-
tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a de novo hearing before any  judge  other
than Judge N M Paul.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 21 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

