
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03804/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15 February 2016                       |On 9 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                     JB
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, aged 21. He has appealed with
      the permission of the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  Judge  of
      the First-tier Tribunal J C Hamilton, dismissing his appeal against  a
      decision of the respondent to remove him to Sri Lanka  as  an  illegal
      entrant, having refused  his  asylum  and  human  rights  claims.  The
      appellant, who is Tamil, claimed to have been detained and tortured in
      Sri Lanka on account of his brother-in-law's membership of the LTTE.
   2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction. I  continue  that
      direction in order to protect the identity of the appellant. .


   3. The appellant claimed to have left Sri Lanka on 18 April 2014 by boat,
      travelling to India. He made his way to the UK,  arriving  on  11  May
      2014. On 15 May 2014  he  contacted  the  Asylum  Screening  Unit.  He
      claimed asylum and was  detained.  His  claim  was  processed  in  the
      Detained Fast Track system then in operation at the Harmondsworth IRC.
      The appellant's claim was refused for reasons given in a letter  dated
      5 June  2014.  The  appellant's  account  was  considered  to  contain
      inconsistencies and discrepancies. It was not  accepted  he  had  been
      detained and tortured or that he was at risk on return.  Even  if  his
      account were true, it was noted he had twice been released on  payment
      of a bribe and his brother-in-law  had  been  arrested.  Therefore  he
      would be of no further interest to the authorities.


   4. The appeal was heard at  Hatton  Cross  on  13  February  2015.  At  a
      previous hearing the appeal had been transferred out of  the  Detained
      Fast Track  procedure.  Medical  reports  were  filed  describing  the
      appellant's physical and psychiatric injuries. The former, prepared by
      Professor S Lingam, was broadly supportive of the appellant's  account
      of  ill-treatment.  The  latter,  prepared  by  Professor  R  Persaud,
      indicated there was a risk  the  appellant  would  commit  suicide  if
      removed to Sri Lanka. The appellant did not give evidence  because  it
      was considered he was not fit to do so. The only witness was a  friend
      of the appellant, Mr Subramaniam.


   5. In a lengthy and detailed decision the judge set out his  reasons  for
      dismissing the appeal. He concluded in paragraph 91 that the  core  of
      the appellant's account had been consistent and he found the appellant
      had been detained and tortured on account of his association with  his
      brother-in-law from 26 November 2013 until 14 January 2014  and  again
      from 20 February until 15 April 2014. He then wrote:


         "92. However, even on his  own  account,  the  Appellant  was  only
         detained initially because  the  authorities  could  not  find  his
         brother-in-law. On the  second  occasion  he  seems  to  have  been
         arrested  because  he  was  with  his   brother-in-law   when   the
         authorities found his brother-in-law and arrested  him.  I  do  not
         find there is any or any sufficient evidence  for  me  to  conclude
         that  the  Appellant  was  arrested  and   detained   because   the
         authorities had an interest in him personally. This  is  consistent
         with the objective information about the focus of the  authorities'
         anti-terrorist activities and the appellant's own account."


   6. The judge found the only evidence  of  any  ongoing  interest  in  the
      appellant on the part of the authorities came  from  Mr  Subramaniam's
      account of his telephone conversation with the appellant's father. The
      judge accepted the witness's account of the conversation but found the
      information relayed to him by the appellant's father was not reliable.
      Even if the father's account of a visit by the authorities looking for
      the appellant in November 2014 was accurate, it  did  not  necessarily
      demonstrate ongoing interest in the appellant.   Even  if  there  were
      ongoing interest, this was localized and the appellant could  relocate
      within Sri Lanka. Applying the country guidance given in GJ and Others
      (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC),  the
      judge concluded the protection claim was not made out.


   7. The judge then turned to the other ground of  appeal  which  concerned
      the risk of the appellant committing suicide if he were removed to Sri
      Lanka.  Again  the  judge's  assessment  is  detailed.  He  found  the
      appellant had not shown that adequate medical treatment would  not  be
      available to him in Sri Lanka.  He  went  on  to  apply  the  guidance
      provided in Y (Sri Lanka) & Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362  and  he
      recognized the appellant might fall into the  category  identified  in
      that case of persons who had a genuine fear notwithstanding there  was
      not a real risk of those fears becoming reality. The judge  identified
      his task as assessing whether there was a real risk of suicide or self-
      harm and, if there was, whether it could be managed by  the  provision
      of appropriate treatment. He considered the expert  opinion  contained
      in the report of Professor Persaud.


         "110. Overall I found his assessment of the risk of suicide  to  be
         couched in unhelpfully vague terms and qualified by the caveat that
         the risk was dependent on  the  Appellant  not  receiving  adequate
         psychiatric care. As I have already noted  there  was  no  evidence
         before  me  that  adequate  psychiatric  treatment  would  not   be
         available in Sri Lanka.


         111. In all the circumstances even applying the lower  standard  of
         proof, I do not find that the appellant has shown that there  is  a
         real risk that he will  harm  himself.  The  Appellant  has  severe
         depression but there is no evidence that he has made any attempt to
         self-harm  or  has  acted  on  his  reported  suicidal   ideations.
         Professor  Persaud's  concerns  appeared  to  be  rooted   in   his
         unsubstantiated  belief  that  the  Appellant  would   not   obtain
         appropriate treatment. Furthermore, he has not given  any  adequate
         detail about the proposed treatment or why he believes it would not
         be available in Sri Lanka."


   8. The appeal was dismissed on Article 3 and Article 8 grounds.


   9. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
      granted by the Upper Tribunal. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum considered it
      was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  finding  the
      circumstances of the appellant's second detention were such that there
      would no longer be any adverse interest in him. It was  also  arguable
      that the First-tier Tribunal had not engaged with the issue of whether
      the appellant would be capable of accessing treatment so as to  negate
      the suicide risk.


  10. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal.


  11. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material error of law.


  12. Mr Paramjorthy's submissions followed the grounds  seeking  permission
      to appeal. He began with the issue of the  judge's  treatment  of  the
      article 3 claim based on the risk of suicide. In  essence,  he  argued
      the judge's reasons  for  not  placing  greater  weight  on  Professor
      Persaud's report, that he did not appear to be qualified  to  give  an
      opinion on  whether  there  was  treatment  available  in  Sri  Lanka,
      overlooked the evidence  which  was  before  him  that  mental  health
      services in Sri Lanka are sparse.


  13. Next Mr Paramjorthy argued the judge's finding on risk on  return  was
      erroneous because he had failed to engage with paragraph 339K  of  the
      Immigration Rules[1]. In reasoning that the purpose of the appellant's
      detention had been to obtain intelligence regarding his brother-in-law
      and therefore the authorities would have no further  interest  in  the
      appellant following his brother-in-law's capture, the  judge  appeared
      not to have recognised that the appellant was detained for two  months
      on the second occasion and was severely  ill-treated.  Mr  Paramjorthy
      suggested the judge's decision was infected by his error  in  relation
      to internal flight as the whole point of the  'watch  list'  was  that
      individuals would be allowed through airport security and arrested  in
      their home area. The judge also overlooked the importance of  familial
      connections to persons in the LTTE.


  14. Ms Isherwood argued there were no  errors  in  the  decision.  On  the
      question of risk on return, she emphasised the  judge  had  not  heard
      oral evidence from the appellant and therefore he could only  rely  on
      the available evidence from such sources as the  background  evidence,
      the medical reports and Mr Subramaniam's  evidence.  She  likened  the
      grounds seeking permission to appeal to  mere  disagreement  with  the
      judge's decision. She argued the judge's consideration of  the  mental
      health issue was also adequate.


  15. I reserved my decision on the question of whether  the  judge  made  a
      material error of law.


   Error of law


  16. I shall give my decision firstly on the point about risk on return and
      secondly in relation to the risk of suicide.


   Risk on return


  17. I start by noting the judge made positive findings of fact in relation
      to all the matters put forward by the appellant with the exception  of
      his  father's  account  of  recent  interest  on  the  part   of   the
      authorities, although even on that point the  judge  made  alternative
      findings in case he was wrong. Overall, the  judge  gave  careful  and
      thorough  consideration  to  the   evidence   and   the   issues   for
      determination.


  18. However, having found the appellant was detained  and  ill-treated  in
      the past, the judge did not expressly remind himself of paragraph 339K
      of the rules. This would not always lead to error if it were clear the
      judge had kept the point in mind and applied it in substance. However,
      despite the otherwise thorough analysis of the evidence  made  by  the
      judge, I find there is a danger here that the judge did not  have  the
      past persecution point fully in mind. My reasons are as follows.


  19. As the Upper Tribunal made clear in GJ & Ors,


         "428. ...  The  effect  of  [paragraph  339K]  is  that  where  the
         circumstances are the same, then past persecution or  serious  harm
         is to be regarded as predictive of future  persecution  or  serious
         harm, absent a change of circumstances."


  20. The appellant's last experience of detention and torture was in  April
      2014. Plainly the judge was aware of this. However, it is not possible
      to find in his decision any indication that he has considered  whether
      this might be a predictor of  future  persecution.  There  can  be  no
      suggestion that there has been a material change of  circumstances  as
      regards the prevailing circumstances in Sri  Lanka.  The  election  of
      President Sirisena with a promise of reforms has  not  resulted  in  a
      change in the background evidence of human rights  violations  in  Sri
      Lanka.


  21. Nor do I regard the  capture  of  the  appellant's  brother-in-law  as
      sufficient reason to find a change of circumstances given the fact the
      appellant  was  not  released  for  two  months  and  was  ill-treated
      notwithstanding there was  no  longer  a  need  on  the  part  of  the
      authorities to hold him in order to ask where his  brother-in-law  was
      hiding. It seems reasonable to conclude that mere association with his
      brother-in-law  was  enough  to   raise   suspicions   regarding   the
      appellant's own political opinions.


  22. The circumstances do not  lead  ineluctably  to  a  finding  that  the
      appellant would be at a real risk of further persecution, applying the
      GJ & Ors  country  guidance.  However,  for  present  purposes,  I  am
      satisfied there is a fault in the judge's chain of reasoning  and  his
      error may have been material to the outcome of the appeal. He did  not
      give adequate consideration to the paragraph  339K  point,  especially
      given the length and severity of his ill-treatment during  his  second
      detention.


  23. I set aside the judge's decision  on  the  protection  aspect  of  the
      claim.

   Suicide risk

  24. Having carefully considered the submissions made to me,  I  also  find
      the  judge's  assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  was  flawed.   I
      understand the judge's reasons for finding Professor Persaud's  report
      did not carry  weight  with  regard  to  the  risk  of  the  appellant
      committing suicide because of his reliance on what appeared to  be  an
      assumption  that  there  would  be  no  medical  treatment  which  the
      appellant could access. However, if the judge had had  regard  to  the
      Upper Tribunal's findings in GJ & Ors about the lack of mental  health
      services in Sri Lanka, he  might  have  found  an  echo  in  Professor
      Persaud's opinion.


  25. In allowing the appeal of the third appellant in that case, the  Upper
      Tribunal said as follows:

         "454.     The  evidence  is  that  there  are   only   25   working
         psychiatrists in the whole of Sri Lanka.  Although there  are  some
         mental health facilities in Sri Lanka, at paragraph 4 of the  April
         2012 UKBA Operational Guidance Note on Sri  Lanka,  it  records  an
         observation by Basic Needs that "money  that  is  spent  on  mental
         health only really goes to the large mental health institutions  in
         capital  cities,  which  are  inaccessible  and  do   not   provide
         appropriate care for mentally ill people".

         455. In the UKBA Country of Origin Report issued in March 2012,  at
         paragraph 23.28-23.29, the following information is recorded from a
         BHC letter written on 31 January 2012:

             "23.28 The BHC letter of 31 January 2012 observed that: "There
             are no psychologists working within the public sector although
             there are [sic] 1 teaching at the University of Colombo. There
             are no numbers available for psychologists working within  the
             private sector. There are currently 55 psychiatrists  attached
             to the Ministry of Health and working across the country."

              Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)

              23.29 The BHC letter of 31 January 2012468 observed that:

                       "Post Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (PTSD)  was  first
                  recognised in Sri Lanka in patients affected by  the  2004
                  tsunami. Many of the psychiatrists and  support  staff  in
                  Sri Lanka have received training in Australia and  the  UK
                  for  the  treatment  of   the   disorder.   A   Consultant
                  Psychiatrist from  NIMH  said  that  many  patients  often
                  sought ayurvedic or traditional treatment for the  illness
                  long before approaching public hospitals, adding that this
                  often   resulted   in   patients   then   suffering   from
                  psychosis.""


  26. On the basis of this guidance, there is real doubt about whether  this
      appellant would have had been able to access the  treatment  he  would
      need to reduce the risk of a completed  suicide  attempt.  Again,  the
      issue is open to a finding either way but the  judge's  error  was  to
      disregard the psychiatric report for the reason he gave without taking
      a rounded view of the evidence before him. A rounded assessment  would
      include evaluation of the ability of the appellant to access treatment
      both in terms of its general availability or  otherwise  and  his  own
      mental state given his subjective fears. The evaluation would have  to
      assess the likelihood of his family providing support and supervision.




  27. I set aside the judge's decision because it is  vitiated  by  material
      errors of law. The appeal must be heard in the First-tier Tribunal  by
      another judge who must assess the risk on return  and  the  article  3
      medical claim.   To  assist  with  that  task  I  make  the  following
      directions:






                                 DIRECTIONS


      (1) The appeal will be heard by any Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      except Judge J C Hamilton on a date and at a place to be notified;
      (2) The findings made by  Judge  Hamilton  regarding  the  appellant's
      experiences in Sri Lanka and family links are preserved;
      (3) The Tribunal and the respondent should be informed  ahead  of  the
      hearing whether it is proposed to call  the  appellant  to  give  oral
      evidence;
      (4) The appellant's solicitors should notify the  Tribunal  whether  a
      Tamil interpreter is required for any witness;
      (5) If either party wishes to file additional evidence not  previously
      filed, a consolidated bundle should be prepared containing  the  fresh
      evidence and all the evidence previously filed, which bundle  must  be
      filed at the Tribunal and served on the other party no later  than  14
      days before the hearing.




NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.  The  appeal  will  be
    heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.



                               Signed                 Date 16 February 2016




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal




   -----------------------
   [1] "339K. The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution
   or serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution or such harm,
   will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-founded
   fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there
   are good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will
   not be repeated."


