
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03076/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Field House                |Determination Promulgated |
|On:  28 August 2014                    |On:   1 September 2014    |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                   MS J A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E King, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms P Hastings, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appeals a decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Tiffen) dismissing her appeal against a  decision
      made on 7 May 2014 by the Respondent to  refuse  her  application  for
      asylum and humanitarian protection.


   2. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal against the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge's decision was granted on 20 June  2014  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Eshun on the basis that it was arguable for the reasons
      set out in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal that the  judge
      may have erred in law.

   3. By a letter dated 26 June 2014 the Respondent's  representative  wrote
      to the Tribunal stating

        "The respondent concedes that the FTJ has made a material error  of
        law in the consideration of the sufficiency  of  state  protection.
        The respondent further requests that the matter be taken out of the
        Detained Fast Track process  and  revert  back  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. The Respondent wishes to  investigate  further  following
        the recent arrest in the UK of the MQM leader and the  implications
        thereof, as well as the general country situation."




   4. At the hearing before me Ms King appeared for  the  Appellant  and  Ms
      Hastings for the Respondent. Ms Hastings said that she  had  not  been
      able to contact the case owner to ascertain the up to date position or
      to find out whether the Respondent intended to withdraw  the  decision
      under appeal pending reconsideration. Both representatives agreed that
      in the particular circumstances of this case and with an error of  law
      having been conceded on a fundamental  issue  it  was  appropriate  to
      remit this  matter  for  rehearing  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms
      Hastings, noting further that the Appellant is pregnant, agreed to ask
      the case owner to confirm to the Appellant's representative as soon as
      possible whether the decision under appeal was to be withdrawn.




   DECISION


   5. In detailed grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  Appellant
      asserts that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  having  made  generally
      positive credibility findings erred in law in her assessment  of  risk
      on return. The Respondent accepts that this is the  case  and  in  the
      particular circumstances appertaining wishes to make further  specific
      and general investigations. In my judgement, and taking  into  account
      the Respondent's concession, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      failed to  properly  consider  the  sufficiency  of  state  protection
      available to the Appellant upon a return to Pakistan. This  error  was
      material to the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  that  decision
      therefore falls to be set aside. Due to the nature of the error of law
      and  in  particular  the  Respondent's  stated  aim  to  make  further
      investigations before  deciding  whether  the  decision  under  appeal
      should be maintained it is appropriate for this matter to be  remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing






   Conclusion


   6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law for the reasons set out above.


   7. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and in  accordance
      with the President's direction this matter is suitable for and  should
      be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.












Signed:                                                  Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
