
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03855/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2016                  |On 06th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mrs Elima Ndoro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Nyawanza (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pooler, promulgated on 6th January 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Bennett  House,  Stoke-on-Trent,  on  18th  December  2015.    In   the
    determination, the judge made wholesale  findings  of  fact  that  were
    against the Appellant, but purported then to allow the appeal on asylum
    grounds (whilst dismissing it on human rights grounds under Articles  3
    and 8 of the ECHR).  The Respondent Secretary  of  State  appealed  the
    decision, and upon permission being granted on 3rd February  2016,  the
    matter arises before me today.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Zimbabwe, who was born on  12th
    June 1952.  She had arrived in the UK on 20th June 2002 with  leave  to
    enter with valid entry clearance which was valid only until  13th  June
    2003.  She has remained here ever since.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that  she  would  be  persecuted  in  Zimbabwe
    because she had claimed asylum and had remained  outside  Zimbabwe  for
    many years.  She was afraid of "Mugabe's people" and  referred  to  the
    exodus of many teachers from Zimbabwe especially between 2000 and  2002
    (see paragraph 7 of the  determination).   She  is  also  HIV  positive
    (paragraph 8).  However the judge had found the Appellant's account  to
    be inconsistent (paragraphs 15 to 16).   Moreover,  the  Appellant  had
    delayed in claiming asylum (paragraph 18).  She had never been involved
    in politics in Zimbabwe (paragraph 19).  The judge had  regard  to  the
    country guidance case in relation to teachers  in  Zimbabwe  (paragraph
    21).  He concluded that the Appellant would not be at  risk  (paragraph
    33).  He also concluded that the Appellant's HIV diagnosis did not mean
    that she would be without care and treatment or  at  risk  in  Zimbabwe
    (paragraphs 35 to 36).

 4. He went on to hold that there was nothing exceptional by  reference  to
    which the Appellant's circumstances should be  considered  outside  the
    Rules (paragraph 43).  He  referred  to  the  "lack  of  evidence"  and
    concluded, "the Tribunal is frankly unable  to  reach  a  finding  that
    removal would have adverse  consequences  for  the  Appellant's  health
    because there is no up-to-date medical evidence" (paragraph  45).   The
    Appellant's initial presence in the UK was precarious  (paragraph  46).
    The judge did not hear any evidence from the Appellant's family members
    or any friends or contacts (paragraph 47).  The judge  concluded  that,
    "I am  persuaded  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  and  remained
    proportionate and the Article 8 appeal must  be  dismissed"  (paragraph
    47).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge should have returned to
    his determination under the "Slip Rule", and reissue the  determination
    because he was wrong to have allowed it on asylum grounds  when  it  is
    clear that he intended to dismiss  the  appeal.   This  is  because  at
    paragraph 16 the judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  targeted
    personally in Zimbabwe.  At paragraph 18,  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's credibility has been affected by her  actions  in  delaying
    her claim to be at risk.  At paragraph 25  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant would be returned to Zimbabwe as a  former  teacher  with  no
    political profile.  At paragraph 32 the  judge  found  that  there  was
    nothing in the evidence to support a finding that the  Appellant  would
    be at risk of persecution in her home area of Harare.  At paragraph  33
    there was a further finding that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk
    upon return at the airport.

 6. On 3rd February 2016, however, permission to appeal was granted on  the
    basis that whereas it was arguable that the judge did intend to dismiss
    the asylum and humanitarian protection appeals in line with  the  human
    rights appeal, as is evident from the final sentence of paragraph 32 in
    which the judge states, "I can find nothing in the evidence to  support
    a finding that the Appellant would be at real risk  of  persecution  if
    she returned to her home area of Harare", the fact was  that  paragraph
    31 of the Procedure Rules did not allow any  amendment  to  a  decision
    once the decision had been sent out.  This was the position here.   The
    decision had been promulgated.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 12th August 2016, Ms  Ahmad,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State,  submitted  that  although
    paragraph 31 of the Procedure Rules states that the Tribunal may  amend
    the decision at any time, the Tribunal decision in Katsonga [2016] UKUT
    00228, makes it clear that this is not possible, if the intention is to
    reverse the effect of a decision that has already been made.   All  one
    can do is simply set aside the decision on the basis that there  is  an
    error of law and remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. In reply, Mr Nyawanza, who is an  experienced  practitioner,  submitted
    that he would have to agree that Katsonga had  precisely  this  effect.
    However, he urged that, rather  than  the  Upper  Tribunal  remake  the
    decision, it was appropriate for this matter to be remitted back  to  a
    judge other than Judge Pooler for the appeal to be reheard again,  just
    in case there was a prospect of a cross-appeal or any new evidence  was
    to be furnished.

 9. In reply, Ms Ahmad submitted that she had seen nothing  to  the  effect
    that any new evidence was to be submitted or the appeal was  to  change
    in any other material respect to what it had previously been  and  this
    being so there was no reason why this Tribunal  could  not  remake  the
    decision itself.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

11. This is clearly a case where the  judge  makes  express  finding  that,
    "there is in my judgment nothing in the country  guidance  to  indicate
    that a return to an area of Harare  which  was  not  said  to  be  high
    density would put the Appellant at any heightened risk" (paragraph 32).
     The judge found that the Appellant was a  teacher  with  no  political
    affiliation, "who had experienced no threats or intimidation during her
    26 years of employment" (paragraph 32).  He then  ended  this  analysis
    with the conclusion that, "I  can  find  nothing  in  the  evidence  to
    support a  finding  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution if she returned to her home area of Harare" (paragraph 32).



12. In the circumstances, the conclusion in the "notice of decision"  that,
    "the appeal on asylum grounds  is  allowed"  could  not  have  been  an
    intended conclusion by the judge in this case.   On  the  face  of  it,
    accordingly, it amounts to an error of law.  Second,  authority  exists
    in the form of Katsonga [2016] UKUT 00228  where  the  Tribunal  stated
    that, "once a decision has been given in a particular sense it  may  be
    subject to setting aside under Rule 32 or the appellate  process",  but
    the power under the Slip Rule does not enable a decision to be reversed
    at the instance of a losing party,  because  "in  all  other  respects,
    having made and sent out the decision" the original  judge  is  functus
    (paragraph 10).

Remaking the Decision

13. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  Under Rule 7.2 of the Practice Statement, it is made clear that
    the general position is for the Upper Tribunal to remake the  decision,
    an error of law having been first found, and this being so,  I  see  no
    reason why the decision cannot be remade by this Tribunal.  Given  what
    Judge  Pooler  below  held,  in  his  comprehensive  and  well-analysed
    determination, the only appropriate  decision  in  this  appeal  is  to
    dismiss the appeal of the Appellant and I so decide.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.  I remake  the
    decision as follows.  This appeal is dismissed.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    5th September 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    5th September 2016

