
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03011/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision  Promulgated                |
|On  10th November 2014               |On 21st January 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     S R
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is citizen of Sri Lanka born on 19th February 1977 and he
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 29th  April  2014
    to remove him from the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under
    Section 10 of the immigration and Asylum Act 1999 following the refusal
    of international protection.

 2. Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Symes refused the  appellant's  appeal
    on all grounds.

 3. The appellant made an application for permission to appeal and this was
    granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen.

 4. The Judge rested his rejection of the appellant's credibility  in  part
    on discrepancies in the evidence and  recorded  such  discrepancies  at
    [21] of the determination.  However the judge failed  at  [21]  of  the
    determination to take account of or make findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's explanation for the perceived discrepancy  in  relation  to
    who  accompanied  him  in  travelling  to  Chennai.   The   Record   of
    Proceedings indeed acknowledges that the appellant gave an  explanation
    as to the discrepancy in the travel arrangements.  Further,  the  Judge
    fails to acknowledge the representations that the bribe alleged to have
    been paid that the appellant's evidence throughout was not inconsistent
    [see AIR 95].  These errors were relevant to important factors  in  the
    Judge's overall assessment which in turn led to an adverse  credibility
    finding against the appellant.

 5. When approaching the medical  evidence  the  judge  cited  JL  (medical
    reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC)  but  stated  at  [25]
    that the medical evidence failed to acknowledge  that  the  appellant's
    account was challenged by the Secretary of State  which  undermined  Dr
    Lingam's view.  In fact the medical report acknowledged  the  Secretary
    of State's refusal letter.  The  Judge  also  appeared  to  reject  the
    evidence as it relied 'heavily on the explanation tendered  to  him  by
    the appellant for his scars and overall I do not consider that this  is
    the kind of report that can outweigh the concerns I have raised above'.
    As the findings in respect of the  appellant's  credibility,  cited  at
    paragraph 4 above, are flawed, these must in  turn  taint  the  Judge's
    findings in respect of the appellant's medical evidence.

 6. There was further challenge in respect of the sur place findings and in
    relation  to  overall  scrutiny  of  the  evidence   because,   despite
    dismissing the claim, at [33] the judge found that the appellant had  a
    well  founded  fear  of  persecution.   The  latter  appears  to  be  a
    typographical error but as I have found an error of law in  respect  of
    the findings on credibility I set aside the decision in its entirety.

 7. The matter should be returned to the First Tier Tribunal for a  hearing
    de novo because of the nature and extent of the findings to be made.

 8. The matter is listed for 29th April 2014 and a Tamil interpreter is  to
    be present. Any further evidence is to be served on both  the  opposing
    party and the Tribunal at  least  14  days  prior  to  the  substantive
    hearing.



Signed      Date 10th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
