
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03283/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th September 2018                       |12th October 2018             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. B. Jones, Counsel instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 22 May 2018, I set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal came before me to be remade.


 2. I continue the anonymity direction.
 3. In order to establish his claim to be  a  refugee  the  Appellant  must
    establish that the Respondent's decision  is  contrary  to  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the United Nations Convention  relating  to
    the Status of Refugees made at Geneva on  28  July  1951  (as  amended)
    ('the Refugee Convention'), or that it does  not  comply  with  Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC dated 29 April 2004  ('the  Directive').   Failing
    this, the Appellant can challenge the decision as being  in  breach  of
    his rights under the ECHR.


 4. The Appellant is required to show that he is currently at  "real  risk"
    of persecution if returned to Sri Lanka as a person  who  falls  within
    article 1(A) of the Refugee Convention, in  which  case  he  is  to  be
    accorded recognition as a refugee under paragraph 334 of HC 395.  If he
    does not qualify as a refugee  he  is  required  to  show  "substantial
    grounds" for believing that, if returned to Sri Lanka, he "would face a
    real risk of suffering serious harm" as defined by paragraph 339C of HC
    395, in which  case  he  is  to  be  granted  humanitarian  protection.
    Alternatively he has to show that that returning him to Sri Lanka would
    cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of its obligations  under  the
    ECHR, as he faces a near-certainty of death such as to place the United
    Kingdom in breach of Article 2, or that he would be subject to  a  real
    risk of torture or inhuman or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment  of
    sufficient severity to engage Article 3, or  that  the  decision  would
    otherwise  constitute  an  unwarranted  interference   with   qualified
    protected human rights.


 5. Paragraph 339L of HC395 states that it is the duty of an  appellant  to
    substantiate his claim and sets out the relevant conditions to  be  met
    when assessing evidence.  As well as a statement of claim, an appellant
    is required to produce "all documentation at [his  disposal  regarding]
    age, background (including background details of  relevant  relatives),
    identity,  nationality(ies),  countries  and   place(s)   of   previous
    residence,  previous  asylum  applications,  travel  routes"  and  also
    "identity and travel documents".  I have had regard to these conditions
    when assessing the credibility of the evidence.  I have also considered
    the application of section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
    of Claimants) Act 2004 ('the 2004 Act') to the evidence in this appeal.




 6. I have also taken into account the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No
    2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive  appellant  guidance,
    given the evidence of the Appellant's mental health.


 7. The standard of proof required of an appellant  is  a  low  one,  to  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, recognising the  difficulty  so  often
    faced by appellants in proving their case.  This  standard  applies  to
    both past and current  circumstances,  and  also  to  establishing  the
    future risk in the country to which they will be returned.


The  Appellant's  given  background,   immigration   history   and   general
circumstances


 8. The Appellant's case  is  set  out  in  the  record  of  his  screening
    interview dated 21 August 2013, the  record  of  his  asylum  interview
    dated  7  February  2014,  the  supporting  evidence,  the   background
    evidence, the skeleton argument and the oral evidence at  the  hearing.
    I do not propose to set out the Appellant's case here as this is to  be
    found in these papers and in the Record of Proceedings.


The Appellant's claim of persecution


 9. The Appellant fears persecution on account of  his  political  opinion.
    He fears the Sri Lankan authorities as he was detained  and  mistreated
    by the Sri Lankan authorities as they believed that he  was  affiliated
    to the LTTE.  This is a reason which engages the 1951 Convention.


The Respondent's decision


10. The Respondent's reasons for refusing the Appellant's asylum claim  are
    set out in the reasons for refusal letter dated 12 February 2015.   The
    Respondent accepted the  Appellant's  identity  and  nationality.   The
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had past involvement  with
    the LTTE.  However, the one preserved finding from the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which was agreed at the outset of the hearing, was
    that the Appellant was an LTTE supporter, and assisted in the  delivery
    of weapons and fundraising, for a period until the end of the civil war
    in 2009, as is set out in [87] of the First-tier Tribunal decision.


11. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant left Sri Lanka in  2009  and
    travelled to France with an agent.  The Respondent's records  confirmed
    that the Appellant applied for asylum in France.   The  Respondent  did
    not accept that the Appellant had returned to Sri Lanka from France via
    Italy and Damascus, arriving back in Sri  Lanka  in  April  2010.   The
    Appellant had failed to provide evidence to substantiate the claim that
    his brothers paid for him to return to Sri Lanka and an agent organised
    his journey.


12. An assessment of the Appellant's claimed journey to the United  Kingdom
    had been made.  It was  noted  that  the  Appellant  failed  to  remain
    consistent in his account of the document  used  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom on 6 August 2013.  In the light of his claim to have  travelled
    to the United Kingdom on his own national Sri Lankan passport,  it  was
    noted that the Respondent's records indicated that a visa had not  been
    issued to him.  It was also noted that he was not a  biometric  hit  to
    any visa issued by the UK authorities.  He  claimed  at  his  screening
    interview that the agent had applied for these on his behalf.   However
    later he had stated that he had never claimed for a  visa  before.   It
    was not accepted that he would have  been  able  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom through an international airport on such  a  passport  as  that
    purported to have been used by him.


13. Given the clear  inconsistencies  and  credibility  issues  present  in
    relation to his claim of travelling to  the  United  Kingdom  from  Sri
    Lanka, considerable doubt was cast upon his claim of having returned to
    Sri Lanka in 2009.  As a result the remainder  of  his  claim  was  not
    accepted.  However the claim to have been  arrested  and  detained  was
    considered by the Respondent.


14. The following credibility points cast doubt upon his claim.  He claimed
    that between 2010 and 2013 he went back to the village and  his  father
    got a paddy field for lease, and he was engaged in cultivation.  He did
    not claim to have had any involvement with the LTTE during  this  time,
    nor did he claim to have experienced any problems with the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  There was little to suggest that  the  authorities  would
    maintain an interest in him.


15. He claimed that his sister was arrested by the  Sri  Lanka  authorities
    from his home when they came to look for  the  Appellant.   He  claimed
    that CID came to his home in February 2011.  It was noted that  he  had
    been unable to remain consistent in relation to this claim.  There were
    discrepancies arising in relation to the  actions  after  his  sister's
    arrest.  Additionally it  was  noted  that  he  had  failed  to  remain
    consistent as the key factors of his arrest and detention.


16. Consideration was given to his  claim  that  he  was  informed  by  the
    authorities that he was arrested due to the suspicion of his  brothers'
    involvement in the LTTE.  His brothers were accused of sending money to
    the LTTE.  Despite this claim it was noted that he was  not  questioned
    about such matters during his six-month detention.  It  was  considered
    incredible to claim that he  would  be  arrested  on  suspicion  of  an
    offence but not questioned about it.  Furthermore it was noted that  he
    did not claim to being questioned about his involvement  in  the  LTTE.
    On this basis it would appear that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
    have no reason to arrest and detain him as claimed.


17. Further consideration was given to his claimed release from  detention.
    It was noted that he claimed that his  release  was  paid  for  by  his
    brothers but he later claimed that his parents paid stating  that  they
    sold their land in order to pay  the  25  lakh  necessary.   Given  his
    continued failure to remain consistent during his  claim,  it  was  not
    accepted that he was arrested and detained as claimed.


18. The Respondent considered section 8 of the  2004  Act.   The  Appellant
    claimed to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  6  August  2013.
    Although he claimed that he travelled with the  intention  of  escaping
    his problems in  Sri  Lanka,  he  failed  to  highlight  his  need  for
    international protection on arrival.  It was considered that if he  was
    in genuine need of international protection he would  have  sought  the
    assistance of the authorities at the earliest opportunity.   His  delay
    in claiming asylum undermined his claim to be in fear of his life.


19. By his own admission he claimed that he produced a passport obtained by
    deception as if it were a valid passport.  It was  noted  that  he  had
    failed to remain consistent in respect of this part of his claim.   His
    behaviour fell under section 8 and his credibility  was  damaged  as  a
    result.


20. The Respondent considered risk on  return.   His  claim  to  have  been
    arrested and detained by the Sri Lankan authorities had  been  rejected
    in its entirety, but consideration was given to any potential  risk  he
    may have on return.  He did not  claim  to  be  involved  in  political
    activities in  United  Kingdom  nor  to  be  involved  with  the  Tamil
    diaspora.  He claimed that he had not supported the  LTTE  in  any  way
    since arriving in the United Kingdom.  Consideration was given  to  his
    claim to have attended a single Heroes' Day celebration in London.


21. It was not accepted that it  would  be  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    government as a threat to  the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  nor  was  it
    accepted that he had had, or continued to have, a significant  role  in
    post-conflict Tamil separatism.  The Respondent considered the case  of
    GJ and others (post-civil war; returnees) [2013] UKUT 00319  IAC.   Any
    involvement he claimed to have had with  the  LTTE  was  low-level  and
    would not cause the Sri Lankan authorities to be  currently  interested
    in him.  It was considered that since he had been in the United Kingdom
    he did not  claim  to  have  been  involved  in  any  activities  which
    supported Tamil separatism and therefore he would not be viewed by  the
    Sri Lankan government as taking part in activity  that  would  threaten
    the integrity of Sri Lanka.


22. Even if it was accepted that he had been  detained  by  the  Sri  Lanka
    authorities, it was not considered this would  put  him  at  risk.   He
    claimed to have been released from detention on the payment of a bribe,
    and as such it was considered  that  he  was  not  of  any  significant
    interest to the authorities.  He was also able to travel  from  Colombo
    airport on his own national passport.  As he was able to leave  Colombo
    airport it was considered that his name was not on a stop list.


23. The Respondent considered  that  there  was  no  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the Appellant would be  persecuted  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.   He  considered  that  he  did  not  qualify  for  humanitarian
    protection or that the decision breached Articles 2 and  3  ECHR.   The
    Respondent considered Article 8 ECHR under the  immigration  rules  but
    considered that he did not meet the  requirements  of  the  rules.   He
    considered that the decision did not breach the Appellant's  rights  to
    family or private life under Article 8 outside the immigration rules.


24. The Respondent considered the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  should  be
    allowed to stay in the  United  Kingdom  based  on  Article  3  medical
    grounds.  He suffered from pain in his hand and hips after being beaten
    by the Sri Lankan army and he was receiving psychiatric treatment.   He
    claimed to be receiving medication but he had not stated his dosage  or
    medication type.  The Respondent considered the documents submitted  in
    support including the psychiatric report prepared by Dr. Lawrence dated
    10 August 2013, and other medical documents.  The claim was  considered
    in line with the case law of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31,  and  GS  and  EO
    (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT 00397 (IAC).  Although  it
    was acknowledged that the medical facilities in Sri Lanka were  not  as
    developed as those in the United Kingdom or other  European  countries,
    it was considered that medical treatment was available for the  medical
    conditions that  he  had  suffered.   The  evidence  provided  did  not
    indicate that his condition was at such a critical stage that it  would
    be inhumane to remove him.   It  was  not  accepted  that  his  removal
    reached the high threshold of severity to breach Article 3.  He did not
    qualify for discretionary leave.


The hearing

25. I heard oral evidence from the  Appellant's  brother,  TS1.   Ms  Jones
    informed me that the Appellant had  attended  the  hearing  centre  but
    preferred to remain outside the  hearing  room.   Both  representatives
    made oral submissions.  I reserved my decision.


26. At the outset of the hearing, Ms. Jones explained that TS2, another  of
    the Appellant's brothers, could not attend the hearing as  on  the  day
    before the hearing, his  wife  had  been  arrested.   Due  to  domestic
    situation he had to remain at home as  requested  by  social  services.
    Ms. Jones did not request an adjournment.


27. However, during the course of cross-examination of TS1, Ms. Jones  made
    an adjournment request on the basis that she had been told that TS1 had
    the same information regarding the Appellant's journey to Sri Lanka  as
    TS2 who was unable  to  attend  due  to  domestic  circumstances.   She
    submitted that it was clear that this was not the  case  and  therefore
    sought an adjournment.


28. Mr. Jarvis opposed this.  The issue of the return to Sri Lanka and  the
    absence of evidence corroborating the Appellant's return to  Sri  Lanka
    had been raised in the reasons for  refusal  letter.   The  Appellant's
    brothers had not provided this evidence.  It was clear from the witness
    statements which had been provided that the  Appellant's  brothers  did
    not have the same level of information.


29. I considered that it was not in the interests of justice to adjourn the
    hearing.  I took into account that no  updated  witness  statement  had
    been provided by TS2, and that which I had  was  dated  December  2017.
    Ms. Jones stated that she had been told that it  had  been  planned  to
    take a further witness statement on the day prior to the  hearing,  but
    then the domestic issue arose.  The  Appellant's  representatives  have
    been aware of this issue since the reasons for refusal  letter.   Since
    the error of law decision was promulgated in May 2018, four months have
    passed yet the Appellant's  representatives  had  planned  to  take  an
    updated witness statement from one of the  key  witnesses  on  the  day
    prior to the hearing.  The standard directions issued by  the  Tribunal
    indicated that this  should  have  been  done  much  earlier.   I  also
    considered the fact that there was other evidence before me which  went
    to the issue of whether or not the  Appellant  had  been  detained  and
    tortured in Sri Lanka in 2012.  It was not only  the  evidence  of  his
    brothers on which the Appellant relied.  I  did  not  adjourn  and  the
    hearing proceeded.


30. I have also taken  into  account  the  documents  in  the  Respondent's
    bundle, and the five Appellant's bundles, together with the  report  of
    Dr. John Stevens dated 11 April 2017 and the skeleton argument.

Findings and Reasons


Medical reports relating to the Appellant's mental health


31. The Appellant has provided three psychiatric  reports  from  Dr.  Robin
    Lawrence.  The first is dated 13  August  2013  (Respondent's  bundle).
    The two further addendum reports are in Appellant's bundle 5.   I  have
    carefully considered the qualifications and experience of Dr. Lawrence.
     I find that he is a psychiatrist, and is qualified to  produce  expert
    reports such as this.  The Respondent  did  not  challenge  his  report
    either in the reasons for refusal letter, or at the hearing.


32. In the 2013 report Dr. Lawrence had assessed that, while the  Appellant
    had capacity, he was in an altered  mental  state  and  would  find  it
    extremely difficult to instruct a  solicitor,  and  would  find  cross-
    examination extremely difficult.  I find  that  Dr.  Lawrence  saw  the
    Appellant very shortly after his arrival in the  United  Kingdom.   His
    mental state examination is set out on pages 8 and 9 of the report.  On
    page 9 he states that the Appellant is  "subjectively  and  objectively
    depressed and in the  mental  state  consistent  with  someone  who  is
    suffering  from  Post  Traumatic  Stress   Disorder,   with   secondary
    depressive symptoms".


33. On page 10 of the report he states that he has given  consideration  to
    whether the Appellant was simulating his symptoms, and  concludes  that
    this is "extremely unlikely".   He  considers  that  the  Appellant  is
    probably not  intelligent  enough  to  be  able  to  simulate  PTSD  or
    depression.


34. I find that this report, produced very shortly  after  the  Appellant's
    arrival in the United Kingdom, is evidence that the  Appellant  arrived
    with very poor mental health which was not simulated or contrived.


35. In the  most  recent  report,  the  second  addendum  report  dated  11
    September 2018 (pages 66 to 118 of Appellant's bundle 5), Dr.  Lawrence
    states that his impression has not changed.   The  Appellant  has  PTSD
    caused through being tortured.  His depression and anxiety are  getting
    worse.  He states that he is not fit and will never be fit to give oral
    evidence (page  85).   He  states  that  all  the  doctors  seeing  the
    Appellant have agreed with his diagnosis of PTSD.   Two  doctors  agree
    concerning  his  scars.    Three  doctors  agree  about  his  cognitive
    impairment and incapacity to give evidence.


36. I find that Dr. Lawrence has always considered that the Appellant would
    not cope with cross-examination.  He continues to consider this  to  be
    the case  having  examined  him  as  recently  as  September  2018.   I
    therefore attach no weight to the fact that the Appellant did not  give
    oral evidence bearing in mind the medical evidence  provided.   I  find
    that his  evidence  falls  to  be  considered  with  reference  to  the
    Presidential Guidance referred to above.  I find  in  particular,  that
    any inconsistencies relating to dates and times  should  be  considered
    very carefully given his mental health difficulties.


37. The Appellant also provided a psychiatric report from Dr. John  Stevens
    dated  11  April  2017.   I  have  considered  his  qualifications  and
    experience are set out at the end of the report.  I find, having  taken
    into account his qualifications,  including  his  judicial  experience,
    that his evidence can be relied on.  He has set out all the material to
    which he had access at the beginning of his report  together  with  the
    letter of instruction.


38.  Dr. Stevens set at how to his opinion on page 12.  He stated  that  in
    his opinion the Appellant has a major depressive disorder and PTSD.  He
    states that the Appellant has a significant learning disability.  These
    things together contributed to his  impaired  ability  with  regard  to
    instructing a lawyer and understanding legal  proceedings.   He  stated
    that he lacked the requisite mental capacity  in  connection  with  his
    asylum appeal hearing.  He also considered that the Appellant would  be
    most unlikely to be capable of feigning  his  conditions,  exaggerating
    his conditions or malingering.


39. The Appellant's brother was appointed as his litigation friend in  June
    2017.


40. I note that there is a further medical  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's mental health  for  example  the  psychological  report  of
    Carmela Cotterell, the psychiatric report of Dr. Saleh Dhumad, and some
    of the Appellant's medical notes.  However I have considered  the  most
    significant experts psychiatric reports, and  to  a  large  extent  the
    material set out in the other reports duplicates that set  out  by  Dr.
    Lawrence and Dr. Stevens.  I have found that these can be relied on and
    I find that they corroborate the Appellant's claim.


Medical evidence relating to his physical injuries

41. It is the Appellant's account that he was detained and tortured in  Sri
    Lanka in 2012, and released  on  payment  of  a  bribe  in  2013.   The
    Appellant provided a  medical  report  from  Professor  Sundara  Lingam
    (pages 49 to 71 of Appellant's bundle 1).  I have carefully  considered
    this report, to which I gave some consideration in  the  error  of  law
    decision.  In the First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  found  that  Professor
    Lingam had the relevant qualifications  and  experience  to  produce  a
    scarring report.  I have considered his  qualifications  and  expertise
    (pages 50 to 51) and I find that he has the relevant qualifications and
    experience to produce a scarring report.


42. I find that the Appellant was seen by  Professor  Lingam  on  8  August
    2013, only two days after his claimed arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Appellant's claim is that he was  beaten  with  metal  rods  and  a
    heated metal knife (Q85).  Professor Lingam finds that the  Appellant's
    scars are diagnostic of the history that they  were  inflicted  at  the
    same time by two separate instruments as stated (page 54).   He  states
    that the scars are diagnostic with burning  (page  55).   The  clinical
    features are characteristic of burns and cannot be anything else.


43. He addresses the age of the scars on page 56.  He states:


    "I have further carefully considered the age of the  scars  and  I  can
    confirm that the pigmentation of the scars and the healing process that
    they have endured is completely in line  with  the  scars  having  been
    caused in December 2012 about over eight months  ago  as  there  is  no
    hyperemia and the scars are not quite mature looking at the collagen on
    the scars.  These certainly are not fresh scars meaning  two  or  three
    months old.


    There is no clinical pink  pigmentation  -  hyperemia.   There  are  no
    hyperemia in any of the scars thus that they are over 2 to 4 months."


44. Professor Lingam also considers whether the scars  were  self-inflicted
    or caused deliberately to mislead (page 57).  He  states  that  he  has
    ruled out the possibility of self-inflicted injuries because the  areas
    where the scars are located are not easily  reachable.   The  Appellant
    could not have caused them himself.  In relation to whether  they  were
    caused deliberately to mislead,  he  states  that  he  has  "clinically
    concluded that there is no way I nor any other medical expert  in  this
    field can scientifically differentiate between  deliberately  inflicted
    wounds [...] from wounds inflicted by any trauma."


45. I have found above that Professor Lingam  is  qualified  to  produce  a
    scarring report.  He has explained both why the scars are diagnostic of
    the claimed account, and he has given reasons for his opinion as to the
    age  of  the  scars.   He  has  considered  the  possibility  of  self-
    infliction.  I find that his evidence as to the causation and  the  age
    of the scars can be relied on.


46. The Appellant also produced a scarring report from  Dr.  Andres  Martin
    dated 8 July 2015 (pages 10 to 27 of Appellant's bundle  1).   He  sets
    his qualifications (pages 11 to 12).  I have considered the evidence of
    his qualifications and experience and I find that he  is  qualified  to
    produce such a medical report.


47. Dr. Martin's report is consistent with that of  Professor  Lingam.   He
    considers the scars  to  be  diagnostic  of  the  treatment  which  the
    Appellant claimed to have received (pages 15 to 16).  He considers  the
    possibility of self-infliction by proxy but considers that this  is  no
    more than a remote possibility.  He concurs with Professor Lingam  that
    it is scientifically impossible to differentiate,  but  considers  that
    there is no other factor making self-infliction by proxy  more  than  a
    remote possibility.  He refers to Professor Lingam's report and  states
    at the scarring found is the same is found during his examination,  but
    it was at a much earlier  stage  of  healing  when  seen  by  Professor
    Lingam.  In relation to determining the age of the scars, he says  that
    it was possible only to give a very approximate range of time when they
    could have been caused (page 17).  He  said  that  the  scars  appeared
    matured and this was consistent with injuries which occurred more  than
    two years ago.  This is consistent with the Appellant's claim and  also
    with the report of Professor Lingam.


48. He sets out his conclusion on page 18.  He does not have any doubt that
    the scars on the back and upper arm were caused by intentional injuries
    by being hit by a  hot  implement.   With  reference  to  the  Istanbul
    protocol, he states in his expert opinion that the scars  on  the  back
    and  upper  arms/shoulders  are  diagnostic  of  intentionally   caused
    injuries and were likely to have  been  caused  by  a  third  party  as
    described by the Appellant.  I find that I can rely on the evidence  of
    Dr. Martin.


49. I have also considered the Rule 35 report dated 26 August  2013  (pages
    28 to 31 of Appellant's Bundle 1).  This corroborates  the  claim  that
    the Appellant was a victim of torture.


50. Taking the two scarring reports into account, having found that  I  can
    rely on the authors due to their qualifications and experience, I  find
    that they are consistent, and that the  medical  evidence  corroborates
    the Appellant's claim to have been detained and tortured in  2012/2013.
    I find that it is reasonably likely that the scars were caused  in  the
    way claimed by the Appellant.  I find that the  scars  were  caused  in
    2012.  Taking into account the medical evidence, I find that  there  is
    no reasonable likelihood that they were caused  by  self-infliction  by
    proxy, but that they were caused in the way claimed by the Appellant.


The Appellant's account


51. It is against the background of the medical evidence  that  I  consider
    the evidence of the Appellant and of his brothers in  relation  to  the
    return to Sri Lanka in 2010.  I accept that there are some deficiencies
    in  the  evidence,  particularly  in  relation  to  the  provision   of
    corroborative evidence of travel and money transfers.  However, I  take
    into account the passage  of  time,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has consistently claimed that all of his travel was  arranged
    by agents.


52. I have carefully considered the Respondent's reasons for rejecting  the
    Appellant's claim that he was detained and tortured  in  Sri  Lanka  in
    2012/2013.  The main reason for rejecting the Appellant's claim to have
    been detained and tortured was due to the fact that the Respondent  did
    not accept the Appellant's claim to have returned to Sri Lanka in  2009
    due to the "clear inconsistencies and  credibility  issues  present  in
    relation to his claim of travelling to the UK from Sri Lanka" [60].


53. I have stated above that I have considered the Appellant's evidence  in
    accordance with the Presidential Guidance.  I have carefully considered
    the evidence given at screening interview, asylum interview and in  his
    statements, particularly  the  first  witness  statement  in  which  he
    addressed the reasons for refusal letter, and I find that the  core  of
    the Appellant's claim has been consistent.


54. One of the reasons given by  the  Respondent  was  that  the  Appellant
    claimed to have fled Sri Lanka in 2009 due to fear of the  authorities,
    but he returned to Sri  Lanka  out  of  his  own  free  will.   I  have
    carefully considered the evidence regarding the Appellant's  return  to
    Sri Lanka in 2010.   I  have  considered  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant at his asylum interview.  At Q75 he said that  he  registered
    himself in France to claim asylum but the agent held me in a  room  and
    "at the time I had treatment for the mental problem  and  I  had  taken
    something to commit suicide so the agent sent me back to Sri Lanka".


55. In his witness statement dated 8 July 2015 the Appellant said that when
    he was in France he  had  attempted  suicide  by  taking  plant  insect
    killer, having been told that he was due to be removed from  France  to
    another country.  He stated that he continued to have suicidal thoughts
    and due to this the agent decided to return him to Sri Lanka in 2010 to
    live with his family (page 6, Appellant's bundle 1).   When  commenting
    on [57] of the reasons for refusal letter, he stated "I did not  return
    to Sri Lanka out of my own free will.  The agent  returned  me  to  Sri
    Lanka after I had attempted to take my own life.   The  agent  did  not
    want this to happen as he did not want to be blamed for my death  -  so
    the agent decided to return me to my family in Sri Lanka" (page 7).


56. In his witness statement, the Appellant's brother TS1, stated  that  he
    was aware that the Appellant had attempted to take his own life when he
    was in France "because he did not want to continue to live any longer".
     He came to learn of this from his other younger brother in the  United
    Kingdom, TS2.  He stated that he believed that the Appellant was not in
    good health during the time he spent in France in 2009 [4].  At [6]  he
    stated that he contributed financially to the Appellant's return to Sri
    Lanka from France with the assistance of an agent.   His  knowledge  of
    the events leading to the Appellant's return from  France  was  limited
    because it was his younger brother he was dealing with these matters in
    the United Kingdom [10].


57. I find that, given his mental state,  when  he  was  suicidal  and  had
    attempted to  take  his  own  life,  that  to  describe  the  Appellant
    returning to Sri Lanka of his own free will is not accurate.  I  accept
    the evidence that the Appellant's mental health was very  poor  at  the
    time and so it was decided to return him to his family  in  Sri  Lanka.
    While it may seem a somewhat strange course  to  take  having  got  the
    Appellant as far as France, given that he had tried to kill himself  in
    France, I accept that the agent may have wanted to return the Appellant
    to his family rather than risk him killing himself in France.


58. The Respondent also noted that the Appellant had failed to provide  any
    evidence substantiate his claim including boarding  passes,  copies  of
    documents used or  bank  statements.   In  his  witness  statement  the
    Appellant said that he was not given the opportunity to retain  any  of
    this documentation which the agent took from him once  he  returned  to
    Sri Lanka.  He said that the agent did not permit  him  to  retain  any
    travel documents and it was the agent who  had  made  arrangements  for
    people to collect him from the airport and take him back to his  family
    (page 7,  Appellant's  bundle  1).   I  find  this  to  be  a  credible
    explanation and  I  would  not  expect  to  see  any  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's travel to Sri Lanka from France, given his  mental  health,
    and given that he was returning home with no reason to believe that  he
    would need to prove that he had taken this journey at some point in the
    future.


59. In his witness statement TS1 stated that he made a contribution to  his
    younger brother and he believed that it was  his  younger  brother  who
    sent the combined financial contribution to his father in Sri Lanka via
    Western Union.  He believed that this money was paid by his  father  to
    the agent [8].


60. Again, while no corroborative evidence has been provided in relation to
    this by the Appellant's brothers, I take into account  the  passage  of
    time and that there was no reason to believe that they  would  have  to
    prove at some future time that the Appellant had  taken  this  journey.
    It is the evidence of TS1 that it was TS2 who had coordinated the money
    being sent to Sri Lanka in 2010.


61. The other reasons for rejecting the Appellant's journey  to  Sri  Lanka
    from France as set out in the reasons for refusal letter at [58] relate
    to the assessment of the Appellant's journey to the United  Kingdom  in
    2013 from the evidence in the screening and asylum interviews.  I  have
    taken into account in particular the evidence of the Appellant's mental
    health from his examination by Dr. Lawrence shortly after  his  arrival
    in the United  Kingdom  when  considering  the  answers  given  at  the
    screening and asylum interviews.


62. In his witness statement commenting on [58] the Appellant said that  he
    believed he had travelled on a genuine Sri Lankan passport  because  he
    was not stopped anywhere on his journey to the United Kingdom.  He said
    at the same passport had been present at all immigration checks but  he
    was never stopped or questioned about its authenticity.  He  considered
    the passport to be genuine as it contained his name, date of birth  and
    a photograph that looked like him.  He said that the passport was taken
    from him when he arrived in the United Kingdom.  I find this  credible.
    He was only in  possession  of  the  passport  for  short  periods  was
    approaching immigration control, and again I find this to be credible.


63. Given that the Appellant  claimed  to  have  travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom with an agent, who arranged his travel for him, I do  not  find
    it of any significance that the Respondent's records indicated  that  a
    visa was not issued to the Appellant.  The Appellant never  claimed  to
    have applied for a visa himself and there is therefore no inconsistency
    between the Appellant's claim that the agent had applied for a visa  on
    his behalf, and his claim that he had never claimed for a visa  before.
    I find that there is no reason for doubting the  Appellant's  claim  to
    have entered on the passport  which  he  claimed  to  have  used.   The
    Appellant has not claimed that it was a genuine visa.  I find that  the
    Appellant did what the agent told him to do.  On page 7 of his  witness
    statement he said that his father told him that the passport  and  visa
    were ready for him to use, but did not give  details  of  the  type  of
    visa.


64. I do not find that there are  "clear  inconsistencies  and  credibility
    issues" present in relation to the Appellant's claim of  travelling  to
    the United Kingdom from Sri Lanka as set out in  [58]  and  [59].   The
    Respondent rejects the Appellant's claim to have returned to Sri  Lanka
    due essentially to the evidence given about the documents used to enter
    the United Kingdom on 6 August 2013.  The Appellant's evidence has been
    consistent that it was the agent who facilitated  his  entry  into  the
    United Kingdom, and that it was the agent who applied for  a  visa.   I
    find that this alone is  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  doubting  the
    Appellant's claim to have returned to Sri Lanka.


65. Regarding the lack of corroborative evidence from his brothers, I  find
    that the lack of such evidence does not outweigh the evidence contained
    in the medical reports which indicates that the Appellant's scars  were
    caused by events which took place in 2012, and there is no evidence  to
    suggest that they did not take place in Sri Lanka,  nor  was  any  such
    submission actively made by Mr. Jarvis.


66. When considering the account of his detention and torture, many of  the
    Respondent's  objections   to   his   evidence   are   concerned   with
    discrepancies and dates (see [63] to [65] of the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter).  Bearing in  mind  his  mental  health  problems,  which  were
    evidenced at the time by a psychiatric report, I attach  little  weight
    to these inconsistencies.  Further, the Appellant explained that at the
    time of his Rule  35  report  he  was  not  feeling  well  (page  8  of
    Appellant's Bundle 1).


67. In relation to the issues raised at [66] of  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter, at Q101 of the asylum interview the Appellant said that he  was
    asked about his brothers.  Therefore by Q125 he had already  said  that
    he had been questioned regarding his brothers.  Considering the  asylum
    interview record as a whole, particularly Q100 and Q101,  I  find  that
    the Appellant did state that he had been questioned about his role  and
    that of his brothers.


68. I find, having preserved the finding from the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that the Appellant assisted with the delivery of weapons
    and fundraising for the LTTE prior to leaving Sri  Lanka  in  2009.   I
    have further considered the other parts of his account which he  claims
    support his claim to have been detained and tortured, in particular  in
    relation to his sister, and that the authorities  have  enquired  about
    his whereabouts.


69. In relation  to  his  sister,  the  Appellant  said  at  his  screening
    interview that his sister had been missing since 21 March 2012  (Q6.6).
    In his witness statement he clarified that his  sister  been  taken  in
    2011, and that he had made a mistake in his interview when he  said  it
    was 2012 (page 7 of Appellant's Bundle 1).  At his asylum interview  he
    said that the authorities visited his home in February  2011  and  took
    his sister (Q81).  He said  that  the  authorities  said  that  if  the
    Appellant was brought to them, they would release his sister.  They had
    heard nothing more from his sister since this time (Q84).  His  brother
    TS2 stated in his witness statement that his younger sister was missing
    (page 13, Appellant's bundle 5).  He said that  she  was  arrested  and
    taken away in 2011.  I attach no weight to the mistake  made  regarding
    the date.  The Appellant has been consistent  in  his  claim  that  his
    sister was taken by the authorities.


70. TS1 gave evidence that his father had told him about the  disappearance
    of his sister.  He gave evidence that he had found out  was  from  TS2,
    but he had also spoken directly to his father about it.


71. While I find that TS1 was not able to answer all of the  questions  put
    to him, partly because some of the information is second  hand  insofar
    as it was TS2 who was the brother who took the  lead  in  communicating
    with his family in Sri Lanka, particularly in relation to the Appellant
    and his sister, I found TS1's evidence regarding his own  contact  with
    his father credible.  If he did not know the answer, he was prepared to
    say as much rather than hazard a  guess.   He  said  that  he  had  not
    discussed his sister's disappearance with his father earlier as he  had
    found out about it from TS2, and his father was elderly and he did  not
    want to bring it up again and again, causing his father more stress.  I
    found this to be credible, and if TS2 was in frequent contact with  his
    father and discussing these issues, I accept the evidence of  TS1  that
    he did not feel the need to discuss it with his father as well.  I find
    that it is reasonably likely that she was taken as claimed and has  not
    been seen since.


72. In relation to the visits to his home after he arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom, I have given this very careful consideration, especially given
    the submission of Mr. Jarvis set out  below  in  relation  to  risk  on
    return [78].  In his witness statement the Appellant said that  he  was
    in contact with his family and his father had told him  that  the  non-
    uniformed CID had come to the family home enquiring about the Appellant
    and asking where he was (page 8  of  Appellant's  bundle  1).   In  his
    additional witness statement (page  7  of  Appellant's  bundle  2),  he
    stated that he received a telephone call from his father who  had  been
    approached and stopped by four men on 19 February 2016.  He  said  that
    these men were from EPDP, Eelam People's  Democratic  Party.   He  said
    that the four men had asked the Appellant's father questions about  the
    Appellant including his whereabouts.  His father told them that he  was
    living with his brother, but did not state where.  The  men  asked  his
    father why the Appellant could not return to  Jaffna,  and  his  father
    said that he did not want to the Appellant to return to live in Jaffna.
     His father told him that the men had said  that  they  would  need  to
    speak to his father again about the Appellant's whereabouts.


73. At the hearing TS1 was asked whether he was in contact with his father,
    and he said that he spoke to him four or five times a month.   He  said
    was asked whether his father had told him of any problems with the  Sri
    Lankan authorities since 2011.  He said that his father told  him  that
    the authorities came quite often in search of the Appellant.  He  could
    not remember the first time that his father had told him.  As  set  out
    above, I accept the evidence of TS1 regarding contact with his  father.
    I accept his evidence that his father has told him that the authorities
    come  looking  for  the  Appellant  quite  often.   I  find  that  this
    corroborates  the  claim  in  the  Appellant's   statement   that   the
    authorities have come looking for him in the past,  and  I  accept  the
    evidence of TS1 that this interest is ongoing.  The Appellant's  sister
    is still missing, and she was taken when the authorities  came  looking
    for the Appellant.


74. GJ is clear that the fact of someone being released  on  payment  of  a
    bribe does not point  to  the  authorities'  lack  of  interest  in  an
    individual (paragraph 275).  It is also clear from this paragraph  that
    it is possible to leave through the  airport  even  when  a  person  is
    actively being sought.  Neither the fact that the Appellant  claims  to
    have been released on payment of a bribe, nor the fact that  he  claims
    to have left through the airport without  problem  cast  doubt  on  his
    claim to have been detained as claimed.


Section 8


75. I find that there was no significant delay in the Appellant's  claiming
    asylum.  He claimed asylum on 21 August  2013  having  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 6 August 2013.  In his witness statement he said that
    he had attended the Respondent's offices on 10 August 2013 but was told
    to return on 21 August 2013.  Even on the later date, there is  only  a
    period of some two weeks which I find is of no significance.


76. I have considered the fact that he claimed asylum previously in France.
     I accept his evidence that he was told he was going to be removed  and
    then attempted to take his own life.  I find that he then  returned  to
    Sri Lanka.  The events which led to this claim occurred in Sri Lanka in
    2012/2013, and are not the same as the basis on  which  he  would  have
    claimed in 2009.


77. Taking into account all of the evidence, and all of my findings  above,
    according significant weight to the medical evidence provided,  I  find
    it is reasonably likely that the Appellant was detained and tortured in
    Sri Lanka in 2012/2013 as claimed on account of the fact that he worked
    for the LTTE for a period until 2009.  I find that he returned  to  Sri
    Lanka from France in 2010 as claimed.   I  find  that  his  sister  was
    taken by the authorities in 2011.  I find that he was arrested in 2012,
    detained and tortured.  I find it is  reasonably  likely  that  he  was
    released on payment of a bribe in 2013, and that he then  travelled  to
    the United Kingdom with the assistance of the  agent.   I  find  it  is
    reasonably likely that the authorities have continued to search for the
    Appellant, and still have an interest in him.


Risk on return


78. Considering my findings above, I turn to the issue of risk on return to
    the Appellant.  Mr. Jarvis accepted that, if I were to  find  that  the
    Appellant was detained and mistreated in Sri Lanka as claimed,  and  if
    the evidence  regarding  ongoing  interest  from  the  authorities  was
    reliable, the Appellant would be at risk on return as there would be an
    ongoing adverse interest in him.  He submitted however that I could not
    put weight on the evidence regarding  any  ongoing  interest  from  the
    authorities.  I have found above at [73] that I can place weight on the
    evidence of ongoing interest.


79. The country guidance set out in paragraph 356 of GJ states:


      "(7)The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or
      serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
      otherwise, are:

       (a)    Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to  the
       integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  are,  or  are
       perceived to have a significant role in  relation  to  post-conflict
       Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities
       within Sri Lanka.


       (b)    Journalists (whether in print or other media) or human rights
       activists, who, in either  case,  have  criticised  the  Sri  Lankan
       government, in particular  its  human  rights  record,  or  who  are
       associated with publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.


       (c)    Individuals who have given evidence to  the  Lessons  Learned
       and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri  Lankan  security
       forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities  in  alleged  war
       crimes.  Among those who may have witnessed war  crimes  during  the
       conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
       who have already identified themselves by giving such evidence would
       be known to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only  they  are
       at real risk of  adverse  attention  or  persecution  on  return  as
       potential or actual war crimes witnesses.


       (d)    A person whose name appears on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
       accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against  whom
       there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.  Individuals whose
       name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped  at  the  airport  and
       handed over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in  pursuance
       of such order or warrant."


80. I have found above that the Appellant  was  detained  and  tortured  in
    2012/2013 due to his  previous  involvement  with  the  LTTE.   I  have
    considered the submissions made in the skeleton argument in relation to
    the time that the Appellant was arrested [49].  His arrest occurred  at
    a time when, according to GJ, the authorities were no longer  arresting
    Tamils  in  generalised  round-ups.   Instead  their  activities   were
    intelligence led, which suggests that they had reason to  suspect  that
    the Appellant's arrest was intelligence-led, and that he was of adverse
    interest.  I find  that  there  is  some  weight  in  this  submission,
    following GJ.  I find that he was released on payment of  a  bribe.   I
    have found above following the case of GJ, that the  seriousness  of  a
    case against an individual is not determinative of  whether  or  not  a
    bribe can be paid (275).  I also find, following the case  of  GJ  that
    someone who has been released on payment of a bribe is likely  to  have
    been recorded as escaped from detention and  the  details  put  into  a
    database (146).


81. I am mindful of the established  principle  of  asylum  law  that  past
    persecution provides a serious indication of  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.  I have found that the Appellant has  been  persecuted  in
    Sri Lanka.


82. I was referred to the "Report of a Home Office Fact Finding Mission Sri
    Lanka: treatment of Tamils and people who  have  a  real  or  perceived
    association with the former Liberation Tigers of Tamil  Eelam  (LTTE)",
    July 2016.  At 8.1.22 it states:


    "People returning from the UK with a previous LTTE connection would  be
    subject to torture and harassment and their families will be harassed".




83. At 10.4.1 to 10.4.3 it states:


    "In general, if a person has a previous connection with the LTTE,  then
    arrest  and  detention  will  happen.  Ill  treatment  happens  in  PTA
    [Prevention of Terrorism Act] detention. The  authorities  monitor  the
    houses of people who have left the country. A person who is ill-treated
    could report the incident to the HRC.


    10.4.2 Most of the time when people return [from outside  the  country]
    there is the possibility they will be arrested. So for this reason many
    people refuse to Page 33 of 106 return. The military keep  a  watch  on
    their houses and the family remaining in Sri Lanka, but this will  only
    be if the person has committed a serious crime in the past. Even if the
    crime or death/murder through conflict was 20  years  ago,  the  person
    will still be investigated. In these cases, if torture is to be used to
    get information, they will not hesitate to use it. The  possibility  is
    always there for torture to be used.


    10.4.3 The culture is slowly changing; people who are arrested  may  go
    through ill treatment. Their treatment will be based on  previous  LTTE
    involvement."


84. At 15.1.16 it states:


    "People returning from the UK with LTTE  [Liberation  Tigers  of  Tamil
    Eelam] connections would be handed to the TID because their faces would
    be recognised and their passport numbers match the 'blacklist'."


85. The use of the PTA continues as set out in the Country Information  and
    Guidance, Sri Lanka: Tamil separatism: June 2017.


    "Reinforcing the stigmatization of the Tamil identity is the  continued
    application of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, which affects the Tamil
    population disproportionately.  Despite  the  heavy  criticism  it  has
    received  nationally  and  internationally   for   allowing   prolonged
    detention without due process, the Government has reportedly  continued
    to rely on the  Act  to  make  new  arrests,  including  exiled  Tamils
    returning to Sri Lanka." [8.2.5]


86. I  find  that  this  indicates  that  the  situation  has  not  changed
    significantly  since  the  Appellant  was  detained  and  tortured   in
    2012/2013.  There has been no significant change  therefore  since  the
    last time that the Appellant was detained and tortured  on  account  of
    his involvement with the LTTE.  I find it is reasonably  likely,  given
    that there has been no significant change, that  the  authorities  will
    still perceive him to be a threat.


87. I find that Appellant has an additional vulnerability  due  his  mental
    health condition and poor cognitive ability.  Since his arrival in  the
    United Kingdom in 2013 his mental health has been very poor and getting
    worse according to the medical expert reports provided.   He  has  been
    considered unable to face cross-examination and would not  be  able  to
    cope with questioning by the authorities.


88. Taking all of the evidence  into  account,  including  the  Appellant's
    previous detention  and  torture  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  the  continuing
    interest of the authorities in the Appellant, I find that the Appellant
    meets the criteria set out in GJ and will be "perceived to be a  threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they  are,  or
    are perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
    Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal  of  hostilities
    within Sri Lanka."  Given that the authorities are interested  in  him,
    internal relocation would not be possible.


Conclusions in relation to refugee protection, humanitarian protection,  and
Articles 2 and 3 ECHR


89. Considering all the above, I find the Appellant's claim to be a genuine
    refugee in need of international protection to be well founded.  I find
    that there is a real risk that he will suffer persecution on return  to
    Sri Lanka, and so his claim succeeds on  asylum  grounds.   As  I  have
    allowed his appeal on asylum grounds, I do not  need  to  consider  his
    claim to humanitarian protection.  I find that  returning  him  to  Sri
    Lanka would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of its obligations
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.


Notice of Decision


90. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


91. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 8 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
