
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03950/2015
                                                               AA/03952/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     D J
                                     e l
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Dirie, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are Albanian nationals and are sisters. The Respondent
       refused their applications for asylum in letters  dated  15  February
       2015. It was  accepted  that  the  Appellants  had  been  victims  of
       trafficking in Brussels. It was not accepted that they  would  be  at
       risk of persecution on return because  it  was  considered  that  the
       individual who trafficked them would not locate them in Albania.  The
       Respondent also  concluded  that  there  would  be  sufficient  state
       protection.  The Respondent decided to refuse leave to remain in  the
       United Kingdom and remove the Appellants by way  of  directions  made
       under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

    2. The Appellants appealed against that decision and their appeals  were
       dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rouke  in  a   decision
       promulgated on 4 August 2015. He found that Articles 8 and 3  of  the
       European Convention on Human Rights were not  engaged  and  dismissed
       the appeal on asylum, humanitarian and human rights grounds.

    3. The Appellants sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
       Permission was granted on 28 August 2015 by Designated Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Garratt. Permission was granted on the basis that
       the Judge's reasons for finding against the Appellants were  confined
       to two paragraphs of an eleven page decision and it was arguable that
       the Judge had  failed  to  give  any  consideration  to  the  medical
       evidence and its connection to risk on return having  regard  to  the
       country guidance. He also considered that it was  arguable  that  the
       Judge had given inadequate reasons for concluding that the trafficker
       would not have the incentive to find the Appellants if returned.

   The Grounds

    4. Ground 1  asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  material
       direction of law in the application of the Country Guideline case  of
       AM and BM (Trafficked Women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80.  The  grounds
       set out the case law and the contents of the Appellants'  psychiatric
       reports in which it was concluded that both showed signs of PTSD. The
       grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal made no reference to PTSD
       and the effect of  this  condition  on  the  Appellants'  ability  to
       function normally and reintegrate in Albania.

    5. Ground 2 asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  unreasonable
       findings on the psychiatric evidence. The Judge  doubted  the  threat
       posed to them by their brother  based  in  part  on  the  failure  to
       mention their fear of him to their psychiatrists.  The  grounds  aver
       that the psychiatric evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did show
       that the Appellants feared their  family  and  that  their  fear  was
       supported by the country guidance case law. The First-tier Tribunal's
       findings are said also not to reflect the  fact  that  this  was  the
       first meeting between the psychiatrist and  the  Appellants  and  the
       report expressly stated that it took a while to build up  a  trusting
       relationship. It is asserted that therefore the Judge's finding  that
       the Appellants did not express a fear of their brother was a material
       error of law.

    6. Ground 3 asserts that the Judge found that their trafficker  did  not
       seem to know  their  surname.  No  reasons  were  provided  for  this
       finding. It is asserted  that  as  their  trafficker  arranged  their
       travel to Belgium and as he knew their brother it was  reasonable  to
       conclude that he would have known  their  family  name.  The  Judge's
       finding that their trafficker would not have the incentive to  search
       for the Appellants ignored  the  relationship  between  him  and  the
       Appellants' family and was not based on any objective  assessment  of
       his motivation for trafficking them in the first place.

   The Rule 24 Response

    7. The Respondent submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  directed
       himself appropriately.  He  considered  their  trafficker's  lack  of
       knowledge of their surname and doubted whether he would be  motivated
       to trace them in Albania and considered  the  country  guidance.  The
       grounds are said to have no merit and not to  identify  any  arguable
       material error of law.

   The Hearing

    8. Ms Dirie submitted that there  was  evidence  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that the Appellants were  highly  traumatised.  The  country
       guidance  stated  trafficking  was  likely   to   have   a   profound
       psychological effect and that this must be taken into account and was
       relevant to infringement  of  Article  8.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
       failed to make any reference to PTSD and  the  question  of  internal
       relocation. Their mental state was relevant to whether  or  not  they
       would face persecution in their home area. The reasons given were not
       sufficient. Whilst accepting that they were suffering  depression  he
       failed to give sufficient reasons. He found that their trafficker had
       no incentive to find them and  looking  at  the  other  factors  with
       regard to the brother that there was a reduced or limited risk.

    9. With regards to ground 2 there were unreasonable findings with regard
       to the psychological evidence.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  based  the
       finding in relation to the brother on their failure to mention it  to
       the psychiatrist. However, there was explicit reference to the danger
       faced from their brother. The  psychiatrist  was  only  able  to  get
       limited information on a  first  evaluation.  She  was  not  able  to
       explore every  detail  of  the  account.  The  second  Appellant  was
       recorded by the psychiatrist as saying that they  knew  their  family
       did not want them back. It was a delicate matter. It took a while  to
       explore a relationship. The fear of the family was expressed and  the
       First-tier Tribunal should have made clear findings  as  to  risk  in
       their home area.  Thus it was a material error for the Judge to  find
       that they did not express a fear of their brother.

   10. There was a failure to make sufficient findings that their trafficker
       would not have an incentive to find them. The Judge found that he had
       very little knowledge of their background. At question  q147  of  the
       interview the First Appellant was asked if the  trafficker  knew  the
       family name and she said he was interested in her  life  and  in  her
       family. Further  questions  showed  that  he  was  constantly  asking
       questions and grooming her and knew about her background. He arranged
       her travel to Belgium and he would have those details.  At  Q157  she
       said her mobile phone was taken  by  him.  That  showed  he  had  the
       opportunity to find out that he more information about  her.  Further
       the Judge made a material error in failing to provide reasons  as  to
       why he would not be able to find them.  He  had  a  financial  vested
       interest in the Appellants.

   11. Mr Richards relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted  that  there
       was no material error of  law.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge  gave
       adequately  reasoned  findings  and  came  to  a   perfectly   proper
       conclusion. The Judge's findings  were  set  out  over  a  number  of
       paragraphs from 16 to 25. He had regard to the country guidance  case
       law but also was furnished with up to date evidence which allowed him
       to step outside the country guidance case law  to  some  degree.  The
       pertinent evidence was from the IOM showing how things had  moved  on
       since AM was promulgated and that  was  of  particular  relevance  in
       relation to the mental health  of  the  appellants.  He  noted  quite
       properly at 21 (iii) that medical support was available from the IOM.
       The IOM evidence was referenced at paragraph 22. The Judge had  given
       perfectly sound reasons for finding that they would not be  at  risk.
       With regard to the potential risk from brother at 23 (a) he  rejected
       the notion of threat from him not only  because  the  Appellants  has
       failed to mention fear to psychiatrist but also because he was  young
       and of low economic status. It was a perfectly proper  conclusion  to
       reach on the evidence. The Judge dealt with the potential threat from
       the trafficker at 23 (b). It was not simply a matter of  not  knowing
       surname. He did not have knowledge of their background but also after
       a year would not have an incentive and there was  nothing  irrational
       in that conclusion. No error of law was disclosed. The Judge  in  any
       event found that there would be a sufficiency of protection available
       in Tirana. Having said that there was a sufficiency of protection  it
       seemed unnecessary to go on to  consider  Tirana  but  there  was  no
       reason why the Appellants should not re-integrate and live safely. In
       those circumstances the decision to dismiss the appeal  disclosed  no
       material error of law.  The  grounds  were  a  disagreement  with  an
       unwelcome decision.

   12. Both representatives agreed that were I to find a material  error  of
       law remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing would be  the
       appropriate disposal.

Discussion and Findings

   13. I have considered the arguments raised under Ground 2 firstly as they
       deal with the assessment of risk to the  Appellants'  in  their  home
       area which as a matter of logic should be dealt with first. Ground  1
       relates to the First-tier Tribunal's approach to the medical evidence
       which is relevant to difficulties reintegrating into Albanian society
       and relocation, should a fear of persecution  in  the  home  area  be
       found. It is also of relevance  to  Article  8  rights.  (AM  and  BM
       (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (paragraph 218).

   14. The Respondent accepted that the Appellants had  been  trafficked  to
       Belgium where they had been forced into prostitution.  The First-tier
       Tribunal set out the relevant passages of AM concerning  the  factors
       relevant to an assessment of  risk.  The  Upper  Tribunal  found,  at
       paragraph 214 of that decision, that each case will turn on  its  own
       facts or circumstances and  the  treatment  which  such  women  might
       receive from their families could in certain circumstances amount  to
       persecution. They may be  at  risk  from  their  former  traffickers,
       particularly if the trafficker considered that he had some right over
       them if he had entered into a financial arrangement with their family
       or alternatively if he considered that the trafficked woman would  be
       able to give the police evidence of crimes which they had committed.

   15. The First-tier Tribunal's findings in relation to  the  risk  to  the
       Appellants are set out at paragraphs 21 (e) to paragraph 24. He  sets
       out factors to be considered in any individual case extrapolated from
       the Respondent's assessment of the country guidance and evaluates the
       evidence in relation to  those  factors.  The  specific  findings  in
       relation to risk  in  their  home  area,  however,  are  confined  to
       paragraph 23. In that paragraph he finds that they do not have a well-
       founded fear of persecution because their brother is  young,  of  low
       economic status and that as the Appellants failed to mention  a  fear
       of him to their psychiatrists, that threat seemed not to be  a  major
       factor  in  their  minds.  He  further  finds  that  the  person  who
       trafficked them  seemed  to  have  very  little  knowledge  of  their
       background, to include surname, seemed to work  abroad  much  of  the
       time and that it was inherently unlikely that after the  space  of  a
       year he would have the incentive to continue to search for them.

   16. I find that those findings were infected by a material error  of  law
       for the following reasons. Firstly, the first Appellant  did  mention
       to her psychiatrist that both she and her sister thought their  lives
       would be in danger and that the family members might kill them due to
       the same of what happened to  them  (Appellant's  bundle,  p175-177).
       Secondly, it was clear from both psychiatric reports that  they  were
       the result of a first meeting and  that  it  was  very  difficult  to
       explore psychologically in detail in one session the  abuse  suffered
       as it took a while to build a relationship.  Further, the  Appellants
       had consistently and repeatedly  stated  throughout  their  screening
       interviews and asylum interviews that they were both in fear of their
       brother and of their trafficker. The First-tier  tribunal  summarised
       this evidence briefly at paragraph 12 (f) of the decision. The First-
       tier Tribunal's conclusion therefore that the  Appellants  failed  to
       mention their fear  of  their  brother  to  their  psychiatrist  both
       proceeded on a material error of fact and failed to give  any  weight
       to the fact that it had consistently been their case that  they  were
       in fear of their brother. The First-tier Tribunal gave no reasons for
       rejecting this evidence.

   17. Further, in concluding that their trafficker  "seemed  to  have  very
       little knowledge of their background", including their  surname,  the
       First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with  the  evidence  that  their
       trafficker from whom they asserted their fear  of  persecution  arose
       had arranged their travel to  Belgium  and  that  it  was  the  First
       Appellant's evidence in her interview that he was interested  in  her
       life and  family  (q147).  In  concluding  that  it  was  "inherently
       unlikely"  that  their  trafficker  would,  after  a  year,  have  an
       incentive to continue to search for  them,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       failed to consider the country guidance in relation to the  financial
       investment made by the trafficker in the Appellants and the fact that
       they escaped him. I therefore find that his conclusions  in  relation
       to future risk were inadequately reasoned.

   18. I also find that in failing to reach properly reasoned conclusions on
       the issue of risk in the Appellants' home area, the assessment of the
       internal flight alternative in paragraph 24 cannot stand as it is not
       informed by a proper assessment  of  the  Appellants'  circumstances.
       There is also no reference in that paragraph to the medical  evidence
       in relation to PTSD which is relevant to  the  question  of  internal
       relocation (AM).

Notice of Decision

   19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore involved the making
       of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

   20. In the light of the extent of judicial fact-finding required the case
       is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing de novo.

Anonymity

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the Secretary of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

