

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03154/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 8 August 2013                              |On 6 September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              Mr MUDASAR IQBAL
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S McEwan, Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Cope dismissing the appeal on asylum and human rights
   grounds.

2) The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He claims to  fear  persecution
   in Pakistan by reason of his Ahmadi faith.  While it  was  accepted  that
   the appellant is an Ahmadi  his  claim  that  he  had  been  involved  in
   preaching in Pakistan was found not to be credible.  He was found not  to
   be at risk by reason only of his faith.
Error of law

3) The appellant came to the attention of  the  immigration  authorities  in
   the UK when he attempted at Heathrow Airport to board a flight  to  Spain
   relying upon his own passport in which there was  a  stolen  blank  Greek
   visa and a counterfeit Greek entry  stamp.   This  behaviour  led  to  an
   adverse credibility  finding  being  made  against  the  appellant  under
   section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act
   2004.  Permission to appeal was granted in part because it  was  arguable
   that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal misdirected himself in  finding
   that he was required to draw an adverse inference against the appellant's
   credibility.

4) The second issue on which permission to appeal was granted  was  that  it
   was arguable that the judge was not entitled to draw  an  inference  that
   the appellant had not been involved in preaching in Pakistan on the basis
   of a letter from the Ahmadi community in the UK  which  did  not  specify
   that the appellant had been involved in preaching in Pakistan.

5) At the hearing before me, Miss McEwan, for the appellant, submitted  that
   the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not look at  the  evidence  when
   drawing an adverse inference under section 8 of the 2004 Act.  The  judge
   did not take into account the appellant's reasons for seeking  to  travel
   to Spain.  The judge was wrong to  disregard  a  report  on  this  by  an
   Immigration Officer at Heathrow, at A11 of the respondent's bundle.   The
   judge failed to give sufficient reasons for his finding under section  8,
   particularly as there was significant parts of  the  evidence  where  the
   judge found in favour of the appellant on credibility.

6) For the respondent, Mr Dewison  submitted  there  was  no  error  by  the
   judge.   Under  section  8  the  judge  was  bound  to  make  an  adverse
   credibility finding on the  basis  of  the  appellant's  behaviour.   The
   appellant was trying to leave the UK using a forged Greek visa  with  the
   aim of claiming asylum in Germany.

7) In relation to the letter from the Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association  (AMA),
   the judge was entitled to find that, if what the appellant said about his
   activities Pakistan was true, then there would  be  more  information  in
   this letter about these activities than there was.   If  the  judge  felt
   that a piece of evidence was insufficiently weighty then  the  judge  was
   entitled to reject it.  The judge identified further difficulties in  the
   appellant's evidence at paragraphs 60-79, where the judge gave a  lengthy
   explanation of why the appellant's evidence was not credible.

8) The consideration by the judge of section 8  of  the  2004  Act  followed
   upon section 8(2)  of  the  2004  Act  having  been  founded  on  by  the
   respondent in the reasons for refusal  letter  of  15  March  2013.   The
   relevant parts of section 8 read as follows:

    "(1)   In determining whether to believe a  statement  made  by  or  on
           behalf of a person who makes an asylum claim or a  human  rights
           claim, a deciding authority shall take account, as damaging  the
           claimant's credibility, of any behaviour to which  this  section
           applies.


    (2)    This section applies to any behaviour by the claimant  that  the
           deciding authority thinks -


           a) is designed or likely to conceal information,


           b) is designed or likely to mislead, or

           c) is designed or likely to obstruct or delay  the  handling  or
              resolution of the claim  or  the  taking  of  a  decision  in
              relation to the claimant."


9) The application for permission to appeal relies upon the decision of  the
   Court of Appeal in JT (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878, in  which  guidance
   was given as to the meaning  and  effect  of  this  provision.   In  that
   decision section 8 is described as "a reminder to fact-finding  tribunals
   that conduct coming within the categories stated in section  8  shall  be
   taken into account in assessing credibility".  The decision, at paragraph
   21, then states that "at one end of the spectrum, there  may,  unusually,
   be cases in which conduct of the kind identified in section 8 is held  to
   carry no weight at all in the overall assessment of  credibility  on  the
   particular facts".  The weight to be  given  to  section  8  matters  was
   entirely a matter for the fact-finder.

10) On behalf of the appellant it is argued that in the present  appeal  the
   judge misdirected himself as to the meaning and effect of section 8.   At
   paragraph 103 of the determination the judge summarised  the  meaning  of
   section 8 as requiring that the Tribunal "must  draw  adverse  inferences
   against the credibility of an appellant in relation to certain prescribed
   factual circumstances."  This is going too far.  The  provision  requires
   the section 8 matters to  be  taken  into  account  as  damaging  to  the
   claimant's credibility but this will not necessary result in  an  adverse
   inference on credibility being drawn.  As pointed out  by  the  Court  of
   Appeal in JT (Cameroon), there is a spectrum of possibilities between one
   extreme, where the section 8 matters may carry no weight, and the  other,
   where they may indeed lead to the drawing of an adverse inference  as  to
   credibility in relation to crucial issues in an appellant's evidence.

11) To ascertain properly whether  the  judge's  misdirection  affected  the
   outcome of the appeal, it is necessary to  have  regard  to  the  reasons
   given by the judge for drawing an adverse inference from  the  section  8
   matters.  The judge refers at paragraphs 104-106 to the appellant  having
   obtained and used a stolen visa and forged immigration stamp.  Because of
   this the judge finds that "the use of such documentation points  strongly
   to the appellant not being genuine in his claim to have left Pakistan  to
   seek asylum abroad."  The judge then says that consequently  he  has  "no
   alternative but to draw a statutory adverse credibility  finding  against
   the Appellant" and that "the weight to be attached to  such  a  statutory
   adverse credibility finding is considerable".

12) The main difficulty I have with this reasoning  is  that  it  completely
   disregards the appellant's account of why he was seeking to leave the  UK
   to travel to Spain.  Before the judge can assess the weight to  be  given
   to the appellant's relevant behaviour under section  8,  the  judge  must
   have regard to any evidence  given  by  the  appellant  to  explain  that
   behaviour.  In this appeal the judge failed to do this.

13) One of the reasons the judge fell into this error was  that  he  decided
   to disregard the report  by  the  Immigration  Officer  at  A11,  already
   referred to, describing the way in which the appellant came to the notice
   of the immigration authorities at Heathrow.

14) The judge noted that this  report  bears  the  date  15/04/2013  but  it
   purports to have been sent by fax on  16/02/2013.   The  incident  giving
   rise to the detection of the appellant took place on 15 February 2013 and
   this date is not disputed.  Largely because  of  the  inconsistency  over
   dates on the face of the report, the judge found the document was  not  a
   reliable document on Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.

15) The judge does not appear to have  considered  the  obvious  explanation
   that the date of 15/04/2013, although it appears twice on  the  document,
   was a simple typing error and that the report's correct date should  have
   been 15/02/2013.  In addition, the judge appears to  have  been  confused
   about the meaning and application of the decision in Tanveer Ahmed.  This
   decision applies principally to documents whose  origins  are  such  that
   their  provenance  cannot  be  checked  or  verified.   Accordingly,   an
   assessment has to be made of the reliability of  such  a  document  based
   upon the evidence in the round.

16) The document  dated  15/04/2013,  however,  was  not  a  document  whose
   veracity could not be checked.  It purports to be a report by a named  UK
   Immigration Officer.  If necessary, inquiries could have been  made  with
   that officer as to whether he wrote the report.  It is unlikely, however,
   that such inquiries would have been  necessary  because  the  report  was
   accompanied by other evidence  from  the  Home  Office  relating  to  the
   detection of the appellant at Heathrow on 15 February 2013.  Not only did
   the judge misdirect himself as to the law in assessing the reliability of
   the document in question, but even it terms of his manner  of  assessment
   he adopted, he failed to take into account of the evidence in the  round,
   namely the other evidence emanating from the Home Office tending to  show
   that this was a genuine document.

17) Partly as a result of these errors, the judge failed to have  regard  to
   the explanation given by the appellant as recorded  in  the  document  in
   question.  When detected the appellant told the Immigration Officer  that
   he could not go back to Pakistan because his life was in  danger  and  he
   wanted to claim asylum in Germany.  The  appellant,  along  with  another
   passenger, with whom he was travelling, believed that his Greek visa  was
   a Schengen visa which would entitle him to travel to Spain and then on to
   Germany.

18) There was an explanation in the appellant's witness statement of why  he
   wanted to travel to Germany and this was because his brother  was  living
   there.  His brother has an asylum claim in Germany.  As was  pointed  out
   on behalf of the appellant, the judge did not take into account  that  it
   would be possible for a genuine asylum seeker to wish to claim asylum  in
   a particular country and it did not necessarily  follow  from  an  asylum
   seeker trying to reach that country that the claim was not credible.

19) The error of law by the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  consists  not
   merely in misconstruing the effect of section 8 of the 2004 Act but also,
   and  perhaps  more  significantly,  failing  to  take  into  account  the
   appellant's explanation  for  the  behaviour  taken  into  account  under
   section 8.  For this reason, I consider that the decision of the Judge of
   the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside and re-made.

Submissions on re-making the decision

20) Both parties were of the view that the decision might be re-made at  the
   same hearing as I made the decision  on  error  of  law.   Accordingly  I
   invited submissions from them.

21) For the respondent,  Mr  Dewison  relied  on  the  reasons  for  refusal
   letter.  He submitted that the judge was entitled to draw  the  inference
   he did from the AMA letter.  He pointed to an adverse finding made by the
   First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 73 of the  determination.   It  was  the
   appellant's evidence that used to attend camps for people of  the  Ahmadi
   faith.  Those who were not Ahmadis were invited to some  of  these  camps
   but this stopped after a terrorist bombing in Lahore on 28 May 2008.  The
   judge referred to the background evidence in which it was stated  that  a
   considerable number of Ahmadis were killed in a bombing at  a  mosque  in
   Lahore on 28 May 2010.   At  interview  the  appellant  denied  that  the
   incident had taken place in 2010 and reiterated that it  was  2008.   The
   judge considered that  given  the  importance  and  the  impact  of  this
   incident it was very surprising that the appellant should have made  this
   mistake and did not accept his explanation that he  was  mixed  up  about
   dates.  Mr Dewison submitted that this  was  such  a  significant  event,
   which attracted worldwide publicity, if the appellant was a long-standing
   and involved member of the Ahmadi community he would not have  made  this
   mistake.

22) For the appellant, Miss McEwen pointed out  that  the  determination  of
   the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal relied heavily on the record of  the
   asylum interview and the judge did not refer to the appellant's  evidence
   at the hearing.

23) Reference was made to the decision in MN &  others  (Ahmadis  -  country
   conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389.  In relation to this Mr
   Dewison submitted that the AMA letter did  not  support  the  appellant's
   claim  about  his  activities  in  Pakistan  and  did  not  support   the
   proposition that he would behave any differently were he to return there.
    He submitted that to qualify as a refugee any preaching must be to "non-
   believers".  Ahmadis in Pakistan could practise their faith and  problems
   only arose for people who openly proselytized.  The Judge of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal found the appellant  could  live  in  Pakistan  as  he  did
   before.

24) For the appellant, Miss McEwen responded that the appellant dropped  his
   activities because of the attack on the mosque in Lahore.  His activities
   were curtailed because of fear of persecution.  The Judge of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal accepted that the appellant had been practising  his  faith
   in the UK but did  not  accept  this  was  enough.   An  example  of  the
   appellant's  behaviour  in  the  UK,  however,  was  his  involvement  in
   distributing leaflets to non-Ahmadis.

Discussion

25) In order to succeed the appellant must show that  he  falls  within  the
   country guideline decision of MN & others.  This decision  sets  out  the
   current position for Ahmadis in Pakistan.  It states that it is  possible
   in general for Ahmadis to practise their faith  on  a  restricted  basis,
   either in private or in community with other Ahmadis, without  infringing
   domestic Pakistan law.  The background to the risk faced  by  Ahmadis  is
   legislation that restricts the way in which they  are  able  to  practise
   their faith openly.  This legislation not only  prohibits  preaching  and
   other forms  of  proselytizing  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other
   elements of manifesting religious belief, such as holding open  discourse
   about religion with non-Ahmadis,  even  where  these  do  not  amount  to
   proselytizing.  The prohibitions include referring openly to one's  place
   of worship as a mosque and to one's religious leader as an Imam.  Ahmadis
   are not allowed to refer to the call to prayer  as  "azan",  or  to  call
   themselves Muslims, or to refer  to  their  faith  as  Islam.   Sanctions
   include a fine and imprisonment and, if blasphemy is found, there is  the
   possibility of the death penalty, although to  date  this  has  not  been
   carried out.  If the death penalty is imposed there is a risk of  lengthy
   incarceration.  This legislation is used by non-state actors to  threaten
   and harass Ahmadis.

26) The decision proceeds to state that if an Ahmadi is able to  demonstrate
   that it is of particular importance to his religious identity to practise
   and manifest his faith openly in Pakistan in defiance of the restrictions
   in the Penal Code, he or she is likely to be in need  of  protection,  in
   the light of the serious nature of the sanctions that  potentially  apply
   as well as the risk of prosecution for blasphemy.  It  is  no  answer  to
   expect an Ahmadi who fits this description to avoid engaging in behaviour
   to avoid a risk of protection.

27) According to MN, the first question the decision maker must ask  is  (1)
   whether the claimant genuinely is an Ahmadi.  This is likely  to  include
   an inquiry as to whether  the  claimant  is  registered  with  an  Ahmadi
   community in Pakistan and worshipped  and  engaged  there  on  a  regular
   basis.  Post-arrival activity will also be relevant, as well as  evidence
   from the UK AMA headquarters regarding activities in Pakistan.  The  next
   step (2) involves an inquiry into the claimant's intentions or wishes  as
   to his or her faith  if  returned  to  Pakistan.   There  is  a  need  to
   establish whether  it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  religious
   identity of the Ahmadi concerned to engage in behaviour contrary  to  the
   Penal Code.  The burden is  on  the  claimant  to  demonstrate  that  any
   intention to practice or manifest their faith in this  way  is  genuinely
   held and of particular importance to the claimant to preserve his or  her
   religious  identity.   All  the  evidence  must  be  evaluated  including
   behaviour since arrival in the  UK,  where  relevant.   If  the  claimant
   discharges this burden, he or she is likely to be in need of  protection.



28) In this appeal it was accepted by the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
   that the appellant is an Ahmadi.  It was further  accepted  that  he  has
   been involved in activities in the UK manifesting his Ahmadi  faith.   He
   has received awards from the Ahmadi community in Bradford and Dewsbury.

29) The judge had before him a letter from the  AMA  in  the  UK  containing
   information supplied by the AMA headquarters in Rabwah (Chenab Nagar)  as
   well as information about his activities in the UK.   The  letter  states
   that the appellant was born to 2 Ahmadi parents.   His  contact  and  co-
   operation with the Ahmadiyya Muslim community in Pakistan was  very  good
   and he discharged his financial obligations and the  duties  assigned  to
   him.  More particularly he was connected with an  auxiliary  organisation
   called Majlis Khuddamul Ahmadiyya, which looks after the affairs of males
   under the age of 40.  He served as assistant guide for this organisation,
   the name of which is abbreviated to  Khuddam,  from  2007  to  2008.   He
   served as assistant organiser of Tarbiyyat Nau Mubeen (reformation of new
   converts) from 2008 to 2009 and as assistant organiser of Tarbiyyat (self-
   reformation and improvement of moral values)  from  2008  to  2009.   The
   letter further states that there was no case registered against  him  (by
   another member of the community).  It is not clear whether this refers to
   a case registered by a member of the Ahmadiyya community or a  member  of
   the wider Islamic community in  Pakistan  but  it  is  not  part  of  the
   appellant's claim that any cases were registered against him.

30) The letter continues that in  the  UK  he  has  attended  congregational
   prayers and Friday sermons in Newcastle.   He  has  participated  in  the
   preaching programmes for the branch including  door-to-door  distribution
   of leaflets creating an awareness of Islam and inviting  members  of  the
   public to the message of the Ahmadiyya Muslim  community.   He  has  also
   performed general duties assigned to him by community officials.

31) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal pointed out  that  the  AMA  letter
   does not state that the appellant was involved in preaching activities to
   non-Muslims in Pakistan.  In his witness statement the appellant said  he
   would not preach to a group of mullahs outside a mosque  but  if  he  saw
   three men and found out by speaking to them that they were  all  Shia  or
   non-Muslim he would speak to them to find out their views and then preach
   to them.  He seems to have done this sometimes in groups with friends.

32) The witness statement does not describe preaching so much  as  the  type
   of discourse  about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis  which  is  specifically
   referred to in MN as being contrary to  the  Penal  Code.   This  is  not
   preaching in the sense of standing in a public place and  addressing  the
   public at large but it does appear to fall within the prohibition on open
   religious discourse.

33) The judge  considered  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was  damaged
   because this was not referred to in the AMA letter.  It was  pointed  out
   on behalf of the appellant, however, that this type of activity would not
   necessarily have come  to  the  attention  of  the  AMA  headquarters  in
   Pakistan.  It was an activity carried out informally  by  the  appellant,
   either  with  himself  or  with  friends,  in   discussion   with   other
   individuals.  The appellant explains that in these discussions  he  would
   start by trying to identify the religious persuasion of the people he was
   talking to and would only proceed if those he was addressing were  either
   Shia or  non-Muslim  and  clearly  not  members  of  the  majority  Sunni
   community.  The obvious reason why the appellant was concerned about this
   was because he did not want to face  either  persecution  from  non-state
   actors in the Sunni community or prosecution.

34) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
   explanation at his asylum interview of the  mix  up  over  dates  of  the
   bombing in Lahore as to whether this took place in 2010 or  2008.   I  do
   not think the judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  this  conclusion.   Mr
   Dewison submitted that this  was  an  event  which  attracted  world-wide
   publicity. He  further  submitted  that  the  appellant  would  not  have
   forgotten the date if he was genuinely committed to his faith.

35) The reasoning of the judge appears to ignore the difference between  the
   Gregorian calendar and the Islamic calendar used  in  Pakistan.   At  his
   asylum interview the appellant does not appear to  have  been  asked  the
   date of the  bombing  in  the  Islamic  calendar  but  in  the  Gregorian
   calendar.  It seems to me that this point was not  adequately  considered
   by the judge in rejecting the appellant's  explanation.   Furthermore,  I
   note from the letter from the AMA association that the appellant  limited
   his activities after 2009 and this corresponds to some  extent  with  his
   description of Ahmadi activities in  Pakistan  being  reduced  after  the
   bombing, although it also corresponds to the  onset  of  health  problems
   affecting the Appellant's voice.  The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   identified a further apparent inconsistency in the appellant's  evidence.
   According to the judge the appellant said at Q52 of his asylum  interview
   that he preached in Pakistan in 2010 but in his  oral  evidence  he  said
   that his fear of persecution started in 2012 "after he  left  the  Ahmadi
   religious school in order to stop preaching" (paragraph 74).

36) It seems  that  the  judge  misapprehended  the  question  at  interview
   recorded as Q52.  This does not ask when the appellant preached but  when
   he "first ever" preached, to which the appellant gave the answer 2010 and
   then confirmed in response to the next question that he preached for  the
   first time in 2010.  He does not state that he stopped preaching in  2010
   and there is no inconsistency as described by the judge.

37) The judge further states that in his oral  evidence  the  appellant  was
   less than clear about why it was that he was not  targeted  when  he  was
   preaching.  It  is  clear  from  his  witness  statement,  however,  that
   according to the appellant he preached very cautiously  to  small  groups
   and, as already explained, found out in  discussion  what  religion  they
   were before he talked to them about his faith.  The judge should have had
   regard to this explanation.

38) In addition the judge referred to the appellant's  evidence  as  to  his
   activities in Pakistan as vague but this is quite a subjective assessment
   and cannot be sustained having regard to  the  way  in  which  the  judge
   misapprehended the evidence, as set out above.

39) So far as the findings of the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
   concerned, many of these are favourable to the  appellant.   Those  which
   are unfavourable are, for the reasons given above, not soundly based.  Of
   course, the  section  8  matter  already  discussed  weighs  against  the
   appellant in the assessment of credibility but this  appears  to  be  the
   only potentially significant factor weighing against the  credibility  of
   the appellant's  evidence  as  to  his  activities  and  his  intentions.
   Accordingly, I consider that the section 8 matter should be given  little
   weight.

40) Having regard to the evidence and to the findings made, I  am  satisfied
   that the appellant has in the past in Pakistan held open discourse  about
   religion with non-Ahmadis, contrary to  the  Penal  Code.   Whether  this
   discourse would amount to proselytizing may be to some extent a matter of
   opinion.  It was the appellant's intention to tell  suitable  non-Ahmadis
   about his faith in the hope that they would be interested in  conversion.
   That this was the appellant's intention is supported  by  his  record  in
   Pakistan of working with new converts and by his  record  in  the  UK  of
   delivering leaflets about the Ahmadi  faith  to  houses  of  non-Ahmadis.
   These activities are a manifestation of the importance to  the  appellant
   of engaging in behaviour which would be contrary to  the  Penal  Code  in
   Pakistan.  The appellant's evidence in his witness statement was that the
   reason he did not preach or proselytize entirely openly in  Pakistan  was
   because of a fear of the consequences  and,  in  particular,  a  fear  of
   having cases registered against him  or  being  persecuted  by  non-state
   actors.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that it is the  appellant's  genuine
   intention, and it is  a  matter  of  particular  importance  to  him,  to
   manifest aspects of his faith openly against the provisions of the  Penal
   Code.  Where he has restricted his activities in this regard in the past,
   it has been because of a fear of  persecution  but  he  has  nevertheless
   taken part in such activities so far as he dared and his intention  would
   be to continue to do so.  Accordingly, his asylum appeal will succeed.

Conclusions

41) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

42) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

43) The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  As the appeal  has
   now  been  successful  I  see  no  reason  to  continue  that  order  and
   accordingly it is lifted (pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
   (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Fee  Award                           Note:  this  is   not   part   of   the
determination.

As no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.




Signed                                             Date



Judge of the Upper Tribunal


