
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03071/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 February 2016                      |On 8 March 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SET
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Sirikanda, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, SET, was born in 1989 and is a male citizen  of  Turkey.
    He appeals against the decision to remove  him  by  way  of  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006
    which was dated 16 February 2015.   The  respondent  has  rejected  his
    asylum claim.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Telford)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 27 July 2015 dismissed the appeal on all  grounds.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant  asserts  that
    the judge made an error of fact.  At no point did the  appellant  claim
    to have had his toenails pulled out as part of torture by  the  Turkish
    authorities.  At  [3],  the  judge  recorded  that  the  appellant  had
    "claimed he was ... arrested twice and tortured including his  toenails
    being pulled out when asked for information on pro-Kurdish activities."
     Again, at [18], the judge wrote,

         The  injuries  from  torture  he  now  relates   to   the   medical
         practitioner were not provided  in  a  screen  interview  (sic)  as
         elements of torture but when asked about any medical conditions  he
         was able to provide details of an in-growing toenail  as  detailed.
         I find  he  did  so  because  he  was  picking  and  choosing  what
         information to provide.  Likewise he claimed they pulled his  nails
         out three times but did not rely  on  this  later  as  evidence  of
         torture all told this is a confusing picture he has presented.

 3. I consider that the grounds contain a valid criticism  of  the  judge's
    reasoning.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller, for the respondent, did not  seek  to
    disagree with the submission of Ms Sirikanda, for the  appellant,  that
    the judge had misunderstood the evidence.

 4. The  second  ground  of  appeal  criticises  the  judge  for  attaching
    excessive weight to the screening interview.  The judge noted that  the
    appellant had not stated at the screening interview that  he  had  been
    tortured; he had not described any injuries which he had sustained from
    torture; he did not say that he had been fingerprinted; he mentioned at
    the screening interview only two arrests and  subsequently  claimed  to
    have been arrested on  two  additional  occasions;  he  stated  at  the
    screening interview that he had no knowledge  of  any  arrest  warrants
    issued against  him  but  subsequently  claimed  that  there  "may  be"
    warrants.  Ms Sirikanda submitted that the appellant had given  answers
    at his screening interview through a telephone interpreter.

 5. I do not find that this ground of appeal  has  merit.   The  judge  was
    clearly aware of the difficulties of attaching inappropriate weight  to
    screening interviews.  At [5] he wrote,

         It was a short screening interview and I noted  the  criticisms  of
         answers in the screening interview as potentially  inconsistent  or
         vague for example should  in  any  event  have  been  treated  with
         caution as the appellant was informed in  the  screening  interview
         that the purpose was not to discover in detail the full aspects  of
         any claim.

 6. Subject to that self-direction, it was open to the judge to attach some
    weight to the answers  given  at  the  screening  interview  given  the
    particular discrepancies between  those  answers  and  the  appellant's
    subsequent evidence.

 7. The third ground of appeal contains a challenge to the judge's findings
    on risk on return.  At [23] the judge wrote:

         The background material deals with those who are on the system  for
         investigation and detention in Turkey.  It deals  with  how  higher
         level members than the appellant of the BDP may come into  conflict
         with the state.  This appellant is nothing of the  sort.   At  most
         his membership of the BDP indicates an  interest  in  politics  but
         many thousands of members are low-level and I find that this is the
         case in this appellant's claim.  Given that he has been prepared to
         use false identities  and  deceive  by  omission  and  later  false
         additions as evidence as I find it, I reject his claim that  he  is
         in personal fear of persecution and also the claim  that  there  is
         any objective risk to him upon return to Turkey.  He gave  evidence
         that was inconsistent  about  arrest  warrants.   There  were  none
         related in his screening interview.  In SEF interview  and  witness
         statement there may be.  In oral evidence  that  position  remained
         vague.  I find the lack of  reasonable  attempt  to  validate  this
         vague claim indicates to me that he wishes to  avoid  being  pinned
         down on any claim in case it is not substantiated.

 8. The judge went on at [25] to conclude:

         I consider whether the claim - even at its highest - could  succeed
         as I find there was sufficiency of protection for him in any event.
          He claimed he could not  return  because  it  meant  he  would  be
         targeted and if targeted would  face  a  scenario  of  insufficient
         protection and an inability to relocate.  After  due  consideration
         and anxious scrutiny, and although there  was  background  evidence
         that the Kurdish political parties' higher level activists may face
         persecution, I find his claim  that  his  ethnicity  and  political
         views and membership of the BDP not to be such as put him at  risk.
         I find that his account of fear  of  the  State  incredible.    [my
         emphasis]

 9. The grounds draw attention to what is described as "a bleak picture" of
    the treatment of grass roots supporters  of  the  BDP  by  the  Turkish
    authorities.  Two examples are  cited,  one  from  the  United  Kingdom
    Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee  Report  (Turkey  relations  and
    Turkey regional role April 2012)  which  noted  "the  mass  arrests  of
    [BDP's] supporters."  The other source is an  E-Kurd  article  of  2012
    which noted that 7,748 people had been  taken  into  custody  and  over
    3,895 had  been  arrested  and  that  "dozens  of  BDP  executives  and
    employees are still in prison."

10. The difficulty for this appellant is that, although  I  find  that  the
    judge erred in law  in  misunderstanding  the  evidence  regarding  his
    toenail removal, the judge has gone  on  to  consider  the  appellant's
    claim "at its highest."  I take that to mean that, for the  purpose  of
    assessing risk on return, the judge has assumed that what he  has  been
    told by the appellant is true.  The judge's analysis of the appellant's
    credibility, therefore, is not of relevance in that  assessment.   Even
    the appellant himself does not  say  that  there  are  any  outstanding
    arrest warrants against him in Turkey; at the best, he was only able to
    state  that  there  "may  be"  warrants.   Otherwise,   the   appellant
    presented, by his own account, as a low level or grass-roots  supporter
    of the BDP.  The background material before the judge  including  those
    two extracts which I have cited above do not  support  a  finding  that
    this appellant, a low-level grade grass-roots supporter,  would  be  at
    real risk on return to Turkey.  For the purpose of  that  analysis,  it
    cannot be assumed that there is any arrest warrant against him or  that
    he would appear on any records held by the Turkish  authorities  either
    at the airport on entry to Turkey or upon return to his home area.  The
    E-Kurd article (which together with the  Parliamentary  report  is  now
    four years old) recorded that BDP members had been taken  into  custody
    but also noted that it had been "executives and employees" of  the  BDP
    who had remained in prison.  That is not to say that those detained and
    subsequently released were not  ill-treated  but  there  is  no  direct
    evidence of that having  occurred,  only  evidence  that  higher  level
    employees and executives of the party were  of  such  interest  to  the
    Turkish authorities  that  they  remained  in  prison.   Likewise,  the
    reference in the Parliamentary report to  "mass  arrests"  was  plainly
    insufficient to establish the existence of a real risk to a  low  level
    supporter who was otherwise not known to the authorities, such as  this
    appellant.  The judge's conclusions as to risk  on  return,  therefore,
    are not tainted by any  error  he  has  made  by  misunderstanding  the
    appellant's  evidence  and,  although  brief,  are  not  undermined  by
    anything which the appellant now asserts in the grounds  of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  I refrain from setting aside the judge's  decision
    because, even if he had understood the appellant's  evidence  regarding
    toenail removal or, indeed, if he had  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant as to past events in Turkey as true, he  would  have  reached
    the same correct conclusion as to risk on return.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
