
IAC-BFD- MD








UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER  Appeal Number: AA/03217/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th December 2014                           |On 23rd December 2014      |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                             ms nhung thi nguyen
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rehman, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born 6th January  1973.  She  had
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent   dated   29th   April   2014   refusing   to   grant    her
    asylum/Humanitarian Protection in the UK.

 2. In summary the Appellant claims to have been a victim of trafficking to
    the UK for an unlawful purpose. Her claim is  that  she  was  initially
    made to work as a domestic caring for a young  child,  but  after  five
    months she was told she must grow cannabis. She escaped her captors but
    claims a fear that if returned to Vietnam she will be harmed or  killed
    by those who trafficked her because she has not repaid  the  money  she
    owes them for bringing her to the UK.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was set down for hearing on 19th June 2014.  The
    Appellant did not attend the hearing. On 18th June  2014  the  Tribunal
    received a faxed request from  Rachel  Read,  the  Appellant's  support
    worker, seeking an adjournment of the hearing the following day as  the
    Appellant felt unable to attend the hearing  because  she  was  unwell.
    The fax was not received until late in the day on  18th  June  and  the
    support worker was telephoned and put on notice that any decision on an
    adjournment would be a matter for the Judge on the day.

 4. Hearing nothing further and applying Rule 21 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules 2006  the Judge proceeded to hear and determine the appeal in the
    absence of the Appellant. The appeal was dismissed.

 5. The Appellant appealed the FtT's decision on the grounds that there was
    good reason for her non-attendance on 19th June 2014 and that it  would
    be procedurally unfair for the Appellant to  be  disadvantaged  in  her
    claim to  protection  being  dismissed  without  her  being  given  the
    opportunity to be heard. Permission to appeal was given by UTJ O'Connor
    on 7th October 2013.

The UT Hearing

 6. Before me the Appellant was represented by Mr  Rehman  of  Counsel;  Mr
    Diwnycz appeared for the Respondent. Mr Rehman sought leave  to  adduce
    medical evidence in the form of the  Appellant's  GP  Patient  Records.
    Although this request  to  introduce  these  documents  was  made  last
    minute, Mr Diwnycz raised no objection and therefore in  the  interests
    of justice I admitted them.

 7. Mr Rehman submitted that the patient records when  read  together  with
    the fax from the support worker showed that the Appellant was unwell on
    18th June 2014 (the day before the hearing). The medical  records  also
    showed that the Appellant attended a drop-in medical  centre  and  that
    following on from that  she  attended  her  GP  surgery  on  19th  June
    although this was also on a drop-in basis.  Although  she  was  at  the
    surgery at 8:30 am on 19th June, she was not seen until 11:00  am.  She
    was advised to take fluids and rest. She was unable to  get  a  message
    through to the court and in any event at 11:30  am,  not  having  heard
    from the Appellant, the Judge proceeded  to  hear  the  appeal  in  her
    absence. The Appellant was diagnosed at a later date as suffering  from
    Hepatitis B.

 8. Mr Diwnycz  defended  Judge  Hindson's  determination  and  pertinently
    pointed out that even to date there is no medical  evidence  (produced)
    to substantiate the Appellant's claim of being diagnosed with Hepatitis
    B by the Royal Hallamshire Hospital on 1st July 2014. However with  his
    customary fairness Mr Diwnycz did not press his defence too strongly.



Error of Law

 9. I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  illness  prevented  her  from
    attending the hearing on 19th June. No criticism  can  be  attached  to
    Judge Hindson for proceeding as he did; it is clear  that  he  was  not
    made aware of the full situation. That  lack  of  information  led  the
    Judge to determine the appeal but with the  result  that  a  procedural
    unfairness has occurred such as  to  vitiate  the  FtT's  decision  and
    amount to an error of law.

10. Having announced that I was satisfied that the FtT's decision  must  be
    set aside for  procedural  unfairness,  both  representatives  were  in
    agreement that the appropriate course in this appeal is to remit it  to
    the FtT for a full re-hearing. It is appropriate  that  the  FtT  makes
    fresh findings of fact  No findings of fact are  preserved  from  Judge
    Hindson's decision.

Decision

11. The FtT decision of 19th June 2014 dismissing the Appellant's appeal is
    hereby set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a full rehearing before any Judge (not Judge Hindson).



Signed        Date 17th December 2014

Judge Roberts
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

