
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03600/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th January 2016                 |On 18th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     C M
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Muirhead (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ian Howard, promulgated on 23rd October 2015, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 17th July 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo,
    who was born on 6th October 1969.  She appealed against the decision of
    the Respondent dated 13th February 2015,  rejecting  her  asylum  claim
    under paragraph 334 of HC 395 and her claim for humanitarian protection
    under paragraph 339C, and her claims under the Human Rights Convention.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she comes  from  a  family  who  actively
    support the Bundu dia Kongo (BDK)  and  that  her  parents  disappeared
    after attending a BDK rally, and she believes that  the  government  is
    responsible for their disappearance.  The Appellant  herself  became  a
    more active supporter in the BDK.  She was  subsequently  detained  and
    imprisoned until a cousin in  the  army  heard  about  her  arrest  and
    arranged for her release.  The heart of the Appellant's claim  is  that
    she went into detention, was tortured, and after being beaten, she  was
    taken to the hospital for treatment, and during the  same  torture  she
    was digitally penetrated, groped and raped and that, "she  claims  that
    it was from hospital that her cousin was able to  secure  her  release"
    (see paragraph 19).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how central to the Appellant's claim was her arrest,
    detention, torture, and hospitalisation and that,

         "She was quite clear that she was sent to hospital  to  be  treated
         for a nosebleed.  At the same time she asked me  to  conclude  that
         her abductors seriously sexually assaulted her, yet  were  content,
         or sufficiently concerned about the nosebleed to release  her  from
         their custody to a hospital.  Given  the  dynamics  for  which  the
         Appellant argues I found it incredible that  those  who  have  just
         beaten and raped her would, for a nosebleed, show such  concern  or
         compassion to send her off  to  hospital.   Indeed  the  background
         material Mr  Muirhead  properly  asked  me  to  consider  is  clear
         evidence of a security force whose attitudes and actions are malign
         in the extreme and not consistent with the Appellant's evidence  of
         concern for a nosebleed." (See paragraph 23)

 5. The judge went on to conclude that, "in short the fundamentals  of  the
    Appellant's case are such as I am not  satisfied,  even  to  the  lower
    standard that she has ever had any involvement  with  the  BDK  in  the
    DRC".  The judge went on to reject  the  claim  both  under  the  Human
    Rights Convention and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of  application  state  that  having  determined  that  the
    Appellant was not a member of the BDK political group,  despite  having
    the same being made known in the written grounds at paragraph  15,  the
    Tribunal Judge neglected to consider the very real and pertinent issues
    of risk upon  return  faced  by  the  Appellant  as  a  result  of  her
    membership of a particular social group and vulnerability in  the  face
    of sexual violence faced by women in the DRC.

 7. On 18th  November  2015,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me  on  20th  January  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Mr  Muirhead  of  Counsel,  and  the  Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Tufan.  Mr Muirhead  handed  up  a  helpful  skeleton
    argument to me, upon which he sought to place  reliance.   In  essence,
    his  submission  was  that  the  judge  simply  failed  to   give   any
    consideration to the fact that the  Appellant  was  released  from  her
    incarceration and there was nothing described in this regard either  at
    paragraph 20 or 23 of the determination.  Secondly, the judge failed to
    take into account the extremely high incidents of sexual  assaults  and
    rapes in the DRC, to which this Appellant would be highly vulnerable if
    returned.

 9. For his part, Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the  grounds  were  succinct.
    However, there is nothing there about how the  Appellant  obtained  her
    release from incarceration.  Nor was there anything there about how she
    went into hospital or came out of it.  Therefore,  even  if  the  judge
    erred in any particular respect, it could not be deemed to be  material
    for the purposes of this appeal.

10. In reply, Mr Muirhead submitted  that  if  one  looks  at  the  country
    guidance cases it is quite clear that there are 48 rapes  per  hour  in
    the DRC and the Appellant stands  to  be  at  serious  risk  of  sexual
    violence if she had to go back.  It is clear from the country  guidance
    provided (see pages 109 to 113) that the risk is very real.   The  risk
    of violence against women is exceptionally high so  that  almost  every
    woman at some point or other is sexually molested.  These were  matters
    that the judge ought to have taken into account.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

12. First, in relation to the Appellant's core aspects of  the  claim,  the
    judge is quite clear that he has had regard to the fact  that  "central
    to  the  Appellant's  claim  is  her  arrest,  detention,  torture  and
    hospitalisation" (see paragraph 23), but the judge simply does not find
    the claim as put to be credible.   The  judge  rejects  completely  the
    account that the Appellant's tormentors allowed her to be  released  to
    hospital because she had a nosebleed.

13. Second, the Appellant, during her interview,  explained  that  she  was
    arrested due to her having previously travelled to Europe, and there is
    nothing here to the effect that she fears  sexual  ill-treatment  as  a
    primary reason for seeking international protection.

14. Third, the Appellant's representative may well now raise the  issue  of
    high sexual violence in a country like the  DRC,  but  the  Appellant's
    core claim was not based on this.  Her core claim  (see  paragraph  16)
    was in relation to her active support for  the  BDK,  which  the  judge
    rejected.

15. But in any event, even if that were to be an aspect of her  claim,  the
    country guidance case does not say that a woman from the DRC cannot  be
    returned back to that country simply on account of  a  fear  of  sexual
    violence, even if that were to be the case.

16. For all these reasons, the judge's decision does not exhibit  an  error
    of law.  I have had regard to the latest Tribunal determination in  the
    case of Dasgupta [2016] UKUT 00218, which is  to  the  effect  that  an
    intervention by the Upper Tribunal to upset the findings of a  Tribunal
    of fact below, can only be justified on the basis of the principles  in
    the well-known common law case of Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC  14.   I
    find that this Tribunal cannot intervene for the  reasons  set  out  in
    Dasgupta.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016

