
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03968/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated  |
|On 17th November 2014              |On 25th November 2014              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     MN
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lee instructed by M& S Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 7th November  1980  and
    he appeals against a decision made by the Secretary of State to  remove
    him from the UK  following  a  decision  to  refuse  him  international
    protection.

 2. In essence the respondent had accepted that the  appellant  had  worked
    whilst in Sri Lanka for the LTTE but contended that there had  been  no
    interest in him after 2008 and  that  he  had  not,  as  the  appellant
    claimed, been detained and tortured and then released on bail  in  2013
    before leaving the country illegally.  He feared return at the hands of
    the authorities.

 3. In a determination Judge of the First Tier Tribunal M A Khan  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal but an  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision, initially refused by the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 15th October 2014.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Tufan attempted to defend the decision but
    did concede that this was an uphill task.

 5. I find that the judge did not  engage  with  the  medical  evidence  of
    Professor Lingam adequately.  For example the judge  stated  that  'the
    appellant states that he told Dr Lingam of the incidents of a rod being
    inserted in his rear passage and kicking of  his  testicles.   Both  of
    these crucial incidents are not mentioned in the medical report.   This
    is inconsistent with the appellant's evidence before me and his  asylum
    interview.  I find that if the appellant had suffered  the  torture  he
    claims, he would have mentioned it to Dr Lingam'.

 6. This does not address the report itself of Dr  Lingam  in  relation  to
    scarring and injury and the reference to  the  report  appears  in  the
    determination as  an  afterthought  contrary  to  JL  (medical  reports
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC) and Mibanga v SSHD [2005  EWCA
    Civ 367.  Indeed, I note, the medical report does in fact refer to  the
    appellant being kicked on his body.

 7. In addition the letter of the Complaint to the Human Rights  Commission
    in Sri Lanka  made  reference  to  the  appellant's  abduction  and  no
    reference was made to this at all in the determination.

 8. I find thus that the  judge  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the
    documentary evidence which would have had  a  material  effect  on  the
    decision.

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reason identified.  I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE  2007).   Both  representatives  agreed  that
    there would need to be a re-hearing.  Bearing in mind  the  nature  and
    extent of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the  TCE  2007  and
    further to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction :All further evidence should be served on  the  Tribunal  and  the
opposing party not later than 14 days prior to the substantive hearing.



Signed      Date 17th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
