

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03094/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 December 2014                            |On 16 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     AAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Elliott-Kelly instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 2 March 1994.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 February 2011 with  an  EEA  family
    permit as a dependent extended family member of his aunt who  lived  in
    the UK.  He subsequently applied for a UK residence card based upon his
    relationship with his aunt but that was refused on 7 June 2013.  He did
    not appeal against that decision.

 3. The appellant then claimed asylum.  He claimed to come  from  Mogadishu
    in Somalia. He claimed to be a member of a minority Bandhabo clan, sub-
    clan Bhar Sufi, sub-sub-clan Ahmed Nur.  He claimed that when he was  a
    child a bomb was thrown at his house which injured him causing the loss
    of an eye.  His father and mother were killed and he went  to  live  in
    another village outside Mogadishu where he lived with his aunt and  her
    daughter.  In 2009, the appellant says that he left Somalia to live  in
    Ethiopia where he remained for 2 years before obtaining a family permit
    to live with his aunt in the UK.

 4. On 17 April 2014, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claim
    for  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  for  leave   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State accepted that the  appellant
    was a citizen of Somalia.  However, the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    accept that the appellant was a member of the Bandhabo clan or that his
    home had been bombed, as he claimed, when he was  a  child.    Further,
    the Secretary of State concluded that it had not been established  that
    the appellant would  be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence falling within Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification  Directive
    (Council Directive 2004/83/EC).

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. In  a  determination  promulgated  on  1  August  2014,  Judge  Davidge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection
    grounds and under Articles 3 and 8 of the  ECHR.   The  Judge  made  an
    adverse credibility finding against the appellant and concluded that he
    had not established that he was a member of a minority clan or that his
    home had been bombed when he was a child and as a result  would  be  at
    risk on return.  Further, in  relation  to  Article  15(c),  the  Judge
    concluded  that  the  appellant  would  not  be   at   real   risk   of
    indiscriminate violence if returned to Mogadishu.

 7. On 24 September 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ McDonald) granted the
    appellant permission to appeal.   Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Issues

 8. The appellant challenges the Judge's decision on five grounds  set  out
    in the grounds of appeal and  developed  by  Ms  Elliott-Kelly  in  her
    detailed skeleton argument and oral submissions before me.

          1. The Judge erred  in  law  by  failing  to  follow  the  (then)
             relevant country guidance decision relating to Somalia of  AMM
             and Others (Conflict;  Humanitarian  Crisis;  Returnees;  FGM)
             Somalia CG  [2011]  UKUT  00445  (IAC)  in  finding  that  the
             appellant  had  not  established  an  Article  15(c)  risk  in
             Mogadishu.

          2. In applying AMM, the Judge erred in law in  finding  that  the
             appellant  had  not  established  that  he  had  a   lack   of
             affiliations or connections with  Mogadishu  relevant  to  his
             risk on return under Article 15(c).

          3. The Judge's adverse credibility finding was flawed as she  had
             failed to take into account the  medical  evidence  concerning
             the appellant's mental health, including a diagnosis of  PTSD.



          4. The Judge erred in law in concluding that the appellant  would
             not be at real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment contrary
             to Article 3 of the ECHR by failing to take into  account  the
             appellant's vulnerability on return as a result of his  mental
             health as set out in the expert's report.

          5. It was unfair of the Judge to find that the appellant had  not
             established that he was a member of the Bandhabo clan and sub-
             clans by concluding that there was no  objective  evidence  of
             its existence  when  that  was  not  a  point  raised  by  the
             Secretary of State or at the hearing.

Discussion

 9. In considering the grounds, it will be helpful to consider grounds  3-5
    dealing with the Judge's findings of fact before considering grounds  1
    and 2 dealing with her application of the CG case of AMM.

    Ground 3: Credibility

10.   Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted that the Judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account the medico-legal report of Dr Longman  (at  appellant's  bundle
    pages 7-44) in reaching her adverse credibility finding.   Ms  Elliott-
    Kelly submitted that the Judge had merely paid  "lip  service"  to  the
    medical evidence.  She had failed to take  into  account  the  evidence
    concerning the appellant's PTSD and the effect that might have  had  on
    his  recollection  and  therefore   provided   explanations   for   the
    differences in his account which the Judge relied upon in  finding  the
    appellant not to be credible.  She submitted that the Judge  had  found
    the appellant not to be credible at paragraph 22 of  her  determination
    and had merely "tagged on" at paragraph 23 reference  to  the  expert's
    report which she had found  to  be  "little  assistance"  in  assessing
    credibility.  Ms Elliott-Kelly relied upon the decision of the Court of
    Appeal in SA (Somalia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1302 where the  Court  of
    Appeal had approved a statement by the IAT in HE (DRC - Credibility and
    Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321 at [22] that:

         "Where the report is specifically relied on as a relevant factor in
         credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with  it  as  an  integral
         part of the findings on credibility rather than just as an  add-on,
         which does not undermine the conclusion to which he would otherwise
         come."

11.   Ms Elliott-Kelly's submissions on this ground have  their  origin  in
    the Court of Appeal's decision in Mibanga v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367
    where the Court of  Appeal  concluded  that  an  Adjudicator's  adverse
    credibility finding was legally flawed as she had  failed  to  consider
    the relevant medical evidence (there as to scarring on the  appellant's
    body)  before  reaching  an  adverse  credibility  finding.    In   his
    concurring  judgement,  Buxton  LJ  succinctly  stated   the   relevant
    principle at [30] as follows:

         "The Adjudicator's failing was that she artificially separated  the
         medical  evidence  from  the  rest  of  the  evidence  and  reached
         conclusions as to credibility without  reference  to  that  medical
         evidence; and then, no doubt inevitably on that premise found  that
         the medical evidence was of no  assistance  to  her.   That  was  a
         structural failing, not just an error of appreciation,..."

12.   In SA, the Court of Appeal considered Mibanga.   Sir  Mark  Potter  P
    (with whom Brooke and Moore-Bick LJJ agreed) said at [32]:

         "...where there is medical evidence corroborative of an appellant's
         account of torture of mistreatment, it should be considered as part
         of  the  whole  package  of  evidence  going  to  the  question  of
         credibility and not simply  treated  as  an  'add-on'  or  separate
         exercise for subsequent assessment only after  a  decision  on  the
         credibility has been reached on the basis of the  contents  of  the
         appellant's evidence or his performance as a witness."

13.   Sir Mark Potter P went on to emphasise that a judge's  decision  must
    be looked at "as a matter of substance" based upon a  fair  reading  of
    the decision (see [34]).

14.   The medical evidence relied upon by the appellant under  this  ground
    is found at paras 7.3.1-7.4.7 of Dr Longman's report (at pages 14-17 of
    the appellant's bundle).   At  para  7.3.1-7.3.3  Dr  Longman  makes  a
    clinical diagnosis of PTSD:

         "7.3.1   AAA showed  clinical  features  of  post-traumatic  stress
                disorder so I assessed him more  formally  using  the  PHQ-9
                depression questionnaire and the PTSD checklist (PCL-C),  as
                well as using  the  DSM-IV  diagnostic  criteria  for  these
                conditions.

             1. A diagnosis of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  is  in  my
                opinion compatible with AAA's observed mental state.   AAA's
                trauma symptoms were assessed formally using the PCL-C which
                is a PTSD (Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder) checklist used to
                evaluate symptoms of PTSD according to the DSM-IV diagnostic
                criteria.  AAA scored 36  out  of  a  possible  85  and  met
                several  of  the  DSM-IV  diagnostic  criteria  (note   that
                patients rarely fulfil every criterion and the diagnosis  is
                based on the cluster of symptoms), which is consistent  with
                a diagnosis of PTSD.  See Appendix V.

             2.  AAA  requires  further  assessment  and  will  likely  need
                treatment for his PTSD.  He underwent a traumatic event at a
                young age.  Furthermore he lost his parents at a young  age.
                These factors make  his  situation  complex  and  it  is  my
                opinion that a specialist referral  is  warranted.   AAA  is
                likely to require trauma-focused therapy or counselling,  as
                stipulated in NICE guidance.  NICE recommends that  patients
                with PTSD should be offered trauma-focused therapy, and  may
                require antidepressants.  The guidelines suggest  a  limited
                course of therapy initially, but recognize that those  whose
                trauma or PTSD has been prolonged may require longer courses
                of treatment."

15.   At paragraphs 7.4.1-7.4.7 Dr Longman goes on to deal with the  effect
    on the appellant's mental health "on discrepancies  between  accounts".
    Dr Longman begins at 7.4.1-7.4.2 to deal with the potential effects  of
    those suffering from PTSD as follows:

         "7.4.1   In my professional opinion and from the clinical point  of
                view, it is important to keep in mind that people who suffer
                from PTSD are frequently confused about dates and times.  In
                patients with PTSD, memories -  especially  (but  not  only)
                those associated with the  trauma  -  can  be  forgotten  or
                "blocked out", and hence may be  difficult  to  describe  or
                retell in an interview, particularly during proceedings such
                as immigration interviews or court hearings, which are often
                perceived as stressful or adversarial.

         7.4.2    I am aware that there are differences  in  AAA's  accounts
                given on different occasions, and that  these  discrepancies
                have led to  adverse  findings  regarding  his  credibility.
                Clinically, there are many reasons why  differences  between
                accounts  may  arise.   It  is  recognised  that   traumatic
                experiences may be highly distressing to recount, that there
                may be 'gaps' in recall or retelling, and that the  survivor
                may be unable to reveal their full trauma history  in  every
                interview,   as   the   research   summarized   below    has
                established."

16.   At 7.4.3, Dr Longman quotes from  a  research  paper  setting  out  a
    number of  conclusions  concerning  the  effect  on  human  memory  and
    accounts of trauma in asylum seekers and refugees:

         "7.4.3   The medical and psychological research on human memory and
                trauma, and on accounts of  trauma  in  asylum  seekers  and
                refugees,  is  relevant  when  considering   AAA's   account
                (Herlihy & Turner, 2006; Cohen, 2001;  BPS,  2010;  Istanbul
                Protocol, 2004,  Van  der  Kolk,  1997).   The  researchers'
                conclusions include:

                   a. Memory is  not  a  'videotape'  of  events.  Even  in
                      ordinary (non-traumatic) memories, there can be gaps,
                      events recalled out  of  sequence,  or  discrepancies
                      between accounts given on different occasions.

                   b. Memories of trauma may be fragmented and difficult to
                      retell in a coherent and sequential manner.  PTSD may
                      exacerbate difficulties with memory.

                   c. In refugees and asylum seekers, discrepancies between
                      accounts  given  on  different  occasions  are   very
                      common.

                   d. The discrepancies are greater  when  there  are  long
                      time intervals between accounts and if there is PTSD.

                   e.  Many  persons  suffering   from   PTSD   also   have
                      difficulties recalling dates and times.  Cohen (2001)
                      remarks "Memory for dates and  times  is  notoriously
                      inaccurate."

                   f. Memory  may  be  adversely  affected  by  mental  and
                      physical illness such as head injury, poor nutrition,
                      sleep deprivation, PTSD  and  depression,  which  are
                      common in survivors of torture and abuse.

                   g. The medical research on memories of trauma  concludes
                      that discrepancies in asylum seekers' accounts do not
                      necessarily imply a lack of credibility."

17.    At  paras  7.4.4-7.4.7,  Dr  Longman  then  reaches  the   following
    conclusions:

         "7.4.4   In my opinion the above  factors  are  relevant  to  AAA's
                accounts.  He describes a highly traumatic  experience.   He
                has a clinical picture of  PTSD  and  has  a  history  of  a
                serious head injury.  He sleeps poorly and is likely  to  be
                sleep deprived.  With these conditions and according to  the
                medical  research  on  memory,  gaps  in  AAA's  memory  and
                discrepancies between his accounts would not  be  surprising
                clinically.

             5.  In  this  context,  it  is  in  my  view  unsurprising  and
                clinically plausible that AAA  did  not  disclose  his  full
                history during his initial police and screening  interviews.
                AAA reported to me: "I was nervous in my interview and  felt
                panicked.  I wanted the interview to be over as  quickly  as
                possible because I felt  so  uncomfortable".   Even  in  the
                relatively relaxed setting of a medical consultation AAA had
                difficulty in giving his account.  In my opinion  this  lack
                of disclosure does not negate his account of trauma.  I have
                seen  many  asylum  seekers  whose  initial  accounts   were
                discrepant with their later accounts.  In such cases  it  is
                common to find that the trauma  history  only  emerges  over
                considerable time.  Paradoxically, it is often the case that
                the greater the level of clinical trauma, the more difficult
                it is for  the  survivor  to  speak  about  it,  leading  to
                misunderstandings about their clinical level of need.

             6. There are also some clinical issues in working with  medical
                interpreters.   Trauma  survivors  may  have  difficulty  in
                trusting interpreters, particularly telephone  interpreters,
                who are anonymous (they usually  provide  only  their  first
                name if any, and an ID  number  for  the  agency  they  work
                with).  It is common for survivors to be wary  of  confiding
                in interpreters from their own  community.   They  may  fear
                that the confidentiality will not  be  respected,  and  that
                their history will become known to their community.  Face-to-
                face interpreters may be more  easily  trusted,  because  in
                general it is easier for someone  to  trust  another  person
                they can see.  These problems are  acknowledged  by  doctors
                and nurses working with diverse populations.

             7. In  addition,  some  individuals  do  not  use  the  Western
                calendar to measure the passage of time and in some cultures
                the concept of orientation in time is of less relevance than
                it is in the West.  The interpreter informed  me  that  this
                was the case with AAA.   Illiteracy  may  also  limit  AAA's
                access to information about date.  These factors need to  be
                borne  in  mind  when  considering  AAA's  difficulties   of
                recalling temporal details of events in his history."

18.   Judge Davidge undoubtedly had in mind Dr Longman's evidence.  She set
    out extracts from the report and summarised parts of it relevant to the
    appellant's PTSD at paras 14-20 of her determination as follows:

         "14.     There is a medico  legal  report  from  Dr  Tania  Longman
                obtained by the solicitors representing for the  purpose  of
                assisting me in my decision.  The case had  been  previously
                adjourned to allow for the provision of  such  a  report  in
                light of the representatives  expressed  concerns  that  the
                Appellant was suicidal because he had been arrested  walking
                on railway tracks.  In the event it transpired that  he  had
                asked for directions and mistaken the track for his way.  On
                its face the report is evidence capable of corroborating the
                Appellant's  account.   The  doctor  has  found   that   the
                Appellant has four scars, detailed in a drawing,  which  are
                typical to the context of his having been exposed to a  bomb
                explosion over 6 months  ago;  the  writer  then  considered
                mental state, although not a psychiatrist the author  states
                she has examined many who allege to have  suffered  torture.
                The Appellant  here  doe  not  describe  any  experience  of
                torture.

            15.   The author finds that  the  Appellant  describes  symptoms
                compatible  with  a  diagnosis  of   post-traumatic   stress
                disorder arising from the traumatic experience of  the  bomb
                blast in childhood and concludes:

                "Mr ..... requires further assessment and will  likely  need
                treatment for his PTSD."

            16.   The author turns to the issue of discrepancies and  states
                in general terms at para 7.4:

                "people who suffer from PTSD are often confused about  dates
                and times",

                and further explains that memories especially, but not only,
                those associated with the trauma may be blocked, so as to be
                difficult  to  describe   or   retell   in   an   interview,
                particularly  during   proceedings   such   as   immigration
                interviews or court hearings, which are often  perceived  as
                stressful  or  adversarial.   They  may   find   it   highly
                distressing to recount the traumatic experiences,  may  have
                gaps in recall or retelling, and that the  survivor  may  be
                unable  to  reveal  their  full  trauma  history  in   every
                interview."

            17.   With regard to the  Appellant's  case  in  particular  the
                author states:

                "I am aware that there  are  differences  in  Mr's  accounts
                given on different occasions, and that  these  discrepancies
                have led to adverse findings regarding his credibility.

            18.   and concludes:

                "in my opinion the  above factors are  relevant  to  Mr...'s
                case, he describes a highly traumatic experience.  He has  a
                clinical picture of PTSD and has a history of  serious  head
                injury.   He  sleeps  poorly  and  is  likely  to  be  sleep
                deprived.   With  these  conditions  and  according  to  the
                medical research on memory, gaps  in  Mr  ...'s  memory  and
                discrepancies between his accounts would not  be  surprising
                clinically".

            19.   In particular the author writes:

            20.   "it would not be surprising that he had not disclosed  his
                full history in his initial police and screening interviews.
                 Mr... reported to me:  "I was nervous in my  interview  and
                felt panicked.  I wanted the interview to be over as quickly
                as possible because I felt so uncomfortable".  Even  in  the
                relatively relaxed setting of a medical consultation Mr  ...
                had difficulty giving his account.  In my opinion this  lack
                of disclosure does not negate his account of trauma.  I have
                seen  many  asylum  seekers  whose  initial  accounts   were
                discrepant with their later accounts.  In such cases  it  is
                common  to  find  that  the  trauma  history  emerges   over
                considerable time.  Paradoxically, it is often the case that
                the greater the level of clinical trauma, the more difficult
                it is for  the  survivor  to  speak  about  it,  leading  to
                misunderstandings about their clinical level of need."

19.   At para 21, Judge Davidge recorded that:

         "I have borne that medical evidence in mind when I have  considered
         the credibility of the appellant and his historical account."

20.   Then, at para 22 Judge  Davidge  identified  a  number  of  what  she
    described as "significant discrepancies" internally within the evidence
    of the appellant and between his evidence  and  that  of  his  aunt  as
    follows:

         "22.     The Appellant's claims (sic) in summary to  have  suffered
                targeted persecution in Somalia with his house  having  been
                bombed, and his family being forced to flee, with the result
                that he and his parents ran in different directions so  that
                he lost contact with  his  parents,  and  that  his  parents
                subsequently, separately, died, killed  in  the  civil  war.
                Difficulties with credibility arise because:

                   i) There are significant discrepancies in the account of
                      the destruction of the Appellant's home:

                          a) In the  appeal  before  the  Immigration  Judge
                             concerning  his  extended  family  status   the
                             Appellant's  relatives  gave  evidence  to  the
                             point that:

                             (1)   Whilst  they  were  here  in  the  United
                                   Kingdom the Appellant's family  home  in
                                   Somalia was decimated by mortar  attack,
                                   and both of his parents were killed.  He
                                   was then about 2 years old, and went  to
                                   live with his grandmother in  a  village
                                   outside    Mogadishu.     Because    the
                                   sponsoring   aunt   in   the   UK    was
                                   financially    responsible    for    the
                                   Appellant  she  formally   adopted   him
                                   through the courts in Somalia  with  her
                                   daughter    making     the     necessary
                                   arrangements and being  responsible  for
                                   the Appellant on a day-to-day basis.

                          b) The Appellant, in his asylum claim,  said  that
                             the house had suffered the  explosion  when  he
                             was 5 years old, that his aunt was not  yet  in
                             the United Kingdom and so he went to live  with
                             her, there had been no formal adoption although
                             he considered her to be his adoptive mother, in
                             common  with  her   daughter   and   also   his
                             grandmother, all of  whom  were  his  "adoptive
                             mothers".

                          c) In his oral evidence the Appellant told me that
                             in fact the explosion has occurred when he  was
                             10 years old.  His parents had not in fact been
                             killed in the mortar attack but had fled and he
                             and they had never been reunited and  sometimes
                             he said they had been killed and  sometimes  he
                             said they were alive because at different times
                             this is the information he had been given.  The
                             information he had was unreliable and up  until
                             now  he  had  never  been  provided  with   any
                             reliable information as to  whether  they  were
                             alive or dead.  In terms of the discrepancy  in
                             his own evidence as to when the  mortar  attack
                             had happened the difference in  the  times  was
                             explained by his own inability to recall things
                             because of  memory  difficulties  arising  from
                             damage to the brain from the explosion  or  the
                             post-traumatic stress disorder.   In  terms  of
                             the discrepancy with what he said and what  his
                             aunt said he told me that he had  never  really
                             discussed the position with his aunt,  and  any
                             differences  that  had  arisen  between   their
                             accounts could be explained by her  own  memory
                             problems.

                          d) The Appellant's failed to call his aunt or  her
                             daughter, who herself is now in  this  country,
                             or his  grandmother,  who  is  also  apparently
                             present in the United Kingdom, (although having
                             had her application to remain  as  an  extended
                             family member similarly refused, her status  is
                             unclear).

                          e) The evidence  that  the  Appellant's  home  was
                             specifically  targeted  amounts   to   a   bare
                             assertion that that was what was told to him by
                             neighbours at the time.  The only basis for the
                             assertion is his stated recollection.   I  also
                             note that,  whilst  not  determinative  of  the
                             issue, there was no mention of the  Appellant's
                             clan causing difficulties so as to provide  any
                             reason for targeting the family in the  account
                             provided by  family  members  to  the  previous
                             judge."

21.   Then at para 23 Judge Davidge again dealt with the medical report  of
    Dr Longman and  concluded  that  it  provides  "little  assistance"  in
    assessing credibility for the following reasons:

         "23.     Whilst the medical evidence establishes that  there  is  a
                real risk that the Appellant's scars were the result of  his
                being exposed to an explosion, whether resulting from a bomb
                or a mortar attack, at some point beyond  6  months  in  the
                past, I find that the report provides little  assistance  in
                terms  of  the  credibility  of  the  account  as   to   the
                circumstances in the incident.  The diagnosis of  PTSD  does
                not provide sufficient explanation for  the  inconsistencies
                that have  arisen  in  this  account  when  looking  at  the
                evidence as a  whole.   The  report  does  not  provide  any
                detailed analysis as to  how  the  individual  discrepancies
                that have arisen can be so explained.  This is plainly not a
                case of an explanation obtaining clarity and definition over
                time against a backdrop of a medical condition  which  gives
                credence to  such  delayed  telling  and  explanations,  the
                incident which is at the core of the account  was  a  single
                one, the discrepancies and vagueness of the account are  not
                limited to internal issues of the Appellant's account of the
                incident but extend to information about his  clan,  parents
                and family but most  significantly  arise  between  his  and
                other accounts given in a judicial setting."

22.   At para 24, the Judge went on to take into account the fact that  the
    appellant did not  call  any  witnesses  in  relation  to  the  factual
    circumstances surrounding his injuries or indeed  in  relation  to  his
    clan affiliations even though they were in the UK:

         "24.     Following the approach of TK Burundi I find that there are
                witnesses that the Appellant could  have  been  expected  to
                call upon to provide evidence  which  would  assist  in  the
                consideration  of  the  factual  circumstances   surrounding
                injuries he  has  suffered,  the  position  of  his  family,
                including the whereabouts of his parents,  as  well  as  his
                past residence in  Somalia,  journey  to  Ethiopia,  current
                support available to him in Somalia, his ethnic  tribal/clan
                background and affiliations.  It is common sense that  where
                one asserts gaps in one's own knowledge, as  this  Appellant
                does, including as to the chronology of his account, and the
                whereabouts of his parents and family members, many of which
                matters are, according to their evidence as relied  upon  by
                the previous judge, known to family members  in  the  United
                Kingdom, but  also  in  relation  to  his  clan  and  tribal
                affiliations, his failure to call evidence is adverse.  I am
                satisfied that in this case it represents an effort to limit
                the information available  to  this  court  and  reduce  the
                opportunity for the testing of his evidence."

23.   The Judge made further reference to the absence of those witnesses at
    para 26, together with the fact that there was no objective evidence of
    the existence of the appellant's sub-sub clan, in reaching a finding at
    para 27 that he has not established that he is a member of  a  minority
    clan.

24.   Then, having dealt with the appellant's claim under Article 15(c), at
    para 34 the Judge reached the following conclusion:

         "In short I find that the Appellant is not a reliable witness,  and
         the evidence before me does not establish that there  is  any  real
         risk that his account is true, or that he faces any  real  risk  of
         persecution or harm requiring international protection  on  any  of
         the grounds raised."

25.   The  substance  of  the  appellant's  challenge  under  this  ground,
    reflected in Ms Elliott-Kelly's skeleton argument and oral submissions,
    is that the Judge made a "structural failing" (to borrow the  words  of
    Buxton LJ in Mibanga) by  failing  to  take  into  account  the  expert
    evidence in assessing whether  the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    account and between his evidence and his relatives were such as to lead
    to an adverse credibility finding.  The grounds do not,  in  substance,
    challenge the reasons of the Judge, in particular at para 23, that  the
    medical evidence does not, in effect, provide an  adequate  explanation
    for the discrepancies.  Nor do the grounds suggest that there were  not
    discrepancies in the evidence.

26.   It is plain to me that the Judge's determination does not suffer from
    the "structural failing" that occurred in  Mibanga.   First,  prior  to
    making any finding on credibility the Judge set out the pertinent parts
    of the expert evidence dealing  with  the  appellant's  mental  health,
    namely his PTSD and the effect that condition might have on  recall  or
    memory leading to discrepancies.  Secondly, the Judge expressly  stated
    in para 21 that she had "borne that  medical  evidence  in  mind"  when
    considering the issue of credibility.   Thirdly, having identified  the
    discrepancies in the appellant's evidence at paragraph  22,  the  Judge
    expressly at para 23 went on to consider  whether  those  discrepancies
    could be explained, in the light of the  medical  evidence,  given  the
    PTSD diagnosis and views of Dr Longman.  She concluded that they  could
    not.  Fourthly, the Judge only expressly stated her finding in relation
    to the appellant's credibility at para 34 of her determination  -  some
    way after a consideration of the medical evidence and discrepancies  in
    the appellant's evidence.

27.    It  is  perhaps  anodyne  to  state  that  a  Judge  in  writing   a
    determination has to start somewhere and end somewhere else.  Here, the
    Judge started with the medical evidence and ended with  her  conclusion
    on credibility.  In  between  those  two  points,  she  considered  the
    appellant's evidence and  the  discrepancies  she  identified  in  that
    evidence and then evaluated those  discrepancies  against  the  medical
    evidence which was relied upon to explain them.   She  also  considered
    the absence of supporting witnesses based in  the  UK  who  could  have
    provided relevant evidence on the events relied upon by  the  appellant
    and his clan background.

28.   In my judgement, this was not a case where the Judge failed to assess
    the appellant's credibility, and in particular, his  evidence,  without
    regard to the medical evidence concerning his mental  health.   Whether
    in structure or form, the Judge's  determination  cannot  on  any  fair
    reading be seen as treating the medical evidence as an "add-on" and its
    assessment a separate exercise from considering and  reaching  findings
    in respect of the appellant's credibility.

29.   As I have said, Ms  Elliott-Kelly  did  not  directly  challenge  the
    Judge's reasoning in para 23 that led the Judge,  despite  the  medical
    evidence, to find significant discrepancies in the appellant's  account
    which extended not only to the claimed incident of the bombing  of  his
    house but also as to his clan, parents and family  and  "significantly"
    between his account and that of family  members  given  in  a  judicial
    setting.  That latter reference is, of course, a reference to  evidence
    given in an earlier appeal hearing dealing with a  refusal  of  an  EEA
    family permit.  In my judgement, the Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the evidence of Dr Longman, herself not a psychiatrist but who had
    diagnosed the appellant as suffering from  PTSD,  did  not  provide  an
    adequate  explanation  for  the  significant   discrepancies   in   the
    appellant's evidence and between his evidence and other family members.



30.   Ms Elliott-Kelly's skeleton argument refers at paragraph 21 to "Joint
    Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2010:  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive  Appellant  Guidance".   Ms  Elliott-Kelly  made  no  further
    reference to this guidance in her oral submissions.  Reference  in  the
    skeleton argument is made to paras 14 and 15 of the Guidance which,  it
    is said, "deal(s) with assessment of evidence".  No further elaboration
    is offered.  I see no basis for concluding that Judge Davidge was other
    than aware that  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable  adult,  given  the
    diagnosis of PTSD, and that the events had occurred when he was a young
    child. In the absence of any elaboration of this ground, I  cannot  see
    how it adds to the submission which I have already rejected.

31.   For these reasons, ground 3 is rejected.

    Ground 4:  Article 3

32.   Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted that the  Judge  had  failed  properly  to
    consider whether the appellant would be at real  risk  of  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment on return because she had failed  to  consider  the
    views of Dr Longman, in particular at paras 7.5.2 (set out above)  that
    the appellant was not "robust  enough  for  him  to  be  able  to  seek
    appropriate  psychological  help  in   Somalia"   and   that   he   was
    "particularly [at] risk of exploitation or ill-treatment by others" and
    further, at para 7.3.3 he was  "likely  [to]  need  treatment  for  his
    PTSD".  It is not entirely clear how this issue was put to the Judge by
    the appellant's (then) Counsel.  At paragraph 9 of  her  determination,
    the Judge sets out the clarification given by Counsel  to  her  of  the
    issues live in the appeal:

         "I clarified with Mr Paxton the issues which were live  before  me.
         Mr Paxton indicated that whilst the ground of appeal in respect  of
         asylum was not withdrawn formally he did not intend to pursue it in
         evidence or  by  way  of  submissions  before  me.   The  case  was
         vulnerability on return  in  the  context  of  Article  15(c).   In
         clarification he set out that whilst, in  light  of  the  Appellant
         having left Somalia a  considerable  period  after  2008  when  Al-
         Shabaab controlled area since, in combination with the  short  time
         that he had been in the United Kingdom, the  hurdles  to  requiring
         international protection on Article 3  or  humanitarian  protection
         grounds in respect of  Al-Shabaab  were  such  that  he  could  not
         establish it.   Rather the force of the Appellant's case  was  that
         the fact of suffering from post traumatic stress disorder  and  the
         vulnerabilities in terms of an inability to work that followed,  as
         well as the absence of support in Somalia, which would place him in
         an displaced persons camp which was sufficient to establish a  need
         for international protection in the context of the country guidance
         case of AMM."

33.   First, it is apparent that the appellant did not pursue with  vigour,
    or at all, that as a result of a fear of Al-Shabaab he was a refugee or
    that he was at risk of serious ill-treatment contrary to Article  3  or
    Art 15(b) of the Qualification Directive.  The appellant did rely  upon
    Article 15(c) based upon his vulnerability.   I  will  return  to  this
    shortly.  Further, he relied upon his vulnerability and  his  inability
    to work which would, it was submitted, require him to live  in  an  IDP
    and so require international protection.  That was, in all  likelihood,
    a reliance upon Article 3 of the ECHR.

34.   The Judge dealt  with  this  issue  at  paragraphs  29-33  where  she
    concluded that there was no real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  be
    required to live in an IDP camp or otherwise be destitute.  The Judge's
    reasons were as follows:

         "29.     Mr Paxton submitted  that  the  Appellant  would  have  to
                relocate to an Internally  Displaced  Persons'  camp.    The
                submission is based on the fact  that  the  Appellant  would
                have  no  support  network  or   likelihood   of   obtaining
                employment.  I reject that submission on both  counts.   The
                Appellant has not produced medical evidence that he  is  not
                fit for work.

            30. Counsel relies on a finding made by the judge in 2010:

                (i)    "Notwithstanding the lack of evidence of  the  extent
                      of his injuries, there is sufficient evidence to show
                      that he is a vulnerable person, being  blind  in  one
                      eye and having residual  head  injury  problems.   He
                      requires constant medical attention...  it  would  be
                      too much to expect neighbours to look after  him,  on
                      behalf of his aunt/adoptive mother".

            31. I find that that takes  the  matter  no  further,  it  is  a
                finding made on the basis of the balance  of  probabilities,
                and on the evidence of the sponsoring family members who did
                not attend before me.  The  submission  simply  ignores  the
                evidence that the Appellant has  not  provided  evidence  of
                having received in the UK constant medical attention in  the
                context of any severe  head  injury,  there  is  no  medical
                evidence of his being unfit to work, a position which is not
                determined by his either being blind in one  eye  or  having
                scars consistent with having been exposed to  an  explosion,
                or with a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.   The
                Appellant's own evidence is that he is  independent  of  his
                family in the United Kingdom that they do  not  provide  him
                with any physical care and  attention,  although  he  is  in
                regular telephone contact with them.

            32. I have no reliable evidence of the extent of the Appellant's
                family in Somalia or elsewhere or the support  available  to
                him  in  Somalia,  nor  of  what  property  and  assets  are
                available to him there.  I find  it  inconceivable  that  an
                aunt who travelled all the way to Ethiopia to go to  collect
                him, and two cousins, one of whom is in full-time work as  a
                staff nurse and indicated in February 2013 her readiness  to
                support the Appellant, and the  other  who  is  a  qualified
                teacher and again asserts financial  capability  to  support
                the Appellant in her letter of  10th  February  2013,  would
                make such support contingent upon the Appellant's  residence
                in the United Kingdom.  I find  the  notion  of  failing  to
                support this Appellant  in  Somalia  an  entirely  different
                prospect from arranging the families living conditions  here
                so as to maximise claims on public funds.

            33. For all the reason above I find there is no  risk  that  the
                Appellant does not have a support network in Somalia or that
                he would be forced to live in a displaced persons'  camp  or
                be otherwise destitute."

35.   The Judge had, of course, previously set out the views of Dr  Longman
    at paragraphs 14-20 of her determination. Despite Dr Longman's  comment
    at para 7.3.3 that the appellant "requires further assessment and  will
    likely need treatment for his PTSD", there was no evidence  before  the
    Judge, and none was brought to my attention,  that  the  appellant  has
    indeed been further assessed or is  receiving  any  treatment  for  his
    PTSD.  That is despite the fact that he has lived in the UK since 2009.
     Likewise, there was no evidence that the appellant would be unable  to
    work as Judge Davidge points out in paragraph 31.  The evidence  of  Dr
    Longman that  the  appellant  would  not  be  "robust  enough"  to  see
    appropriate psychological help in Somalia and was  "highly  vulnerable"
    and  "particularly  [at]  risk  of  exploitation  or  ill-treatment  by
    others", had to be placed against the evidence that the appellant  was,
    since reaching 18, living independently of his family in the UK who did
    not provide any physical care or attention for him.  Even  without  the
    Judge's finding that the  appellant  had  not  established  a  lack  of
    affiliations or connections with Mogadishu, the Judge's finding that it
    was not established that there was a real risk that the appellant would
    have to live in an IDP is entirely consistent with the country guidance
    decision of AMM.  There at para 2 of the head note  under  the  heading
    "Country Guidance: Mogadishu" it is stated:

         "The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not,  however,  pose  a  real
         risk of Article 3 harm in respect  of  any  person  in  that  city,
         regardless of circumstances.  The humanitarian crisis  is  southern
         and central Somalia has led to a declaration of famine in IDP camps
         in Mogidishu; but a returnee from the United Kingdom who is fit for
         work or has family connections maybe able to avoid having  to  live
         in such a camp.  A returnee may, nevertheless, face a real risk  of
         Article 3 harm, by reason of his/her vulnerability." (my emphasis).



36    In my judgement, given the Judge's factual finding  it  was  entirely
    open to her to conclude that the appellant had failed to establish that
    he was at real risk of living in an IDP camp or of being  destitute  so
    as to engage Article 3 on his return to Mogadishu.

37    For these reasons, I reject ground 4.

    Ground 5: Unfairness

38    The basis of this ground is that the  Judge  raised,  for  the  first
    time, in her determination the question of whether the appellant was  a
    member of the Bandhabo tribe,  sub-clan  Bahar  Sufi  and  sub-sub-clan
    Ahmed Nur on the basis that there was  no  objective  evidence  of  the
    existence  of  that  "particular  minority  clan".   Ms   Elliott-Kelly
    submitted that this was unfair as the respondent had not  disputed  the
    existence of the Bandhabo clan and sub-clan but  rather  had  concluded
    that the appellant had not established that he was  a  member  of  that
    clan.  It was unfair of the Judge to raise this  issue  for  the  first
    time in the determination which did not allow the  appellant  "time  to
    gather evidence and make submissions in respect of the existence of the
    clan"  (see para 28 of the skeleton argument).  The  Judge's  reasoning
    is at paragraphs 26-27 of her determination as follows:

         "26.     In respect of the Appellant's clan membership I  pause  to
                note that  he  has  not  provided  any  evidence  save  bare
                assertion of his membership of a minor clan.  The  Appellant
                claims that he is of the Bandhabow race or  ethnicity,  that
                his sub-tribe is Bahar Sufi and that  his  sub-sub-tribe  if
                Ahmed Nur.  There is no objective evidence of the  existence
                of that particular minority clan and, taking account of  the
                huge Somalian diaspora in the United Kingdom the Appellant's
                failure to call evidence to substantiate his claim does  not
                assist him.  The  failure  to  call  his  own  relatives  to
                provide the information that he accepts he does not know  is
                an issue I have already deal with.

         27.      In short I find that he has not established that he  is  a
                member of a minority clan and in particular that he has  not
                established that he is a member of a minority  clan  to  the
                point that because of lack of affiliations or connections he
                would either  be  persecuted  or  vulnerable  on  return  to
                Mogadishu."

39    As this issue had not been raised by the  respondent  either  in  the
    refusal letter or at the hearing, it was  prima  facia  unfair  of  the
    Judge  to  take  into  account  the  absence  of   objective   evidence
    demonstrating the existence of the appellant's claimed  sub-clan.   The
    Judge's point must, I think, relate to the sub-clan as this experienced
    Judge could not conceivably  have  thought  that  the  principal  clan,
    Bandhabo did not exist.  Mr Richards submitted that the Judge  had  not
    simply relied upon the absence of any objective evidence  but  also  on
    the appellant's lack of knowledge of his clan and the adverse view that
    the Judge had taken in relation to the appellant's evidence in general,
    including the failure of any family members to give evidence to support
    his claim.

40.   Ms  Elliott-Kelly  did  not  draw  my  attention  to  any  background
    evidence, nor is any referred to in the grounds or her skeleton,  which
    does identify the existence of the  sub-clan  to  which  the  appellant
    claims to belong.   In  my  judgment,  the  absence  of  any  objective
    evidence is only one aspect of the Judge's reasoning that  led  her  to
    conclude that the appellant had not established that he was a member of
    a minority clan.  She was  entitled  to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant had provided no supporting evidence from a number  of  family
    members or others who, lived in the UK to support his claim.   It  does
    not appear to have been challenged before the Judge, nor was it  before
    me, that the appellant's only knowledge of his clan was the three  clan
    names and that they eat a particular sweet and as a business  they  sew
    clothes (see para 16-19 of the refusal letter).  In addition, there was
    the Judge's reasons relating to the appellant's credibility in  respect
    of the claimed incident of the bombing of his home set out at  para  22
    of  the  determination.   Taking  these  matters  into  account,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant was not prejudiced in  any  material  way.
    In my judgment, the Judge would have reached just the  same  conclusion
    even if she had not taken into account the  absence  of  any  objective
    evidence supporting the existence of his claimed sub- and sub-sub-clan.



41.   For these reasons, I reject ground 5.

    Ground 1: Failing to apply AMM

42.   Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted that the Judge had erred in law by failing
    to apply AMM which, she submitted, established that the appellant would
    be at real risk of harm falling within Article  15(c)  if  returned  to
    Mogadishu.  The Judge could only depart from AMM if  there  was  cogent
    evidence subsequent to that case which justified a departure  from  it.
    Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted that the Judge had  failed  to  give  cogent
    reasons and to set out the relevant background evidence upon which  she
    relied to depart from AMM on the basis that "the reduction in violence"
    acknowledged in AMM, now established a "durable" change  in  Mogadishu.
    Ms  Elliott-Kelly  accepted  that  the  more  recent  country  guidance
    decision in MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) CG [2014]  UKUT  00042
    (IAC) recognised that there had been a  change  of  circumstances  such
    that there was now less likely to be an Article 15(c) claim  on  return
    to Mogadishu but, she submitted, that decision was not relevant to  the
    Judge's assessment of risk as the relevant country guidance case at the
    time of decision was AMM.

43.   In AMM, the Upper Tribunal recognised that despite the withdrawal  in
    early August 2011 of Al-Shabaab forces from most  of  Mogadishu,  there
    remained a general real risk of Article 15(c) harm for the majority  of
    those returning to Mogadishu after a significant period of time  abroad
    (see, in particular [358]).  The Upper Tribunal recognised  (at  [357])
    that there may be a:

         "category of middle class or professional persons in Mogadishu  who
         can live to a  reasonable  standard,  in  circumstances  where  the
         Article 15(c) risk, which exists for  the  great  majority  of  the
         population does not apply...into this category we would place those
         who by reason of their connections with "powerful actors"  such  as
         the TGF/AMISOM will be able to avoid the generalised risk."

44.   It will be necessary to return  to  this  excepted  category  to  the
    general risk under Art 15(c) under Ground 2.  For the  present,  it  is
    important to note that the Upper Tribunal in AMM rejected the view that
    there was, as yet,  a  "durable  change  of  circumstance  which  would
    justify a finding that there was no Article 15(c) risk to the  majority
    of those returning to Mogadishu.  At [345]  the  Upper  Tribunal  noted
    that:

         "Any assessment that material circumstances have changed, will need
         to demonstrate that 'such changes are well established evidentially
         and durable'."

45.   That is a reference to the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab  and  the  effect
    that has on the  Article  15(c)  risk  to  the  general  population  of
    Mogadishu.  The Judge dealt with this aspect  of  AMM  at  para  28  as
    follows:

         "With regard to the Section 15(c) argument, Mr Paxton  acknowledged
         that whilst in November 2011 it was  too  early  to  say  that  the
         reduction in violence following the  Al-Shabaab's  withdrawal  from
         Mogadishu was durable, he could  put  no  evidence  of  significant
         quality and weight before me to show that in fact the position  had
         subsequently deteriorated.  I am satisfied that as at the  date  of
         July 2014  the  reduction  in  violence  is  established  as  being
         durable.  With regard to the Appellant himself I note that he lived
         without difficulty in an Al-Shabaab controlled area  prior  to  his
         leaving Somalia to go to Ethiopia and I  am  satisfied  that  as  a
         result he would not be at any real risk from Al-Shabaab  on  return
         now. His presence in the west has been of a short duration and I am
         satisfied that given the recentness of his experience he would  not
         stand out as being "westernised".

46.   Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had not, in fact, departed  from
    AMM.  What the Judge had decided, Mr Richards submitted, was  that  the
    reduction in violence following Al-Shabaab's withdrawal from Mogadishu,
    which the Upper Tribunal in AMM had considered would, if durable,  have
    removed a generalised risk under  Article  15(c)  had  in  fact  become
    durable because the appellant's Counsel had produced "no evidence" that
    the position had "subsequently  deteriorated"  since  AMM.    In  other
    words, Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had, in fact, followed AMM.



47.   Whilst Mr Richards' submission has some attraction, ultimately, I  do
    not accept it.  In finding that the reduction in violence recognised by
    AMM  as  resulting  from  the  withdrawal  of  Al-Shabaab  had   become
    "durable", the Judge was in effect departing from the guidance  in  AMM
    that there was a risk to the majority of the population  under  Article
    15(c) on the evidence before the Tribunal  in  AMM.   As  the  Tribunal
    itself recognised at [345]:

         "Any assessment that material circumstances have changed, will need
         to demonstrate that 'such changes are well established evidentially
         and durable'."

48.   At [363] the  Tribunal  foreshadowed  the  approach  that  should  be
    followed in subsequent cases as follows:

         "Before leaving the issue of Article  15(c)  in  Mogadishu,  it  is
         necessary to say something with an eye to the use that will be made
         of our country guidance findings in the next few weeks and  months.
         In assessing cases before them, judicial fact-finders will have  to
         decide whether the evidence is the same or similar to  that  before
         us (Practice Direction 12).  To the extent it is not, they are  not
         required to regard our  findings  as  authoritative.   As  we  have
         emphasised, it is simply not possible on the evidence before us  to
         state that the changes resulting from Al-Shabaab's withdrawal  from
         Mogadishu is sufficiently  durable.   Far  too  much  is  presently
         contingent.  As time passes, however,  it  may  well  be  that  the
         judicial fact-finders are  able  to  conclude  that  the  necessary
         element of durability has been satisfied.  How,  if  at  all,  that
         impacts on the assessment of risk on return will, of course, depend
         on all the other evidence."

49.   The country guidance  in  AMM,  of  course,  included  that  for  the
    majority of returnees to Mogadishu  they  would  be  at  risk  of  harm
    contrary to Article 15(c).  It is clear to me that the  Upper  Tribunal
    regarded it as crucial, in any future case, for a judicial  fact-finder
    to consider the evidence, decide whether it was the "same  or  similar"
    and if it was not to determine whether that impacted upon  the  country
    guidance in AMM such as to justify  a  different  finding.   There  was
    before the Judge background evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle  and
    which was referred to in the refusal letter  at  paras  39-49.   In  my
    judgement it was incumbent upon the Judge to consider this evidence, to
    make findings in  relation  to  the  current  situation  in  Mogadishu,
    including whether it reflected a durable change of circumstances  since
    the decision in AMM.  It was not, in my view, sufficient for the  Judge
    to state that the appellant had been unable to identify any  background
    material   which   showed   that   the   position   had   "subsequently
    deteriorated".  The Judge's failure  to  grapple  with  the  background
    evidence and make appropriate findings was, in my judgement,  an  error
    of law.

50.   Mr Richards invited me, if that was my view, nevertheless not to  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision in relation to Article  15(c).
    He submitted that, in the light of the  more  recent  country  guidance
    decision in MOJ and Others, the appellant  would  necessarily  fail  to
    establish his claim under Article 15(c) and therefore no useful purpose
    was served in setting aside the decision.

51.   Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted that even in the light of MOJ and  Others,
    there remained factual issues which the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    determined or had  not  been  fully  canvassed  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such that the appeal should be remitted for a further hearing.

52.   It will be convenient to deal with this issue and  these  submissions
    when considering Ground 2, where it also arises, and  to  which  I  now
    turn.

    Ground 2:  The Application of AMM

53.   Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted that the Judge had, in any  event,  failed
    properly to apply AMM.  She submitted that on the basis  of  AMM  there
    was a general risk of Article 15(c) harm to returnees unless they  were
    connected with powerful actors or belonged  to  a  category  of  middle
    class or  professional  persons.   She  submitted  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant  had  such  connections  and  it  had  been
    accepted in the appellant's earlier EEA appeal in August 2010  that  he
    had no relatives in Mogadishu.

54.   Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  fully  considered  the
    appellant's circumstances on return to Mogadishu and, given her adverse
    credibility finding, was entitled to find that the appellant had failed
    to establish that he had no "support available to him" in Somalia.   In
    particular, the Judge was  entitled  to  find  that  his  family  would
    provide financial support to him from the UK.

55.   I have already set out above, the Judge's findings  at  paras  31-32.
    In my judgement,  given (as I have  found  earlier)  that  the  Judge's
    adverse credibility finding  is  legally  sustainable,  the  Judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant has not established that he had  no
    family in Somalia who could provide a "support  network"  and  that  he
    could be financially supported  from  the  UK.   Whether  or  not  that
    brought the  appellant  within  the  excepted  category  recognised  in
    Mogadishu of a person: "connected with powerful actors or belonging  to
    a category of middle class or professional persons, who can live  to  a
    reasonable standard in circumstances  where  the  Article  15(c)  risk,
    which exists for the great majority of the population, does not  apply,
    was not a matter decided by the Judge.  That was  because,  of  course,
    she found that there was no Article 15(c) risk to the appellant because
    the changes, noted in AMM, had become "durable".

56.   Therefore, to the extent that AMM had to be applied by the Judge, she
    fell  into  error  by  failing  to  consider  whether  the  appellant's
    circumstances fell within the excepted category.

57.   That, however, leads back  to  the  issue  which  I  left  open  when
    considering Ground 1, namely whether no  purpose  would  be  served  by
    setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision in respect of  Article
    15(c) because the appellant, even on the findings made  by  the  Judge,
    could not succeed under the new country guidance of MOJ and Others.

58.   In MOJ and Others the Upper Tribunal considered that the up  to  date
    evidence justified a change in  the  country  guidance  since  AMM  and
    Others.  The guidance is summarised at paras  (ii)-(xii)  of  the  head
    note as follows:

         "(ii)    Generally a person who is "an ordinary civilian" (i.e. not
                associated  with  the  security  forces;   any   aspect   of
                government  or  official  administration  or  any   NGO   or
                international organisation) on returning to Mogadishu  after
                a period of absence will face no real risk of persecution or
                risk of harm such as to require protection under  Article  3
                of the ECHR or Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.
                 In particular, he will  not  be  at  real  risk  simply  on
                account of having lived in a European location for a  period
                of time  of  being  viewed  with  suspicion  either  by  the
                authorities as a possible supporter of Al Shabaab or  by  Al
                Shabaab as an apostate of someone  whose  Islamic  integrity
                has been compromised by living in a Western country.

           iii) There has been durable change  in  the  sense  that  the  Al
                Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and  there  is
                no real prospect of a  re-established  presence  within  the
                city.  That was not the case at  the  time  of  the  country
                guidance given by the Tribunal in AMM.

            iv) The level of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-military
                casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab target groups
                such as politicians, police officers,  government  officials
                and   those   associated   with   NGOs   and   international
                organisations,  cannot  be  precisely  established  by   the
                statistical evidence which  is  incomplete  and  unreliable.
                However, it is established by the evidence considered  as  a
                whole that there has  been  a  reduction  in  the  level  of
                civilian casualties since 2011, largely due to the cessation
                of confrontational warfare within the city and Al  Shabaab's
                resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on   carefully   selected
                targets.  The present level of casualties does not amount to
                a sufficient risk to ordinary civilians such as to represent
                an Article 15(c) risk.

             v)   It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu  to  reduce
                further  still  his  personal  exposure  to  the   risk   of
                "collateral damage" in being caught  up  in  an  Al  Shabaab
                attack that was not targeted at him by  avoiding  areas  and
                establishments that are clearly identifiable  as  likely  Al
                Shabaab targets, and it is not unreasonable for  him  to  do
                so.

            vi) There is no real risk to forced recruitment  to  Al  Shabaab
                for civilian citizens of  Mogadishu,  including  for  recent
                returnees from the West.

           vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a  period  of  absence
                will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the
                city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing
                a livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek  assistance
                from his clan members who are not close relatives, such help
                is only likely to be forthcoming for majority clan  members,
                as minority clans may have little to offer.

          viii)  The  significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
                changed.  Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support
                mechanisms and assist with access to livelihoods, performing
                less of a protection function than previously.  There are no
                clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,  and  no  clan
                based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for  minority  clan
                members.

            ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu
                after a period of absence has no  nuclear  family  or  close
                relatives in the  city  to  assist  him  in  re-establishing
                himself  on  return,  there  will  need  to  be  a   careful
                assessment   of   all   of   the    circumstances.     These
                considerations will include, but are not limited to:

                   i. Circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

                  ii. Length of absence from Mogadishu;

                 iii.  Family  or  clan  associations  to  call   upon   in
                      Mogadishu;

                  iv. Access to financial resources;

                   v. Prospects of securing a livelihood, whether  that  be
                      employment or self employment;

                  vi. Availability of remittances from abroad;

                 vii. Means of support during the time spent in the  United
                      Kingdom;

                viii. Why his ability to fund the journey to  the  West  no
                      longer  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial
                      support on return;

             x)   Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return
                to explain why he would not be able to access  the  economic
                opportunities that have been produced by the economic  boom,
                especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees
                are taking jobs at the expense of those who have never  been
                away.

            xi) It will, therefore, only be those with  no  clan  or  family
                support who will be e in receipt of remittances from  abroad
                and who have no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
                livelihood on return who will face the prospect of living in
                circumstances falling below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
                humanitarian protection terms.

           xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is not  simply  those
                who originate from Mogadishu that may now  generally  return
                to live in the city without being subjected  to  an  Article
                15(c ) risk or facing a real risk of  destitution.   On  the
                other hand, relocation  in  Mogadishu  for  a  person  of  a
                minority clan with no former links to the city, no access to
                funds and no other form of clan, family or social support is
                unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of  means  to
                establish a home and some form of ongoing financial  support
                there will be a real risk of having no  alternative  but  to
                live in makeshift accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where
                there is a real possibility of having to live in  conditions
                that will fall below acceptable humanitarian standards.

59.   First, this guidance recognises  that  the  change  of  circumstances
    identified in AMM has become "durable" such that "an ordinary  citizen"
    on return to Mogadishu no longer faces a real risk of harm contrary  to
    Article  15(c)  of  the   Qualification   Directive.    Secondly,   the
    significance of clan membership has changed and there is no longer clan
    violence or discrimination or  discriminatory  treatment  directed,  in
    particular,  against  minority  clan  members.    Thirdly,   where   an
    individual returns to Mogadishu without any  nuclear  family  or  close
    relative to assist in his reestablishment on return, any  risk  to  him
    must take account of all the circumstances set out in  a  non-exclusive
    list  at  para  (ix).   Fourthly,  the  economic  circumstances  of  an
    individual who has no clan or family support or those who would not  be
    in receipt of remittances from abroad and who have no real prospect  of
    securing access to a livelihood on return are such that  he  will  face
    conditions likely to require humanitarian protection.

60.   In this appeal, the appellant is  from  Mogadishu.   Even  after  the
    claimed bomb attack on his home, the appellant lived in a village  near
    Mogadishu without any adverse attention from Al-Shabaab.  He  has  been
    in the UK since 2011 and has, therefore, as the Judge found not  become
    "westernised".  The Judge found that the appellant had not  established
    that he was from a minority clan or that  he  had  no  support  network
    available to him in Somalia.  The Judge found that  he  was  likely  to
    obtain employment and, in any event, his family  in  the  UK  (who  had
    previously supported him in the UK) could continue to  support  him  by
    remittances from the UK.  Whilst in the UK, since  becoming  an  adult,
    the appellant has lived independently of his family and is not provided
    with any physical care and attention from  them.   Despite  the  expert
    evidence's prediction that he would require  treatment  for  his  PTSD,
    there is no evidence that the appellant has  been  receiving  treatment
    since his arrival in the UK in 2011.  The expert  opinion  that  he  is
    vulnerable and would be particularly at risk of  exploitation  or  ill-
    treatment by others is not borne out by  his  experiences  in  the  UK.
    There  is  no  evidence  that,  since  living  independently,  he   has
    encountered any such problems.

61.   Taking all these factors into account, in my judgment, the  appellant
    simply cannot succeed in establishing that on return  to  Mogadishu  he
    would be at  risk  of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive or, indeed, Article 3 of the ECHR applying  the
    country guidance now in force in MOJ and Others.

62.   Where the Upper Tribunal finds that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the "making of an error of law on a point of law" the
    Upper Tribunal "may (but need not) set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal" (see s.12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
    Act 2007).   Where,  as  here,  any  remaking  of  the  decision  would
    inevitably lead to the same decision being made, no useful  purpose  is
    served by setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision despite  the
    error of law.  Consequently, despite the errors of law identified under
    Grounds 1 and 2, it is not appropriate  to  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  under  Article
    15(c) and Article 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

63. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR stands.






                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:    16 January 2015


