
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/03898/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |On 25 April 2016              |
|On 7 April 2016                               |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                     gZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
                  Solicitors (Merton Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

In order to protect the anonymity of the appellant's children the  anonymity
direction previously made is retained.

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Mongolia who  was  born  in
    April 1965.  In January 2004 he was  issued  with  a  multi-entry  visa
    valid until July 2004; he arrived  in  this  country  just  before  the
    expiry of this visa using a false  passport  and  applied  for  further
    leave to remain as a student nurse.  That application was  granted  and
    he had valid  leave  to  remain  until  August  2005  which  leave  was
    subsequently extended until January 2009.

 2. In 2007 his wife and children arrived in this country.  His older child
    was then aged about 7 and his younger child about 3.   The  appellant's
    wife then applied in September 2007 for leave to remain as  the  spouse
    of a refugee which application was refused and the  appellant  and  his
    elder child returned to Mongolia.   Subsequently,  in  March  2008  the
    appellant with his wife entered the UK on a flight  from  Mongolia  and
    the current position is that  the  appellant,  his  wife  and  his  two
    children are in this country.  In January 2009 he made  an  application
    for leave to remain as a student nurse with his family members  as  his
    dependants which application was refused and his appeal  was  dismissed
    on 6 December 2010.  The appellant did not return  to  Mongolia  as  he
    should but remained in this country eventually claiming  asylum  on  29
    May 2013.  His wife and two children are dependants on this claim.

 3. The respondent refused to grant the appellant  asylum  on  19  December
    2014 and the appellant with his family as dependants  appealed  against
    this decision which appeal was heard before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  11  December  2015.    In   a
    determination promulgated on 12 January 2016 Judge  Devittie  dismissed
    the appeal both on asylum and human rights grounds (Article 3) and also
    under Article 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal against this
    decision both on  asylum/Article  3  grounds  and  also  on  Article  8
    grounds.  His appeal on Article 3 grounds was  founded  on  one  ground
    which was that the judge had conducted his own enquiry which  was  said
    to be the wrong approach  in  reliance  on  the  Presidential  Tribunal
    decision in AM (fair hearing) Sudan [2015]  UKUT  00656  in  which  the
    Tribunal had set out certain general Rules and principles which  should
    be applied with regard to a judge conducting his/her own enquiries.  In
    particular guidance was given that "independent  judicial  research  is
    inappropriate".  It is said in the grounds at paragraph  12  that,  "in
    the present case the judge has conducted independent judicial research.
     The judge did not decide the case based on the  evidence  before  him.
    This was not a fair procedure and was an error of law".

 4. The grounds also make submissions that Judge Devittie failed adequately
    to consider the position of the appellant's children and their  private
    life under the Immigration Rules (that is those Rules which set out how
    Article 8 claims should be considered).  In  particular  it  was  noted
    that the judge had referred to the children as two daughters whereas in
    fact the appellant had a son  and  a  daughter  which  is  said  to  be
    "indicative of the  absence  of  care  which  the  judge  displayed  in
    considering the children's position".  Subsequently the  appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal with regard to the  decision  refusing  to
    allow the appeal on asylum/Article 3  grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett on  4  March  2016.   However,  Judge  Grimmett  refused
    permission to appeal on Article 8 grounds.  When giving her reasons for
    this decision at paragraph 2 Judge Grimmett considered as follows:

         "2.  The grounds say that the judge erred in  undertaking  his  own
             research.  This point is arguable in light of AM  [2015]  UKUT
             00656."

 5. With regard to the Article 8 argument, however, at paragraph 3  of  her
    reasons, Judge Grimmett stated as follows:

         "3.  It is not arguable that the judge erred in  his  consideration
             of the  children's  private  lives  as  that  issue  is  fully
             addressed in paragraphs 20 and 24."

 6. It would have been open to the appellant had he  chosen  to  do  so  to
    renew the application for permission to appeal on Article 8 grounds  to
    the Upper Tribunal but he chose  not  to  do  so.   Although  I  raised
    article 8 at the outset, no substantive submissions  had  been  put  in
    writing before this hearing with regard to  Article  8  and  indeed  on
    further consideration even the one concern I  had  which  was  that  at
    paragraph 20 of his decision the judge had stated that it  was  "in  my
    view highly improbable that [the children's] parents (and in particular
    their father, an accomplished linguist in the Mongolian language) would
    not have nurtured in their children some degree  of  fluency  in  their
    mother tongue" might have been partly  speculative,  was  not  in  fact
    arguable.  I say this because on any view the older  child  would  have
    been 7 when arriving in this country and the younger  child  3  and  it
    would have been open to the judge properly to find that the older child
    in particular but also the younger must have had some understanding  of
    the Mongolian language.  However, in any event, this aspect of the case
    is not before me as the application for permission to appeal on Article
    8 grounds had not been renewed.

 7. With regard to the appeal on asylum/Article 3 grounds the  issues  were
    fully canvassed before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Decision  is
    fully reasoned.  It is noted that the only objection that is  taken  to
    the Decision is that at paragraph 12(ii) the judge found as follows:

         "(ii)    To the extent  that  [the  appellant]  claims  persecution
             because of his academic work, I have noted  that  no  evidence
             has been presented of a general trend showing  persecution  of
             other dissenting academics by the authorities in Mongolia.  My
             own inquiry on this point from information within  the  public
             domain, has not yielded any results showing that academics who
             express independent views are generally at risk of persecution
             in Mongolia [my emphasis]."

 8. There are a number of other reasons given why the judge does not accept
    that the appellant and his family would be at risk such as the delay in
    claiming asylum and the fact that he had visited  Mongolia  briefly  in
    2008 and did not attract any adverse attention.  The judge  also  noted
    that what he describes as "the main pillars on which his claim of  past
    persecutory  treatment  rests"  amounted  to  no  more  than  that  the
    appellant had briefly been arrested in 1994 but  was  released  on  the
    same day and no further action was taken, together with  an  attack  on
    him in 1998 by unknown drunk persons whom  he  claims  made  statements
    during the attack indicating they were  state  agents  (which  was  not
    believed by the judge) and (this is the aspect of the case giving  rise
    to this appeal) what  he  claims  to  have  been  the  conduct  of  the
    university authorities "in frustrating his academic career".

 9. In his submissions before me on behalf of the appellant (further to the
    skeleton argument  which  had  usefully  been  prepared  prior  to  the
    hearing) Mr Mold submitted that the real objection was that  the  judge
    had reinforced a view that he had had by making his own enquiries  that
    there was no evidence without giving the appellant  an  opportunity  of
    addressing that point in argument.   It  was  also  submitted  further,
    based on the guidance given in AM, that had the judge  had  the  doubts
    that he expressed in the  first  sentence  of  paragraph  12(ii)  these
    should have been raised at the hearing in order to give  the  appellant
    the opportunity of making such arguments as might be available to  him.
    The real failure (it was submitted) was that the judge  had  not  given
    the appellant the opportunity to  address  such  concerns  as  he,  the
    judge, had.

10. On behalf of the respondent Mr Wilding submitted that  what  in  effect
    the appellant was seeking to argue in this  case  was  that  the  judge
    erred materially by not finding something which in Mr  Wilding's  words
    was "ludicrous". Mr Wilding accepted that  had  the  judge  found  some
    evidence, either through having made independent enquiries  or  because
    he had been made aware of that evidence subsequently, at that stage  he
    should have raised it  with  the  parties  either  by  reconvening  the
    hearing or asking for written observations.  However, in this case, the
    appellant's  submissions  within  the  grounds  that  the   appellant's
    representatives do not know what he actually did find does not  assist.



11. Mr Wilding paraphrased what the judge was saying at paragraph 12(ii) as
    follows:

         "If the appellant is claiming risk due to his academic work per se,
         there was no evidence in the bundles or  materials  before  him  to
         show persecution of dissenting academics -  because  there  was  no
         evidence I did a search  myself  but  I  could  not  find  anything
         either."

12. This had not been the central plank of the appellant's case.  The judge
    was just noting that to the extent that there  was  a  claim  that  the
    appellant would be persecuted because of his academic work,  there  was
    no evidence to support this aspect of  the  appellant's  case  and  the
    judge could not find any evidence either.

13. In my judgment, while in light of the guidance given in AM  it  is  not
    best practice for a judge  to  conduct  research  on  the  internet  or
    anywhere else but he should rely rather on the evidence put before  him
    by or on behalf of the parties, in this case the fact  that  the  judge
    looked on the Internet  to  see  whether  he  could  himself  find  the
    evidence which had so far been lacking cannot on any sensible  view  be
    regarded as a material error; the judge's action in searching  (without
    success) for further evidence which might have assisted  the  appellant
    cannot have made any material  difference  to  the  outcome.   What  is
    notable about the grounds and indeed the  submissions  which  were  put
    before this Tribunal is that at no time has it been asserted  that  had
    an opportunity been given to the appellant to deal  with  any  concerns
    the judge might have had, there would have been  or  was  any  evidence
    capable of supporting a proposition that any academic in  Mongolia  had
    been persecuted in the past because of his or her  political  opinions.
    It is all very well claiming that a judge erred by not giving  a  party
    an opportunity to make his or her case;  for  that  to  be  arguably  a
    material error however there needs to be at  least  some  evidence  (or
    even argument) that had that opportunity been given this would or might
    have had a material impact on the decision.  In this case no suggestion
    has been made to this effect and even when this  point  was  raised  in
    argument, Mr Mold did not put before the Tribunal any  submission  that
    such evidence existed.  The highest he was able to put the  appellant's
    case was that because he did not know what enquires the judge had  made
    or what he had actually found he was not in a position to address those
    concerns. Accordingly, there is no basis upon which this Tribunal could
    realistically  find  that  the  judge's  enquiries  made  any  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal and while it  would  have  been
    preferable had he restricted himself to considering the evidence  which
    was put before him, the fact that he looked to see if  the  appellant's
    case could be improved by his own enquiries but was unable to find that
    it could did not make the respondent's case any stronger. The judge had
    started from the position that there was no evidence and that is  where
    he ended so in these circumstances there was nothing that  the  parties
    could usefully have addressed had they been invited to comment.

14. In these circumstances it must follow that because such error as  there
    was in the judge making his own independent enquiries was not  material
    this appeal must be dismissed and the decision affirmed.

Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, dismissing the appellant's appeal, is affirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 18 April 2016
