
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03929/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th April 2018                            |On 26th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    k g t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Pooler (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal) (the FTT) promulgated on 15th June 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a female national of Ethiopia  born  [  ]  1984.   The
    Appellant entered the UK on 29th October  2013  illegally  and  claimed
    asylum.  Her asylum claim is  based  upon  her  political  opinion  and
    support for the Oromo Liberation Front  (OLF).   The  Appellant  has  a
    daughter born in the UK on [ ] 2016.   She  has  no  contact  with  the
    father of her child, an Ethiopian national with no status in the UK.

 3. The application  for  international  protection  was  refused  on  27th
    February 2015.  The Appellant's appeal was  heard  by  the  FTT  (Judge
    Colyer) on 2nd October 2015 and dismissed but  this  decision  was  set
    aside by the Upper Tribunal and remitted back to the FTT  to  be  heard
    afresh.

 4. The judge heard the appeal  on  12th  June  2017  and  the  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.  The judge did not find the Appellant to be a
    credible witness.  The judge was not satisfied that the  Appellant  had
    ever been of adverse interest to  the  authorities  in  Ethiopia  as  a
    person suspected of OLF involvement, and although  the  judge  accepted
    that the Appellant may have attended a small number of OLF meetings  in
    the UK, in 2015, he was not persuaded  that  she  was  ever  a  genuine
    supporter of the OLF and was not satisfied that she would be  perceived
    by the authorities in Ethiopia to be a member  or  sympathiser  of  the
    OLF.  The judge was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  ever  been
    arrested or detained in Ethiopia, and did not  accept  that  an  arrest
    warrant had been issued.

 5. The judge found that the Appellant would be returning to Ethiopia as  a
    single woman with a child, and that she had family support in Ethiopia,
    and medical treatment was available to treat her diagnosis of HIV.

 6. Following dismissal of her appeal the Appellant applied for  permission
    to appeal relying upon three grounds which are summarised below.

 7. Firstly, it was contended that  the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to
    adequately consider background material.  The judge had found that  the
    Appellant had attended a small number of OLF meetings in the  UK,  most
    of which were in 2015, and  reference  was  made  to  the  Respondent's
    Operational Guidance Note of November 2013 which  indicated  that  mere
    sympathisers and perceived members of OLF are likely to be at  risk  of
    persecution.  It was  contended  that  the  judge  had  not  adequately
    considered the persecutory risk that the Appellant faced on  return  to
    Ethiopia in the light of her OLF involvement  and  had  not  adequately
    assessed the risk of the Appellant being stopped on  arrival  at  Addis
    Ababa Airport.

 8. The  second  ground  contends  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
    adequately consider whether the Appellant formed  a  particular  social
    group given that she would be returning to Ethiopia as a  single  woman
    with a child and had  failed  to  consider  whether  she  would  be  at
    persecutory risk on that basis.  This was significant as the judge  had
    accepted that the Appellant is a vulnerable adult.

 9. The third ground contends the judge erred by failing to  give  adequate
    reasons for not accepting that an arrest warrant was issued in  respect
    of the Appellant.  In addition, the judge  failed  to  give  sufficient
    reasons as to why  it  was  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's  integration  if  returned  to
    Ethiopia in accordance with paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration
    Rules.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bird and I set  out  in  part
    the grant of permission;

         "2.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against this decision
             on the grounds that the judge made an arguable error of law in
             failing to adequately consider the background material.  It is
             alleged  that  the  background  material  stated   that   even
             sympathisers or perceived members of the OLF are likely to  be
             at risk of persecution.

         3.   The judge considered the background evidence at paragraphs  20
             and 21 of the determination.  He set out the country  guidance
             decision in MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG  [2007]  UKAIT
             00030 at paragraph 22.  The judge in assessing the Appellant's
             claim that she was a sympathiser of  OLF  failed  to  properly
             consider the evidence that he heard from the two witnesses who
             attended the hearing.  The judge failed to state at  paragraph
             27 why the evidence that was contained in the statements  from
             both Dr Berri and Mr Afako noted by the judge at paragraphs 14
             and 15 was not credible.  Both statements were  consistent  in
             saying that the Appellant had  attended  OLF  meetings  on  31
             January, March, April and August 2015.  The judge  has  failed
             to adequately reason his conclusion that this  evidence  could
             not be relied on.  An arguable error of law has arisen.

         4.   The grounds further allege that the Tribunal  failed  to  give
             adequate reasons for not accepting  that  the  arrest  warrant
             that had been issued for the Appellant was genuine.

         5.   The Appellant's evidence in relation to the arrest warrant  is
             considered at paragraph 31.  The  judge  has  failed  to  give
             adequate reasons for finding that the arrest warrant  was  not
             genuine.  The judge has made an arguable error of law."

11. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the judge had directed  himself
    appropriately and it was clear that the appeal had failed  due  to  the
    various discrepancies in the Appellant's account  in  combination  with
    her failure to claim asylum in either  Italy  or  France.   The  expert
    report, which the judge took into account, could not cure  the  deficit
    in the Appellant's case.  The reasoning of the judge was  adequate  and
    the Appellant could clearly see why she lost the appeal.

12. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the judge had erred in law such that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Oral Submissions

13. Mr Howard relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal.  He conceded that the judge  granting  permission
    had erred at paragraph 3 in referring to the  two  witnesses  attending
    the hearing.  The witnesses had  not  attended  the  hearing,  but  had
    provided written statements.

14. It was submitted that the judge had not properly taken into account the
    background material, and had  not  placed  appropriate  weight  on  the
    statements given by the witnesses, which confirmed that  the  Appellant
    had attended OLF meetings in the UK.

15. Mr Howard did not pursue the second ground of appeal.   With  reference
    to the third ground, Mr Howard submitted that  inadequate  reasons  had
    been given by the judge for not accepting that an  arrest  warrant  had
    been issued, and not accepting that there would be no very  significant
    obstacles to integration into Ethiopia.

16. Mrs Aboni relied upon the rule 24 response and submitted that the judge
    had directed himself  appropriately  and  given  adequate  reasons  for
    findings.  It was submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  place
    limited weight on statements, when the authors of those statements  had
    not attended the hearing.  There was no evidence that the Appellant had
    undertaken any activities such as attending OLF meetings after 2015.

17. It was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that an arrest warrant had not been issued,  and  had  noted
    that the Appellant had returned to Ethiopia in 2012.  In  addition  she
    had initially failed to mention that an arrest warrant had been issued.



18. By way of response, Mr  Howard  pointed  out  that  the  Appellant  had
    explained that she did not attend OLF meetings in  the  UK  after  2015
    because of the birth of her child.

19. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. I do not find any merit in the first ground of appeal.  I do  not  find
    that the judge failed to adequately consider background  material.   At
    paragraph 19 the  judge  makes  specific  reference  to  assessing  the
    Appellant's account in  the  light  of  the  background  evidence.   At
    paragraph 20 the judge  sets  out  in  part  the  Respondent's  Country
    Information and Policy Note - Ethiopia - Opposition to  the  Government
    of 7th December 2016, to which he was referred by Mr Howard.

21. At paragraph 21 the judge sets out further background evidence provided
    by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch.

22. At paragraph 22 the judge sets out  the  headnote  to  the  appropriate
    country guidance decision, that  being  MB  Ethiopia  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00030.

23. In my view, it is clear from reading the FTT decision, that  the  judge
    has carefully considered the background evidence and  appropriate  case
    law.  The judge was entitled  to  place  limited  weight  upon  written
    evidence when the authors of that evidence had not attended the hearing
    to answer questions.  It is clear that the judge considered the written
    evidence provided by Dr Berri and Mr Afako but did not err at paragraph
    27 when noting that neither was called to  give  oral  evidence,  which
    limits the weight that can be placed on their  written  evidence.   The
    judge did not err at paragraph 34 in recording that no  OLF  member  or
    official attended the hearing in order to give supporting  evidence  on
    behalf of the Appellant, when such evidence  could  have  been  adduced
    without danger or undue difficulty.

24. The judge recorded at paragraph 19 "the  need  to  be  cautious  before
    reaching an adverse credibility finding and that an Appellant may  find
    it difficult to call witnesses or produce  documents,  particularly  in
    relation to events which occurred in her country of origin."  With that
    in mind, the judge properly assessed the credibility of the Appellant's
    account, including the inconsistencies relied upon by  the  Respondent.
    In my view, the judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons for finding
    the Appellant not to be a credible witness.  This included her  failure
    to claim asylum in France, and the fact that she returned  to  Ethiopia
    after her initial departure.

25. For the reasons given above, I do not find that  the  first  ground  of
    appeal discloses any material error of law.

26. Ground 2 was not pursued by Mr Howard, and  in  my  view,  rightly  so.
    There is no merit in this ground.  The judge clearly  appreciated  that
    the Appellant would be returning to Ethiopia as a single woman  with  a
    child, as this is specifically recorded at paragraph 39, with the judge
    finding that  she  would  have  extended  family  support.   The  judge
    recorded that his attention was not drawn  to  any  objective  evidence
    suggesting that a single woman  with  a  child,  with  extended  family
    support, would face difficulties.

27. With reference to the arrest warrant, it is common ground  that  if  an
    Appellant produces  a  document,  the  Appellant  must  show  that  the
    document can be relied upon, and a decision maker should  consider  the
    evidence in the round.  That is what the judge has done in  this  case.
    The judge considered the inconsistencies in  the  Appellant's  account,
    and was aware of the need to exercise caution before making an  adverse
    credibility finding.  The judge was entitled to note that the Appellant
    had not mentioned an arrest warrant in  her  screening  interview  even
    when specifically questioned about this.  In  addition,  there  was  no
    mention of the arrest warrant in her initial witness statement.

28. The judge has given adequate reasons  for  concluding  that  an  arrest
    warrant was not issued, and also given adequate reasons for  concluding
    that the  Appellant  would  not  face  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration if she returned to Ethiopia.   The  judge  considered  this
    issue at paragraphs 38 - 41, and  did  not  err  in  finding  that  the
    evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant failed to  discharge  the
    burden of proof.

29. I conclude that the grounds  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    disclose a disagreement with the conclusions reached by the judge,  but
    do not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose an error of law.   I  do  not  set
aside the decision. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  Appellant  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             17th April 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             17th April 2018


