
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA036332015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower                    |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8th April 2016                             |On 13th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [T D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J S Law, promulgated on 26th October 2015, following a hearing at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 15th October 2015.  In the determination, the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Eritrea and she was born  on  [  ]
    1975.  She appeals against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 16th February 2015 rejecting her claim to asylum status and
    to humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she moved from Ethiopia  to  Egypt  where
    she had claimed to work as a housemaid working from 6  in  the  morning
    until 10 at night.  Whilst on holiday with the family  in  Greece,  she
    made her escape.  She left her employment because of the  ill-treatment
    from her employers and she then worked for another family between  2002
    and 2005.  A man who was fixing the boiler then raped her and tried  to
    persuade her when he discovered  that  she  was  pregnant  to  have  an
    abortion.  She took money from him for the abortion but ran away and  a
    daughter was subsequently born.  In Greece  the  Appellant  married  an
    Afghani who was attacked and eventually  left  Greece  leaving  her  by
    herself with her child.  With the aid of an agent she decided to  leave
    for the United Kingdom.  The Home Office did not find the Appellant  to
    have been a trafficked person.   She  had  been  internally  consistent
    regarding core aspects of her claim, and  that  while  she  worked  for
    various families in the worst conditions, it was  not  considered  that
    she was trafficked as she had stated that she was able  to  leave  each
    family when she wished.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge J S Law,  there  were  two  witnesses,  one
    [KT], and another [AA].  It was confirmed  in  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was an Eritrean national.

 5. The judge considered the first question to be the  nationality  of  the
    Appellant and held that, "a report from Lambeth clearly states that the
    Appellant is Eritrean and in a way the Home Office have concurred  with
    the same by explaining in the report dealing with her trafficking  that
    her account was consistent and credible" (paragraph 26).  However,  the
    judge was concerned that, "in the removal directions it  was  that  she
    was to be returned to Eritrea and not Ethiopia which  the  Home  Office
    have claimed to be her country of origin."  (Paragraph 26).  The  judge
    went on to continue that the Appellant was an Eritrean  national  "even
    though she had never lived in that country but that she was treated  by
    the authorities in Ethiopia as was her brother as being Eritrean due to
    the nationality of her father" (paragraph 26).

 6. Second, the judge went on to conclude that, because of  the  arrest  of
    her brother by the Ethiopian authorities, "she had a  fear"  (paragraph
    27).  The brother was arrested  because  he  was  considered  to  be  a
    traitor having worked for the Ethiopian government.

 7. Third, the judge held that, "throughout the  Appellant's  account  both
    written and oral she has been consistent in  explaining  the  situation
    with regard to her family, her treatment not only in Ethiopia but  also
    in Greece".

 8. Fourth, the judge had regard to the fact that "two  witnesses  attended
    on behalf of the Appellant and I would give them more weight  than  was
    suggested by the Home Office with regard to  the  contents"  (paragraph
    32).

 9. Finally, the judge had regard to Article 8 considerations, and  applied
    the jurisprudence in Razgar, and concluded that,

         "The question of the removal has been to Eritrea a place  that  the
         Secretary of State has concluded is not the home of  the  Appellant
         and where she has never lived.   That  in  itself  seems  extremely
         disproportionate bearing in  mind  the  risks  on  return  to  that
         country of an Eritrean national which the Appellant  claims  to  be
         and it  would  be  perceived  as  having  left  Eritrea  illegally"
         (paragraph 33).

10. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

11. The Grounds of  Appeal  state  that  the  judge  has  made  a  material
    misdirection of law  and  has  principally  relied  upon  "the  Lambeth
    report"  which  could  not  be   determinative   of   the   Appellant's
    nationality.  The grounds also state that the judge was wrong  to  have
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 given the decision  in  Dube  [2015]
    UKUT 00090.  On 20th November 2015, permission to appeal was granted on
    the grounds that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  placed  too  much
    reliance on the Lambeth report.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me Mr Diwnycz relied upon the Grounds of  Appeal.
    He made the following submissions.  First, the finding at paragraph  26
    that the Appellant was an Eritrean national failed to take into account
    the decision in MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289 and  ST  [2011]  UKUT
    52, in relation to how the Appellant is expected to prove the  Eritrean
    nationality when it is in dispute.  These cases stated  that  the  main
    issue was whether the  applicant  was  stateless.   However,  before  a
    person could be regarded as stateless, she should make  an  application
    for citizenship of the  countries  with  which  she  was  most  closely
    connected.  This had not been done by the Appellant.  It was  incumbent
    upon  the  Appellant  to  assist  the  state   authorities   with   the
    determination of her nationality.  Second, the judge  placed  too  much
    reliance upon the "Lambeth report".  Third, in referring to Dube [2015]
    UKUT 00090, the judge, it was so argued by Mr Diwnycz,  had  failed  to
    give proper regard to the public  interest  considerations  in  Section
    117.

13. For his part, Mr Howard submitted that it had always been the  case  of
    the Respondent that the Appellant, being born in  Ethiopia,  and  where
    her father was an Eritrean, was of Ethiopian  nationality  as  she  had
    been to school in Addis Ababa, and lived with her  mother  and  brother
    there until June 1991.  It was the Appellant's claim that she would not
    have the right to stay in Ethiopia  and  would  be  persecuted  by  the
    Ethiopian government.  However, she could not be  returned  to  Eritrea
    either  and  would  be  persecuted  there.   (See  paragraph  9).   The
    Appellant, however, was now being returned to Eritrea, and as the judge
    stated, "she has no ID or passport and would be liable  to  suffer  the
    consequences of  the  same  with  regard  to  military  training"  (see
    paragraph 33).  Second, it is not the case that overreliance was put on
    the "Lambeth report" because  when  the  judge  first  begins  to  make
    "findings" other evidence is also considered, and  this  has  been  the
    evidence of the Appellant herself where "she  has  been  consistent  in
    explaining the situation with regard to her family, her  treatment  not
    only in Ethiopia but also in Greece" (see paragraph 29); and  also  the
    evidence of the two witnesses on behalf of the Appellant (see paragraph
    32) itself.  Third, Ethiopia does not accept dual nationality.   So  if
    the Appellant is Eritrean she would be treated as such and would not be
    able to go to Ethiopia.  Fourth, the removal here  is  to  Eritrea  and
    this is where she is being wrongly sent, because as  the  judge  stated
    the Appellant risks persecution in Eritrea (see paragraph 36).

14. There is no reply by Mr Diwnycz.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.  First, it is well established that "perversity" represents
    "a very high hurdle" (see paragraph 11) and as Lord Justice Brooke made
    it clear, "far too often practitioners use  the  word  'irrational'  or
    'perverse' when  these  epithets  are  completely  inappropriate"  (see
    paragraph 12).  The same is the case here.

16. The decision of Judge J S Law is not based simply and purely  upon  the
    "Lambeth report".  It is based on that report only insofar as it is the
    case that the Home Office have themselves "concurred with the  same  by
    explaining in the report dealing with the trafficking that her  account
    was consistent and credible" (see paragraph 26).  It would indeed  have
    been perverse of the judge not to have given the report the due  weight
    to which it was entitled in these circumstances.

17. Second, this is a case where the Appellant has gone through journeys in
    Europe where she was abused by employers in Greece and had to find ways
    of leaving them and was subsequently  raped  in  Greece  and  took  the
    opportunity of escaping when the person responsible for the  rape  gave
    her money to have an abortion.  She kept the money and kept  the  child
    and tried to find a way of safety by employing an  agent.   Looking  at
    these facts, the judge held that,

         "I return to the fact that in the statement of the Home Office  her
         account was considered to be credible and was also consistent as to
         these matters relating to her treatment  in  Europe.   These  basic
         facts and the fact that she  is  Eritrean  have  been  consistently
         stated throughout the asylum process and the  process  relating  to
         trafficking" (see paragraph 27).

18. Third, the Home Office have said that her account is  not  credible  in
    the hearing before Judge J S Law.  As  the  judge  explained,  however,
    "this is at odds with regard to the findings that have been  made  when
    the question of her trafficking had been  investigated  and  conclusion
    had been made that she was consistent and credible" (paragraph 29).

19. Fourth, the judge had proper regard  to  the  two  witnesses  who  gave
    evidence on the Appellant's behalf and held that, "I  would  give  them
    more weight than was suggested by the Home Office with  regard  to  the
    contents" (paragraph 32).

20. Fifth, if the Appellant is to be returned to Eritrea then, as the judge
    held, "that in itself seems extremely disproportionate, bearing in mind
    the risks on return to that country of an Eritrean citizen", goes on to
    explain that the Appellant is a person who

         "Has  no  ID  or  passport  and  would  be  liable  to  suffer  the
         consequences  of  the  same  with  regard  to  military   training.
         Similarly, the treatment  that  she  may  find  herself  having  to
         encounter go beyond military training to  being  seen  as  being  a
         traitor to Eritrea as was considered in the case  of  her  brother"
         (see paragraph 33).

21. These were conclusions that the judge was entitled to come to.

22. As far as questions about  her  nationality  are  concerned,  it  is  a
    feature of the Ethiopia and Eritrean cases that, as the  Tribunal  made
    clear in ST [2011] UKUT 52,

         "A person who is regarded by the Ethiopian authorities as an ethnic
         Eritrean and who left Ethiopia during or in the immediate aftermath
         of the border war between Ethiopia and Eritrea, is likely  to  face
         very significant ... difficulties in establishing  nationality  and
         the attendant right to return, stemming from the reluctance of  the
         Ethiopian authorities to  countenance  the  return  of  someone  it
         regards as a 'foreigner', whether or not in international  law  the
         person concerned holds  a  nationality  of  another  country"  (see
         paragraphs 93 to 104).

    Accordingly, and in the circumstances,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    decision by the judge was irrational or perverse.  On the contrary,  it
    was entirely open to the judge to make the findings that were  made  in
    this appeal.

Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

24. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
