
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA032122015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 May 2016                                |On 17 June 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                    [I M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Nizami instructed by Malik & Malik
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He appealed to a Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the  respondent  of  20
    February 2015 to make  directions  for  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.   It is relevant to note at this stage that this was a rehearing in  full
    of his appeal following a decision that there  had  been  a  procedural
    irregularity in his earlier appeal  which  was  also  dismissed,  as  a
    consequence of the detention action litigation.

3.   The appellant claimed to be at risk on the basis  of  adverse  interest
    in him on the part of the Taliban as a consequence of  his  work  as  a
    police officer where he had worked in various guises including being  a
    teacher at the police academy and specialising in mines.  He  had  been
    threatened on several occasions and attacked on two occasions  as  well
    as avoiding being blown up by an IED which he found.  He had been  told
    by his superiors effectively that they could not protect him and  as  a
    consequence he left Afghanistan.

4.   The judge found his claim to  lack  credibility.   Though  he  accepted
    evidence from the appellant's brother-in-law and sister, he noted  that
    that was based on what they had been told by family and the  appellant.
    The judge found a lack of credibility in such matters as the  appellant
    continuing to travel to see his wife even after the third  threat,  and
    it was not credible that he had not reported verbal  threats  to  other
    police officers as they would ask for proof.  Nor was  it  regarded  as
    being consistent with the fear of the Taliban that he would continue to
    return once a week to Logar where his home was and it was illogical not
    to move his family to Kabul where he worked because  he  believed  they
    would be at risk there from the Taliban.  He had said that his  brother
    had been kidnapped but there was no evidence of this, the brother being
    a police officer also.  His father was a prosecutor  who  continued  to
    work in Logar and had not received any threats and continued to work in
    Kabul.  Accordingly the judge  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant
    sought and was granted permission to appeal on the basis first that the
    judge had erred procedurally in, in effect, borrowing a number  of  her
    findings from the judge in the earlier determination, and  secondly  in
    failing to take account of relevant pieces of evidence.   There  was  a
    Rule 24 reply from  the  Secretary  of  State.   I  heard  helpful  and
    detailed submissions from both representatives on  the  two  points  in
    issue.

5.   On the first point, though I have some sympathy with the  argument  put
    forward by Ms Nizami, in the end I think there is no materiality to it.
     It may be that the judge borrowed, consciously or otherwise,  some  of
    the language of the previous judge, but the  points  were  all,  as  Ms
    Isherwood would emphasise, matters which arose for  evaluation  and  in
    respect of which the judge made findings which I consider were  in  the
    end open to him at least in the sense  that  they  are  not  marred  by
    procedural error of the kind contended for.

6.   The problem lies in respect of the second  ground  which  is  concerned
    with the judge's failure, as it is said  to  be,  to  take  account  of
    material pieces of evidence in her evaluation of the claim.  Ms  Nizami
    argued that this was a consequence of being excessively enslaved to the
    earlier findings.  I make no finding on that, but it  is  important  to
    set out the particular matters of concern that were raised.  The  first
    is the point at paragraph 12 of the grounds referring to  paragraph  70
    of the judge's decision where she found that there was no evidence that
    the appellant's brother who is a police officer had been  kidnapped  by
    the Taliban.  Contrary to that  finding  there  was  in  fact  evidence
    specifically in the form  of  a  translated  letter  from  the  Taliban
    stating that they had managed to arrest the appellant's brother and  he
    was still in their custody, and there was also evidence in  respect  of
    this in the appellant's father's letter at page 26 of  the  bundle  and
    the letter sent on the appellant's father's behalf to the local  police
    commandant, at page 52 of the  bundle.   The  judge  was  in  error  in
    failing to recognise this evidence and take it into account.

7.   The further point of concern is the statement at paragraph 78 that  the
    appellant's father had not received any threats and continued  to  live
    in Kabul and also at paragraph 66 that he had not been targeted by  the
    Taliban.   This  failed  to  take  into  account  evidence   that   the
    appellant's father had to relocate to Kabul because of threats from the
    Taliban.  The sister and brother-in-law who had both been found  to  be
    credible gave evidence in this regard and also there was evidence  from
    the appellant.

8.   I am conscious of the fact that these matters only relate  to  part  of
    the appellant's evidence rather than all of it, and that the  challenge
    otherwise is only on the basis of the first ground as  mentioned  above
    which I have not found persuasive.  However I consider that  there  are
    sufficient defects in the credibility findings as regards the errors in
    the judge's conclusions as to lack of adverse  interest  in  the  other
    family members as to make it appropriate for the matter to  be  reheard
    in full and it will be listed as  a  consequence  for  a  rehearing  at
    Hatton Cross before a judge other than Judge  Amin  or  Judge  Martins.
    There will need to be a Dari interpreter and  it  will  be  listed  for
    three hours.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date 17th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

