
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03001/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     UCO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Pipi of Counsel instructed by Rehoboth Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge Cockrill  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 24th July 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to her as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a female Nigerian citizen.  On 10th February  2015  the
    Secretary of State made  a  decision  to  deport  her  and  refuse  her
    protection and human rights claim.  The decision  to  deport  was  made
    because on 28th March 2014 the claimant was convicted of  obtaining  or
    seeking to obtain leave to remain in the UK by deception for which  she
    received a sentence of twelve months' imprisonment.  The  claimant  had
    entered into a marriage of convenience on 18th June 2012  with  an  EEA
    citizen.  She had then applied for a residence card as the spouse of an
    EEA national.  That application had been refused and the  claimant  had
    appealed, and her appeal was dismissed by Judge Davey of the FtT  in  a
    decision promulgated on 25th September 2014.

 4. The claimant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  10th
    February 2015 to refuse her protection and human rights  claim  and  to
    make a deportation order was heard by the FtT on 6th  July  2015.   The
    FtT heard evidence from the claimant and two witnesses.  The claimant's
    case was that she was entitled to asylum because she is a lesbian.  The
    Secretary of State accepted that if the claimant is a lesbian, then she
    would be entitled to asylum, but did not accept that the claimant is  a
    lesbian.  The main issue before the FtT was therefore  whether  or  not
    the claimant had proved that she is a lesbian.

 5.  The  FtT  found  that  the  claimant  had  demonstrated   her   sexual
    orientation, and had proved that she is a lesbian,  and  therefore  the
    appeal was allowed on that basis.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the FtT had erred in law in
    considering the standard of proof by stating in paragraph 67;

         "I am conscious also that  there  is  this  low  standard  that  is
         applicable in asylum cases and if there is a doubt that the benefit
         of that doubt should be resolved in favour of the Appellant."

 7. The Secretary of State referred to KS (benefit  of  the  doubt)  [2014]
    UKUT 552 (IAC) contending that to state that the claimant  is  entitled
    to the benefit of the doubt as a principle of law was a misdirection in
    law.

 8. In addition it was contended that the FtT had given inadequate  reasons
    when assessing the claimant's credibility at paragraphs 56-69  and  had
    made no reference to the findings made  in  the  earlier  FtT  decision
    promulgated on 25th September 2014,  in  which  the  claimant's  appeal
    against refusal of a residence card was dismissed,  and  it  was  found
    that she had entered into a marriage of convenience.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lambert of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cockrill) who in  a
             decision promulgated on 24th July 2015 allowed the Appellant's
             appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to deport.

         2.   The grounds contend error  at  paragraph  67  in  the  judge's
             statement that the lower standard of proof relating to  asylum
             meant giving the benefit of the doubt to the Appellant.

         3.    They  further  contend  inadequate  reasoning   as   to   the
             credibility of the Appellant's claim to be a lesbian  and,  in
             particular, failure to take  account  of  adverse  credibility
             findings made by  a  previous  judge  as  to  the  Appellant's
             claimed marriage to a female.

         4.   The findings made in Judge Davey's earlier  decision  are  not
             obviously examined by this judge.  The content of the  present
             decision is such that both grounds  are  arguable.   There  is
             therefore  an  arguable  error  of  law   disclosed   by   the
             application."

10. It  appears  that  the  judge  granting  permission  misunderstood,  in
    paragraph 3 of the grant,  the  position  relating  to  the  claimant's
    marriage, as the marriage was with a male, not a female.

11. Following the grant  of  permission,  the  Tribunal  issued  directions
    making provision for there to be a hearing before the Upper Tribunal to
    decide whether the FtT decision should be set aside by reason of  error
    of law.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

12. Mr Duffy relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  It was submitted that the FtT had used the wrong
    standard of proof, and had applied a standard lower than  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood.

The Claimant's Submissions

13. Mr Pipi  relied  upon  his  skeleton  argument.   In  summary  Mr  Pipi
    submitted that the decision of the FtT did not  disclose  an  error  of
    law.  The FtT  had  taken  into  account  all  the  evidence  and  made
    sustainable findings.  The correct standard of proof had been applied.

14. Mr Pipi submitted that the FtT had not given the benefit of  the  doubt
    to the claimant, as much of her evidence had been rejected, and the FtT
    had allowed the appeal based upon the evidence of SW,  a  witness  with
    whom the claimant had had a lesbian relationship.

15. The failure to refer to Judge Davey's decision was  immaterial  because
    the FtT had rejected the claimant's evidence  in  any  event,  and  the
    witness whose evidence was accepted, did not give evidence before Judge
    Davey.

The Secretary of State's Response

16. Mr Duffy argued that the  core  of  the  claimant's  account  had  been
    accepted by the FtT, and therefore in reality the FtT had not  rejected
    the claimant's evidence.



My Conclusions and Reasons

17. I find no error of law in relation to the standard of proof applied  by
    the FtT.  The Upper Tribunal in KS decided  that  the  benefit  of  the
    doubt is not to be regarded as a rule  of  law,  but  as  discussed  in
    paragraphs 203 and 204 of the 1979 UNHCR  Handbook  on  Procedures  and
    Criteria for Determining Refugee Status, is a general guideline.

18. I set out below paragraph 2 of  the  head  note  in  KS  in  part,  and
    paragraph 3;

         "2.  ... What is involved is simply no more than an acceptance that
             in respect of every asserted fact when  there  is  doubt,  the
             lower standard entails that it  should  not  be  rejected  and
             should rather continue to be kept in mind as a possibility  at
             least until the end when the question  of  risk  is  posed  in
             relation to the evidence in the round.

         3.   Correctly viewed, therefore, TBOD adds nothing of substance to
             the lower standard of proof, which as construed by  the  Court
             of Appeal in Karanakaran v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2000] 3 All ER 449, affords a 'positive  role  for
             uncertainty'".

19. The FtT in this appeal correctly sets out  the  standard  of  proof  in
    paragraph 65 which is set out below;

         "65. I have to say that this case is very far from clear cut.   The
             standard of proof that is applicable in relation to asylum  is
             that of real risk.  Put differently, a  reasonable  degree  of
             likelihood is the test".

20. Read as a whole, I am  satisfied  that  the  FtT  applied  the  correct
    standard of proof, recognising that this  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood.

21. I do not accept that the FtT gave inadequate reasons for findings.  The
    FtT thoroughly examined the evidence, and considered the evidence given
    by and on  behalf  of  the  claimant  critically.   The  FtT  noted  in
    paragraph 64 that the claimant had "quite  plainly  used  deception  by
    entering into a sham marriage and the reason or reasons  for  that  are
    not known fully".

22. The FtT noted in paragraph 57, as being adverse to the claimant's case,
    that she had not referred to her relationship  with  SW  when  she  was
    interviewed in connection with her claim to be a lesbian.

23. In paragraph 60 the  FtT  found  the  claimant's  explanation  for  not
    mentioning SW when interviewed to be "weak".

24. The FtT also noted in paragraph 62, the  considerable  delay  that  had
    occurred before the claimant made her asylum claim.  This was only made
    after her criminal conviction.

25. The FtT found in paragraph 69;

         "69. I express some appreciable disquiet about certain features  of
             the Appellant's case.  The very fact that she did not refer to
             SW still troubles me but at the end of the day, I do  consider
             that there is a sufficient thread of evidence to show that the
             Appellant has demonstrated being lesbian".

26. The FtT went on to conclude that in the  final  analysis,  it  was  the
    evidence of SW that persuaded the FtT that the claimant is  a  lesbian.
    The FtT noted that SW had come to the hearing to give evidence  and  be
    cross-examined about her relationship, even  though  that  relationship
    had ended.

27. I set out below the head note to  Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost".

28. The FtT has applied the principles set out in Budhathoki, and  examined
    the evidence with care, and given adequate reasons  for  findings  that
    have been made.  In my view it is clear when reading the FtT  decision,
    why the appeal was allowed.  I do not accept the Secretary  of  State's
    contention that inadequate reasons have been given.

29. Turning to the previous decision by Judge Davey, I note  that  no  oral
    evidence was heard in that appeal.  The finding made in that appeal was
    that the Appellant, the claimant in this appeal, had not shown that she
    had entered into a genuine, subsisting marriage, but had entered into a
    sham relationship.  The principles in Devaseelan Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT
    00702, indicate that when there is a previous decision by the FtT, this
    stands as an assessment of the claim that the Appellant was  making  at
    the time of that decision.  It is not binding on a subsequent judge but
    is the starting point as an assessment of the matters that were  before
    the judge who heard the first appeal.  I find no error of  law  by  the
    FtT on this issue.  The finding  made  by  Judge  Davey  was  that  the
    claimant had entered into a sham marriage.  This is clearly  stated  by
    the FtT in paragraph 64.  The FtT was aware that the claimant had  been
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment as a result  of  seeking  leave  to
    remain, by reliance upon that sham marriage.  This is clearly  set  out
    by the FtT, who also set out that the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    application for a residence card was dismissed by the Tribunal on  24th
    September 2014 (paragraph 12 of the FtT decision).  I do not find  that
    there is anything relevant in the decision of Judge Davey, that has not
    been considered by the FtT in this appeal.

30. There is reference in the Secretary of State's Grounds of Appeal to the
    decision of the FtT to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  being  arguably
    irrational.  There is a high threshold in order for irrationality to be
    proved.  That threshold has not  been  reached  in  this  appeal.   The
    conclusions made by the FtT have been made after a careful  examination
    of the evidence.  Sustainable and adequate reasons have been given  for
    the findings made and the grounds submitted by the Secretary  of  State
    do not disclose an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  I  continue  that
order pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.


Signed   Date 3rd December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  therefore  so  does  the
decision not to make a fee award.


Signed   Date 3rd December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
