
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/03773/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2016                          |  On 7 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  ms b b b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B E Jones of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Ms B B B  ("the  claimant").
    The claimant had appealed against the decision  taken  on  27  February
    2015 refusing her claim for asylum.

Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 22 August  1983.
    The claimant came to the UK on 6 March 2011 on her own passport with  a
    student visa valid until 12 December 2012.  On  12  December  2012  she
    applied for further leave to remain as a student and this  was  refused
    on 5 July 2013 with a right of appeal.  She then lodged an appeal which
    was later withdrawn in February 2014.  She claimed asylum on 13 January
    2014.  That application was refused by the Secretary of  State  because
    she did not accept that the claimant's husband was killed  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities or  that  the  claimant  was  detained  because  the
    authorities wanted to ask questions about  her  husband  following  his
    death.  The Secretary of State did not accept that there was an  extant
    court summons or that the claimant had received injuries from her  time
    in detention.  The respondent did not accept that the claimant would be
    at risk on return to  Sri  Lanka  considering  that  her  claim  to  be
    involved in disapora activities were very low level and  that  she  had
    only been a member of the British Tamils for one year.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 1. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on 10 September 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge S  L  Farmer
    allowed the claimant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found that  the
    claimant would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka on the  basis  of  the
    current circumstances in her home area, the  level  of  militarisation,
    the female headed household, her  previous  history  of  detention  and
    arrest, the summons and the fact that she would be of interest  to  the
    authorities on  her  return  all  of  which  provided  additional  risk
    factors.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant's  activities
    in the British Tamil Forum ('BTF') in the UK is recent and she plays no
    active role in the BTF  which  would  raise  her  profile.   The  judge
    therefore found that the claimant would not fall within paragraph  7(a)
    of GJ and Others (Post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    319 (IAC) ('GJ'). The judge concluded that  the  claimant  fell  within
    paragraph 7(d) of GJ.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


 2. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 6 October 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  refused
    permission to appeal.  The Secretary of State renewed  her  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on 2  November  2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted the Secretary of State permission to
    appeal.  The grounds set out that  the  judge  has  arguably  erred  in
    finding that the claimant's name would appear on a  stop  list  on  the
    basis of a court summons that the judge  assumed  was  still  in  force
    against the claimant when there is no evidence  to  that  effect.   The
    grant of permission sets out that there is arguably a conflict  between
    the judge's findings at paragraph 35 and at paragraph  38  taking  into
    account the findings in GJ that the current interest by the Sri  Lankan
    authorities tends to be  a  military  threat  and  to  destabilise  the
    current regime. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

The Secretary of State's Submissions

 3. The grounds of appeal assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    misdirected himself in allowing the claimant's appeal on the basis that
    the claimant falls within the criteria set out in paragraph 7(d) of GJ.
     It is asserted that it  was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  consider
    whether the claimant's account fits the category of person that is  the
    current focus of the Sri Lankan  Government's  concerns.   Reliance  is
    placed on the summary of findings at paragraphs 2 and 3 of the GJ  case
    which set out:

    (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan Government has changed since the civil
         war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri Lanka  itself  is  a  spent
         force and there have been no terrorist incidents since the  end  of
         the civil war.

    (3)  The government's present objective is to identify Tamil  activists
         in the disapora  who  are  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and  to
         destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  enshrined  in  amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983, which  prohibits  the,
         violation of the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka.  Its focus  is
         on preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE  or  any  similar
         Tamil separatist organisations and (b) the revival of the civil war
         in Sri Lanka.

 4. It is asserted that the judge failed to identify why the claimant would
    be of any interest post 2009 given her profile.

 5. It is also submitted that the judge failed  to  consider  the  evidence
    presented to him.  It is asserted that the  judge  considered  all  the
    evidence produced in support of  the  claimant  and  concludes  on  her
    credibility prior to any consideration of  the  points  raised  by  the
    respondent in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter.   Specifically,  it  is
    asserted that the judge failed completely to consider  the  alternative
    reasons given for the claimant's husband's death and  her  injuries  as
    highlighted at paragraph 23 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

 6. It is also submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  conclusion,  at
    paragraph 31 in that he wrongly places the  burden  of  disproving  the
    claimant's case on the Secretary of State.  It is  submitted  that  any
    assertion that the newspaper report relied upon by  the  respondent  to
    demonstrate  that  the  claimant's  account  was  fabricated   or   was
    inaccurate could and should have been disputed by the claimant  in  the
    form of further evidence.  All the evidence should have been looked  at
    in the round and given the weight it deserved in light of the objective
    evidence.

 7. Mr Avery submitted that the claimant had had very  limited  involvement
    in the LTTE and the focus  of  her  claim  was  on  the  basis  of  the
    involvement of her husband and the authority's  interest  arising  from
    his activities.  He asserted that the Secretary of State considers that
    the judge did not take the context into account when  considering  risk
    on return as the thrust of the authority's interest in Sri Lanka is  on
    people who are trying to destabilise the state.   With  regard  to  the
    first ground of appeal he submitted that the  claimant's  profile  does
    not sit with the findings of the panel in GJ and the judge has not  set
    out how the claimant would be at  risk  as  a  result  of  her  limited
    involvement which was some time ago and the fact that her  husband  has
    also been dead for some time now.  With regard to the second ground  of
    appeal he asserted that the judge had formed the view on the claimant's
    credibility before  taking  into  account  the  considerations  of  the
    Secretary of State as set out in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter.   Mr
    Avery referred me to paragraph 30 of the decision and pointed out  that
    the judge  had  already  made  the  finding  regarding  the  claimant's
    credibility previously.  He asserted that  the  judge  had  not  really
    considered the alternative set out  by  the  Secretary  of  State  with
    regard to the  background  leading  to  the  death  of  the  claimant's
    husband.  In relation to ground 3 Mr Avery submitted that the  way  the
    evidence  was  dealt  with  by  the  judge  appears  to   have   placed
    responsibility on the respondent to back up the evidence regarding  the
    background about the death of the claimant's husband.  He asserted that
    there was no reason to question the information provided as it accorded
    with what the claimant  said  about  the  death  of  her  husband.   He
    asserted that the judge followed the submissions made by the claimant's
    representative which were that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have
    followed the pathways  identified  by  the  representative.   Mr  Avery
    asserted that that was not necessary; the evidence was  available  from
    the internet and in effect the judge was placing the burden of proof on
    the respondent whereas it was for the claimant to prove her  case.   Mr
    Avery referred to the grant of permission wherein it was recorded  that
    the judge relied on the fact that there was a previous summons and  had
    assumed that there would be one in existence now.  Mr  Avery  submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred as there was no evidence  that
    there was an extant summons issued.  He asserted that on the  basis  of
    where the interest of the authorities now lies there is  no  reason  to
    assume that they would have pursued a summons against the claimant.  He
    asserted that the conclusions of the judge  at  paragraph  35  were  in
    error.  In accordance with GJ there is no particular risk as  a  result
    of militarisation in the claimant's own  area  but  in  any  event  the
    claimant could relocate to Colombo.  This  was  not  addressed  by  the
    judge.

 8. Ms Jones submitted that the judge  did  not  ignore  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence but declined to accord it weight.  She  asserted  this
    was the only possible decision the judge could have taken and  that  it
    was highly inappropriate of the Secretary of State to seek to  rely  on
    the evidence.  This was an anonymous comment by an unidentified  person
    on a website.  There was no way that the judge could test the  veracity
    of that  person.   She  submitted  that  the  evidence  was  inherently
    unreliable.  With regard to  the  assertion  that  the  judge  assessed
    credibility before considering the evidence of the Secretary  of  State
    she submitted that if the judge  had  merely  set  out  that  paragraph
    earlier in the decision there would be no basis to  this  ground.   She
    submitted that this was merely descending into too  great  a  level  of
    detail.  Ms Jones submitted that the judge found that the  summons  was
    not a forgery and that the claimant was found not to  have  exaggerated
    her claim, that there  was  significant  expert  evidence  produced  in
    support of her claim and therefore there was a number of reasons  taken
    into consideration by the judge who took the evidence in the round.  It
    was a matter for  the  judge  to  place  the  relevant  weight  on  the
    evidence.  She submitted that the first ground of appeal was in essence
    a complaint that the judge should have found the claimant  was  not  at
    risk on return because she did not have a  high  enough  profile.   She
    referred to the case of GJ and submitted that the claimant was arrested
    and interrogated after the end of the civil war.  It was not part of  a
    general roundup of people.  She asserted that the summons was only part
    of the overall picture and that the judge was correct to find  that  it
    was relevant.  She submitted that courts  do  not  just  stop  pursuing
    somebody and that it  was  very  likely  that  having  found  that  the
    claimant was credible in her account of  being  detained  and  tortured
    that the authorities would have continued to  pursue  the  issue  of  a
    summons and an arrest warrant after she had left the country.   It  was
    not an irrational conclusion for the judge to have arrived at  that  an
    arrest warrant would have been issued. The judge made  a  finding  that
    there was a real risk that the arrest warrant would  have  been  served
    and that the claimant would have been on a stop list.  However, it  was
    not just on the basis of the summons  that  the  judge  considered  the
    claimant would be at risk.   Ms Jones referred to the case of  PP  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1828.  She asserted that  the  judge  has
    given sufficiently detailed reasons as to why the claimant would be  at
    risk on return namely that a warrant would have been  issued  and  that
    there is a risk to Tamil women in female  households.   The  claimant's
    mother has subsequently passed away so she would be  the  head  of  the
    household.  She would not be able to relocate  as  she  would  have  to
    return to a named address therefore she would have  to  return  to  her
    home area and would be expected to stay there.

 9. In reply Mr Avery submitted that the  way  the  judge  dealt  with  the
    summons was not adequate, that the finding at paragraph 29  was  simply
    that the judge accepted that there had been a summons but there was  no
    finding that an arrest warrant had been issued.  He submitted  that  in
    this case the position in Sri  Lanka  has  shifted  considerably.   The
    claimant was arrested in 2010 which was not long after the end  of  the
    civil war.  He asserted that even if the claimant has to go back to her
    home area she does not have to  stay  there.   He  submitted  that  the
    claimant is a well-educated  woman  and  that  the  judge  should  have
    addressed the issue that the claimant could go to Colombo.

Discussion

10. Ground 1 - misdirection in allowing the appeal on the  basis  that  the
    claimant falls within paragraph 7(d) of GJ.  The judge found  that  the
    claimant's activities in the British Tamil Forum  (BTF)  did  not  give
    rise to a risk on return to Sri Lanka because the claimant's membership
    is recent and that she plays no active role  in  the  BTF  which  would
    raise her profile.  The focus of the authorities is on  preventing  the
    resurgence of the LTTE or the revival of the civil war  in  Sri  Lanka.
    The Secretary of State asserts, therefore, that the First-tier Tribunal
    failed to identify why the claimant would be of any interest  post  the
    2009 ending of the civil war given her profile.   At  paragraph  35  of
    the decision the judge found that the claimant  would  be  at  risk  on
    return for a number of reasons.  The judge set out:

         "I find that the appellant would be at risk on return, on the basis
         of the current  circumstances  in  her  home  area,  the  level  of
         militarisation, the female-headed household, her  previous  history
         of detention and arrest, the summons and the fact that she would be
         of interest to the authorities on her return all of which  provides
         additional risk factors.

         For the reasons given above I find that  the  appellant  does  fall
         within the criteria set out in paragraph 7(d) of GJ".

11. The judge had considered earlier in the decision the  applicability  of
    GJ to women as considered in the case of PP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ
    1828. The judge referred to paragraph 32 onwards of the decision in PP.
     The Court of Appeal in PP found:

         "32. I agree that paragraph 10 can literally be so read.   However,
             it is clear in the  context  that  the  section  had  a  wider
             function in the reasoning of the Upper  Tribunal  because  the
             Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  further  evaluation  of  the  risk
             attaching to the fact that the appellant  had  been  raped  in
             detention significantly after the  conflict  had  ended.   The
             Upper Tribunal, as I read it, was saying  that  there  was  no
             evidence to suggest that Tamil women might form an  additional
             category of risk in addition to the risk  categories  actually
             identified in GJ.

          33. On that basis, as I see it, there was an error of law  because
             we know that the conclusion was in  conflict  with  the  UNHCR
             eligibility guidelines in  the  passage  that  I  have  quoted
             already.

          34. Moreover, that interpretation is confirmed by  the  subsequent
             material that we have been  shown  concerning  the  vulnerable
             position of Tamil women.  I am not saying  that  the  evidence
             that we have seen establishes that they  are  entitled  to  be
             treated as a separate category but there is  certainly,  as  I
             see it, sufficient material to give  rise  to  more  in  depth
             reasoning and enquiry on the Tribunal's part  than  is  to  be
             found at paragraph 10.

         35.  There is a further point in paragraph 11  the  Upper  Tribunal
             has assumed that the change in circumstances identified in GJ,
             namely the defeat of the LTTE and  subsequent  realignment  of
             the political situation would have a  similar  effect  on  the
             ground in the Tamil territories in the north and the  east  of
             Sri Lanka.  In terms of intelligence capacity,  we  know  from
             the GJ decision that the  government  of  Sri  Lanka's  method
             identifying LTTE sympathisers is now much  more  sophisticated
             and technically based than it used to  be.   For  example,  it
             monitors the internet and mobile telephone calls  and  so  on.
             But it  does  not  follow  that  similar  changes  would  have
             occurred in the Tamil  areas,  which,  as  we  understand  it,
             remain militarised zones with high proportions of soldiers  to
             civilians.  For the position on the ground  that  purpose  has
             not significantly changed.  The high level  of  militarisation
             may be such as to put vulnerable individuals such  as  members
             of households headed by women at risk."

12. The judge (at paragraph 17) also referred to the UNHCR guidelines which
    set out some cases that may be in need of international protection  and
    identified   factors   contributing   to   increased   insecurity   and
    vulnerability of women in the north  and  east  of  Sri  Lanka.   Those
    factors included large numbers of  female  headed  households,  women's
    weak  economic  position  and  high  militarisation.   The  judge  also
    referred to the US State Department's Report 2014 which sets  out  that
    sexual violence and discrimination  against  women  were  common.   The
    judge (at paragraph 19) referred to the Home Office Country Information
    Report which at paragraph 1.3.8 sets out that  Tamil  women  especially
    widows have disappeared and that surrenderees are vulnerable to  sexual
    harassment,  exploitation  or  assault  by  army  personnel  and  other
    militias.  The judge took that background evidence  into  consideration
    in addition to the findings with regard to women in the case of PP.  At
    paragraph 35 of PP the Court of Appeal held:

         "... So the position  on  the  ground  for  that  purpose  has  not
         significantly changed.  The high level  of  militarisation  may  be
         such as to put vulnerable individuals such as members of households
         headed by women at risk.

         I would therefore hold that the failure of the  Upper  Tribunal  to
         perceive  this  distinction  and  to  evaluate   its   implications
         constitutes a material error of law in the assessment  of  risk  on
         return."

13.  Whilst I accept the Secretary of State's assertion that  the  interest
    of the Sri Lankan authorities  is  now  focused  on  those  seeking  to
    destabilise the Sri Lankan state and are working for Tamil  separatism,
    it is clear from the case of PP that the court considered that there is
    a need for an in depth reasoning and enquiry into the particular  facts
    of the case to identify whether  the  particular  circumstances  of  an
    claimant in a position such as the claimant in the instant  case  might
    be at risk on return. As the Court of  Appeal  held  in  PP  the  Upper
    Tribunal in that case  had  erred  in  concluding  that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that Tamil women might form an additional  category
    of risk in addition to the risk categories actually identified  in  GJ.
    The Court of Appeal specifically set out that there was no  entitlement
    to be treated as a  separate  category  but  that  there  certainly  is
    sufficient material to give rise to  a  more  in  depth  reasoning  and
    enquiry.

14. The judge in this case found the claimant's  account  to  be  credible.
    The claimant was arrested in August 2010 (after the end  of  the  civil
    war) and was detained, assaulted and raped.  She was  questioned  about
    her husband and also her own involvement in the LTTE.  The claimant did
    not believe that her husband had committed  suicide.   Having  accepted
    the claimant's account as credible the finding of the  judge  that  the
    claimant would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka on the  basis  of  the
    current circumstances in her home area, the level of militarisation, as
    a female  headed  household  together  with  her  previous  history  of
    detention and arrest was a finding that was open to the judge in  light
    of the case of PP.  This would be the case whether or not the judge had
    found that the claimant fell within paragraph 7(d) of GJ (i.e.  on  the
    basis of being on a stop list.

15. It does not appear to have been argued before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the claimant could re-locate to Colombo and this was not raised as
    a ground in the grounds of appeal. The claimant would  be  required  to
    return to a named address and internal re-location  is  not  an  option
    within Sri Lanka for  a  person  at  real  risk  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities (headnote 5 of GJ). In the absence of arguments before  the
    First-tier Tribunal I do not consider, in the  circumstances,  that  it
    was incumbent upon the judge to consider re-location as an option.

16. I accept the respondent's submissions that the judge  did  not  make  a
    finding that there was an arrest warrant or an extant court order.  The
    judge considered the copy of the summons issued in Sri Lanka  in  2010.
    The judge found that the claimant was of  sufficient  interest  to  the
    authorities for them to want to  prosecute  her.  She  found  that  the
    document established that the claimant was summoned as stated  but  did
    not consider whether that summons remained extant.  The judge  has  not
    given reasons as to why a summons issued in 2010 would  result  in  the
    claimant's name appearing on a computerised  stop  list  which  is  the
    category of persons identified as at risk  in  paragraph  7(d)  of  GJ.
    However, as set out above, there were sufficient reasons  that  it  was
    open to the judge to conclude that the claimant was at risk on  return.
    I do not consider that an error on this issue would, on  the  facts  of
    this case, be material to the outcome.

17. Ground 2 - the judge did  not  take  into  consideration  the  evidence
    presented to her by the Secretary of State  before  concluding  on  the
    claimant's credibility.  At paragraph 31 the judge set out:

         "... however, I accept Ms Easty's submission  that  the  respondent
         has  not  undertaken  the  most  basic  research  to   verify   the
         information or identify or the truth of the contents, or prepare  a
         statement from the individual concerned.  Ms Easty  provided  links
         on how this could be done.  Whilst  I  have  not  carried  out  the
         searches and Ms Easty cannot  herself  give  evidence  on  this,  I
         accept in principle her submissions on this point."

18. The judge clearly did take  into  account  the  points  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  At paragraph  31
    the judge set out that she had considered in particular paragraph 23 of
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  Merely because the judge sets out that
    she has considered this evidence and that the paragraph  in  which  she
    sets it out follows from an overall assessment of  credibility  of  the
    claimant does not lead inexorably to a conclusion that the  judge  only
    took this into consideration after having considered all  the  evidence
    and reached a finding on credibility. There must be some structure to a
    written decision. I do not consider,  therefore,  that  it  necessarily
    follows  that  the  judge  had  reached  her  overall   conclusion   on
    credibility prior to considering the points raised by the Secretary  of
    State with regard to the evidence of the claimant's husband's death.

19. Ground 3  -  the  judge  wrongly  placed  the  burden  of  proving  the
    claimant's case on the Secretary of State.  It is clear that the  judge
    accepted that the Secretary of State had not undertaken the most  basic
    research to verify the information, identity, truth of the contents  or
    prepare a statement in relation to the comments dated  25  August  2010
    from "Kadz 1993" which was posted in relation  to  an  article  from  a
    website of Sri Lankan newspapers. Whilst  I  accept  that  the  judge's
    comments could be interpreted as shifting the burden of  proof  to  the
    Secretary of State, the judge was clearly referring to the reliance  on
    the 'comments' posted on the website. The Secretary of  State  bore  no
    burden in respect of disproving the claimant's  account.  However,  the
    Secretary of State in this case is relying on comments from an  unknown
    person; giving the Tribunal no opportunity to test the veracity of  the
    comments made. So whilst there was no obligation on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  to  undertake  any  research  or  to  verify  the
    information or identify the individual concerned, in the absence of any
    such evidence the judge was entitled to place little or  no  weight  on
    that evidence. As set out in paragraph 32 the judge gave little  or  no
    weight without being able to verify who posted the information that the
    Secretary of State relied on.  I note that the  grounds  refer  to  the
    newspaper report relied upon by the Secretary of State.  In  paragraphs
    31 and 32 the judge is clearly referring to the 'comment' posted on the
    website not the newspaper report.  The evidence of the newspaper report
    itself was not in conflict with the claimant's evidence.  The  claimant
    indicated that the death certificate records that her  husband's  death
    was by hanging by a nylon rope but that she did not believe that it was
    suicide.  As Mr Avery submitted the information in the newspaper report
    accorded with what the claimant said about the death of her husband.  I
    find that there was no material error of law and that the judge has not
    shifted the burden of proof to the Secretary of State.

20. For the above reasons I find that there was no material error of law in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Notice of Decision

I find that the Secretary of State has not displaced the burden upon her  of
satisfying me that there was a material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision without which the decision cannot  be  set  aside.   The
appeal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 29 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw



