
 [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03719/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 10 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                farah younas
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E King, Counsel, instructed by Dean Manson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st  January  1970.  She
    married Raja Mohammad Younas, a British citizen, in 2010.  She came  to
    the UK on 29th September 2012 as  a  visitor  and  immediately  claimed
    asylum on arrival.  She appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi dated 24th April 2015 dismissing her appeal against
    removal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  on
    27th May 2015 on the following basis.

         "Given the judge's apparent  acceptance  of  the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's husband's brother that he was an Ahmadi, it is arguable
         that the judge erred by failing to  make  a  clear  finding  as  to
         whether the Appellant's  husband  was  an  Ahmadi  and  if  so,  to
         consider whether the Appellant had converted to the Ahmadi faith by
         reason of her marriage.

         It is also arguable  that  in  the  absence  of  the  judge  having
         referred to and her considering the principles  enunciated  by  the
         Court of Appeal in the case of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC  31  that  the
         judge erred in her consideration of the risk that the Appellant may
         face on her return to Pakistan as an Ahmadi."

3.   In the Rule 24 response, the Respondent stated:

         "The  judge  rejected  almost  entirely  the  credibility  of   the
         Appellant and her husband.  He accepted only that the Appellant had
         registered as an Ahmadi convert in the UK. The judge concluded that
         even if the Appellant  and  her  husband  are  Ahmadis  their  past
         behaviour is such as to indicate that they do  not  practise  their
         religion openly and would not therefore be at risk. The judge found
         that the Appellant's husband travelled to Pakistan and lived  there
         for many years without incident."

Submissions

4.   Miss King relied on her grounds and stated that there were two  issues.
    Firstly, whether the judge took into account evidence of witnesses  and
    how that impacted on her credibility findings  and,  secondly,  whether
    the Appellant and her husband did not have problems in Pakistan because
    they were obliged not to openly practise their religion.

5.   In relation to ground 1, Miss King submitted that  the  judge  accepted
    the evidence of Mohammad Younas, the Appellant's witness, but failed to
    properly consider his evidence given profile as an  Ahmadi.  The  judge
    accepted that the Appellant  had  converted  in  the  UK,  not  on  her
    marriage.

6.   At paragraph 39 the judge did not accept that  the  Appellant's  family
    had found out about her conversion. In coming to  this  conclusion  the
    judge had not taken into account that the Appellant's husband was  part
    of a well-known Ahmadi family.  Therefore, the judge failed to consider
    whether he could have hidden this from his wife's family.  The  judge's
    finding was perverse because it was implausible  that  the  Appellant's
    family would not have known that her husband was an Ahmadi and it fails
    to take into  account  the  judge's  acceptance  that  the  Appellant's
    husband was part of an Ahmadi family given that Mohammad Younas was  in
    fact the Appellant's cousin.

7.   In relation to  ground  2,  Miss  King  submitted  that  there  was  no
    consideration in paragraph 39 as to whether the  Appellant's  husband's
    behaviour in not exhibiting his faith publicly was one  of  choice  not
    necessity. It was not clear from the record of evidence in the decision
    whether evidence was taken on this point.  However, it was a key  point
    in itself and had been dealt with in the country  guidance  cases.  The
    judge had failed to consider the  reason  why  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband had not sought to practise their faith in Pakistan.  It was not
    a case that there was no evidence before the judge, but that the  judge
    had not turned her mind to the reason why there had  been  no  previous
    preaching or proselytising.

8.   For the respondent Mr Clark submitted a copy of  the  case  of  MN  and
    Others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00389 (IAC).   He relied on paragraphs 5 and 6 of the head note,  which
    states:

         "5.  In light of the above the first question  the  decision  maker
             must ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is  an  Ahmadi.
             As with all judicial fact finding the judge will need to reach
             conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such  weight
             to aspects of that evidence as appropriate in accordance  with
             Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  This is  likely  to
             include an enquiry whether the claimant was registered with an
             Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged  there
             on  a  regular  basis.  Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be
             relevant. Evidence likely to be relevant includes confirmation
             from the  UK  Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the  activities
             relied  on  in  Pakistan  and  confirmation  from  the   local
             community in the UK where the claimant is worshipping.

         6.   The next step (2) involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
             intentions or wishes as to his or her  faith  if  returned  to
             Pakistan. This is relevant because of the  need  to  establish
             whether it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  religious
             identity of the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(1)
             behaviour.  The burden is on the claimant to demonstrate  that
             any intention or wish to practice and manifest aspects of  the
             faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan penal code
             is genuinely held and of particular importance to the claimant
             to preserve his or her religious identity. The decision  maker
             needs to evaluate all the evidence.  Behaviour  since  arrival
             in the United Kingdom may also be relevant.  If  the  claimant
             discharges  his  burden  he  is  likely  to  be  in  need   of
             protection."

9.   Mr Clarke submitted that there were  clear  findings  at  paragraph  34
    that the Appellant was not an  Ahmadi.  The  issue  in  this  case  was
    whether her conversion was a genuine one. The only evidence before  the
    judge was that the Appellant was registered as an Ahmadi in the UK. The
    judge had found that the Appellant had tried to deceive the  court  and
    therefore  the  evidence  of  the  situation  in  Pakistan  was  wholly
    incredible.  She did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a  genuine
    convert.

10.  In relation to ground 2, the intentions or wishes of the  Appellant  on
    return, there was no evidence before the judge to demonstrate that  the
    Appellant practised or preached in Pakistan.  In  paragraph  2  of  the
    head note at MN there  was  a  distinction  between  those  who  openly
    practised their faith and those who  did  not.  The  Appellant  had  to
    demonstrate that she fell into the second category, someone  who  would
    proselytise.  All that was left to the judge was  a  sur  place  claim.
    The account of the Appellant and her husband was inconsistent  and  the
    evidence of Mohammad Younas did not go further than  to  say  that  the
    Appellant was registered as an Ahmadi.   She was at no risk per se.

11.  Given the judge's credibility findings about what happened in  Pakistan
    the judge had no choice. The Appellant  had  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden upon her and to show that she was  a  genuine  Ahmadi.   In  any
    event, the judge took the evidence at its highest and still found  that
    the Appellant was not at risk because she had failed to show  that  she
    would openly practise her religion on return to Pakistan.

12.  In response, Miss King submitted that although the judge  was  entitled
    to take into account particular findings in relation to deception,  she
    had accepted that the Appellant's cousin, Mr  Mohammed  Younas,  had  a
    high profile  as  an  Ahmadi.   Therefore,  regardless  of  credibility
    concerns, whether the Appellant's husband was in fact  an  Ahmadi,  was
    capable of being established independently. This evidence  should  have
    been balanced against her findings of  deception.  There  was  evidence
    from Mohammed Younas that the judge had failed to take into account and
    it was implausible that the Appellant could not  have  known  that  her
    husband's family were Ahmadi.  The judge's  findings  at  paragraph  39
    were perverse.

13.  Accordingly, the second stage test was tainted  by  these  findings  of
    fact. The judge had failed to enquire into why the  Appellant  and  her
    husband had not openly practised their faith in Pakistan. The  findings
    made  at  paragraph  40  were  without  consideration  as  to  why  the
    Appellant's husband did not openly practise his faith in Pakistan. That
    was a key element that was missing from the judge's consideration.

Discussion and conclusions

14.  The judge found that the Appellant and her husband  were  not  credible
    witnesses because there was clear and proven deceit on the part of  the
    Appellant and her husband in an application for entry clearance made in
    2011. The Appellant had lied about  her  situation  and  her  husband's
    affidavit  was  misleading.  Further,  the  Appellant's  evidence   was
    inconsistent with that of her husband in several  significant  respects
    (paragraph 31 of the decision).

15.  At paragraphs 33 and 34 the judge made the following findings:

         "33. I am satisfied that neither the evidence of the Appellant  nor
             that of her husband is reliable.  The  situation  is  slightly
             more complicated with Mohammad  Younas.  He  claims  to  be  a
             former president of an Ahmadi Mosque which is  linked  to  the
             Ahmadi  Association  the  UK.  He  is  also  related  to   the
             Appellant's husband. He  gave  plausible  evidence  about  the
             Appellant registering as an Ahmadi.  Whilst  I  have  profound
             difficulties with the Appellant and her husband's credibility,
             giving her every benefit of the doubt, I am prepared to accept
             that she has registered as an Ahmadi convert.  That  was  done
             when she came  to  the  UK.  There  is  no  evidence  of  such
             registration with the organisation  in  Pakistan,  or  of  any
             activity on her part that would make her stand out as being an
             Ahmadi since birth. This is particularly so  as  her  husband,
             who claims to have been an Ahmadi since birth,  has  travelled
             to and from  Pakistan,  even  establishing  a  business  there
             without any apparent difficulty. If he is an  Ahmadi  then  he
             has for the best part of 22 years been able to live  there  on
             and off without difficulty travelling back and forth as he has
             chosen.  Whilst I accept that the Appellant has registered  as
             an Ahmadi, I do not accept that she was preaching in  Pakistan
             or that she is leafleting in the UK.  She did not  claim  that
             she was in her oral evidence before me.

         34.   In  summary  therefore  I  make  the  following   credibility
             findings. The Appellant and her husband's evidence in relation
             to her experiences in Pakistan is wholly unreliable. They have
             history of attempting to deceive and have  produced  documents
             which suit their purpose. I therefore do not accept any of the
             documentary evidence which they  put  forward.  They  produced
             false documents in 2011 to support an  application  for  entry
             clearance. No document which emanates from this couple can  be
             relied upon. Consequently I do not accept that the Appellant's
             wife is a genuine convert to Ahmadi to whom it is important to
             manifest and practise  her  religion  openly.  If  she  is  an
             Ahmadi, she has chosen  to  hide  that  from  others,  as  she
             practised Islam for over 17 years without feeling it necessary
             to convert.  Similarly her husband  had  travelled  freely  to
             Pakistan without any problems. The only finding I am  able  to
             make with regard to her claims  regarding  her  conversion  is
             that she is registered as an Ahmadi with  the  Association  in
             the UK."

16.  The judge went on to apply the country  guidance  to  her  findings  of
    fact and concluded at paragraphs 39 and 40:

         "39. The  evidence  before  me  shows  that  for  many  years,  the
             Appellant's husband was able to travel to  and  from  Pakistan
             without any difficulty. Although  the  Appellant  claims  that
             this changed once she converted to the Ahmadi faith, I do  not
             accept her evidence that her family found  out  that  she  has
             converted.  She  was  asked  about  whether  the  wedding  was
             attended by her family and she confirmed that it was.  If  the
             Appellant and her husband are Ahmadi, then they have  remained
             quiet about their religion, otherwise it would simply  not  be
             possible for them to have remained in Pakistan  on  the  basis
             that they say they did.

         40.  For all these reasons even  if  the  Appellant  is  a  genuine
             convert to Ahmadi, I am satisfied on the evidence that  it  is
             not of particular importance to her to practise  her  religion
             openly. I  do  not  accept  her  claims  of  proselytising  or
             leafleting or attendance at meetings on  a  regular  basis  in
             Pakistan, or indeed in the United Kingdom."

17.  I find that the judge's conclusions were open to her  on  the  evidence
    before her and she gave cogent  reasons  for  her  adverse  credibility
    findings. Even though the Appellant was registered as  an  Ahmadi,  the
    judge found that she was not a genuine convert.  The  judge  took  into
    account the evidence of Mohammad Younas in coming to this conclusion.

18.  Notwithstanding the judge went on to consider return on the basis  that
    the Appellant and her husband  were  Ahmadi.  On  their  own  evidence,
    applying the country guidance case of MM neither the Appellant nor  her
    husband were at risk on  return.  They  had  not  tried  to  preach  or
    proselytise in the past and they would not do so in the future.

19.  The judge's findings at paragraph 39 were not perverse.  The  Appellant
    claimed that she had converted to the Ahmadi religion on her  marriage.
    However, her family had  attended  the  wedding  and  her  husband  had
    travelled to and from Pakistan for many years. If the Appellant or  her
    husband were openly practising their faith they  would  not  have  been
    able to do this.

20.  The judge  considered  the  case  in  the  alternative,  accepting  the
    Appellant and her husband were Ahmadi and she properly directed herself
    in accordance with the country guidance at paragraphs 35 to 38  of  her
    decision.  The Appellant's case was not put forward on the basis of  HJ
    (Iran) as alleged in the grounds of  appeal.  The  Appellant  had  been
    living in Pakistan and her husband had visited her  frequently  without
    difficulty. They had not tried to preach or proselytise and  there  was
    no evidence before the judge on what she could conclude that  they  had
    deliberately not done so in order to avoid persecution.

21.  Accordingly, I find that there was no error of law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.   The  decision
    of 24th April 2015 shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 31st July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 31st July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
