
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03934/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Court of Justice,      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Belfast                                   |                                 |
|On 2 August 2016                          |On 13 September 2016             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FAD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


ANONYMITY
I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  orders
otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof
shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant  or  her  child.   This
prohibition  applies   to,   amongst   others,   all   parties   and   their
representatives.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S McTaggart, instructed by Nelson-Singleton
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.  I shall refer to FAD as the claimant herein.

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria. She  has  a  son  (ID)  born  in
    Dublin in January 2006 who  is  also  a  national  of  Nigeria  and  is
    dependent on the claimant's  application.   The  claimant  entered  the
    Republic of Ireland in 2005, and thereafter made a  claim  for  asylum,
    which was rejected in or around 2011.  She then travelled  to  Northern
    Ireland and claimed asylum in the United Kingdom  on  19  August  2011.
    This claim was refused by way of a decision dated 3  June  2014  and  a
    subsequent decision was made to remove her from the United  Kingdom  as
    an illegal entrant.

 3. The claimant appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal  and  by
    way of a decision signed on 13 August 2014  Judge  Gillespie  dismissed
    the claimant's appeal on Refugee Convention, Article 2  and  Article  3
    ECHR grounds, but allowed it on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  That  decision
    was subsequently set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge King, in a  decision
    promulgated  on  16  February  2015.   The  appeal  was  remitted   for
    reconsideration by a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal on the
    Article 8 ground alone.

 4. That appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hutchinson  on  17
    December 2015 and in a decision promulgated just four days later  Judge
    Hutchinson once again allowed the claimant's appeal on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals to the Upper Tribunal with
    the permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun, granted 1 February 2016.

    Grounds of Appeal

 5. At the hearing Mr Matthews accepted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
    support of the application for permission  to  appeal  were  broad  and
    general in nature and sought to draw them together into  the  following
    two points:

 i) On the evidence available, and  conclusions  of  primary  fact  reached
    thereon, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  allow  the  appeal  was
    irrational;

ii) When coming to its conclusion  the  First-tier  Tribunal  left  out  of
    account two material matters, namely; (i) the process and procedure  by
    which families are removed from the United Kingdom and (ii) the  nature
    and procedure of the Assisted Voluntary Return  Scheme,  which  at  all
    times was available to the claimant.

Discussion and Decision

 6. In relation to the former of the two grounds Mr Matthews accepted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had properly directed itself  in  law  and  had
    come to conclusions of primary fact which were open to it.

 7. He observed, however, that the Tribunal had found that:

 i) The claimant was  not  a  witness  of  truth  [paragraph  25],  and  in
    particular it had rejected the truth of the claimant's  assertion  that
    her child had not had any contact with the child's father.

ii) ID has a father with whom he has some contact and  whom  he  wishes  to
    remain in contact with [paragraph 27].

iii) The claimant has family in Nigeria. There is no reason  why  she  could
    not return to Nigeria and resume contact therewith.

iv) The claimant's mental health difficulties have improved and that  there
    is no adequate information to support a  finding  that  she  could  not
    access treatment in Nigeria, if such were required.

 8. It is prudent at this stage to identify the following further  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal:

 i) The appellant has a predisposition  to  depression  and  mental  health
    difficulties;

ii) A further deterioration in her mental health cannot be ruled out if she
    is returned to Nigeria;

iii) ID had particular  instability  in  his  early  life  and  this  had  a
    deleterious effect on his emotional health; there has, though,  been  a
    positive  effect  brought  about  by  the  recent  years  of  stability
    [paragraph 36].

 9. At paragraph 46 onwards the Tribunal concluded:

         "This is a finely balanced decision given all that is in favour  of
         the public interest as considered above, but for reasons  primarily
         related to the current mental health of the appellant and crucially
         how that impacts on [ID] I am  not  satisfied  that  removal  would
         currently  be  proportionate  and   I   find   that   the   current
         circumstances outweigh the public interest considerations  and  are
         sufficiently compelling to warrant a grant of leave  under  Article
         8.  However it may well be that, given the increasing  maturity  of
         [ID] and for example the current lack of any need for  recourse  to
         mental health provision for him personally, that this  is  unlikely
         to remain the position in  the  longer  term;  as  the  appellant's
         mental health and that of her son  continues  to  stabilise  it  is
         anticipated that the emotional  wellbeing  of  [ID]  will  be  less
         directly linked to that of his mother.   Any  further  evidence  in
         relation to any relationship that [ID] may have or be in a position
         to develop with his father would also tip the balance in favour  of
         removal.  This is a case where  further  reports  including  mental
         health reports may be required in the future, including it is hoped
         a report obtained by the Home Office. ..."

10. Looking at the FtT's decision as a whole, in my conclusion it cannot be
    said that its conclusion is irrational; albeit it is  not  one  that  I
    would have reached on the  same  evidence.   Irrationality  is  a  high
    threshold to overcome and this is a case in which in my view there were
    two rational answers to the question of whether the appellant's removal
    would breach Article 8 ECHR. It is not said that the FtT failed to take
    anything material into account, save for those  features  I  deal  with
    below, or that it took into  account  irrelevant  matters.  Ultimately,
    this  ground  expresses  no  more  than  disagreement  with  the  FtT's
    conclusion.

11. Turning to the second ground, ordinarily an assertion that  a  Tribunal
    had  left  out  of  account  material  matters  would  foreshadow   any
    conclusion as to  whether  that  Tribunal's  decision  was  irrational.
    However, in this case that is not so because, as Mr Matthews  accepted,
    what underpins his submission is a  requirement  that  the  FtT  should
    have, but did not, take judicial notice of the inner  workings  of  the
    Assisted Voluntary Return Scheme  and/or  the  mechanism  for  removing
    families as a whole from the United Kingdom.  I do not  accept  that  a
    Tribunal can take judicial notice of such measures.  These are  matters
    for the Secretary of State to produce evidence on if she wishes to rely
    upon them.  Mr Matthews accepts that there was no such evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal; indeed, the submission was not  even  made  to
    the First-tier Tribunal that the existence of either the aforementioned
    removal procedures would materially impact on the consideration of  the
    issue of proportionality.  For this reason, I conclude that the  second
    ground is misconceived.

12. For all the reasons set out above I reject  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission that the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error of
    law capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision therefore remains standing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of  law
capable of affecting  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and  it  is  to  remain
standing.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
2 August 2016



