
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 5th September 2016                     |On: 6th October 2016           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Nicodimus [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr Wood, Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe born on the  10th  March  1976.
    On the   21st August 2015 his asylum appeal was dismissed by the First-
    tier Tribunal. Permission was granted for the Appellant  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal and in a decision dated the 27th June 2016 I  found,
    with the consent of the Respondent, that the decision contained  errors
    of law such that it should be set aside. A copy  of  that  decision  is
    appended.  The matter has now come back before me to be re-made.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim for asylum is that he  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution for reasons of his political  opinion.  The
    Appellant submits that he is a high profile opposition activist in  the
    UK and that this sur place activity has brought him to the attention of
    the security services in  Zimbabwe.  The  Appellant  submits  that  his
    political views are genuinely held and that he should not  be  expected
    to hide his antipathy towards  the  Mugabe  regime  upon  return.   The
    burden of proof in  respect  of  all  of  these  issues  rests  on  the
    Appellant who must establish that there is a reasonable likelihood that
    he will be subject to serious harm on return.

 3. The Appellant further relies on  Article  8  ECHR  in  respect  of  the
    private life that he and his family have established in the  time  that
    they have spent in the United Kingdom. Particular reliance is placed on
    the fact that the Appellant's eldest son who was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom is now seven years old. It is submitted  that  he  prima  facie
    meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and that  the  appeal
    should be allowed on that basis.  The burden of establishing any matter
    in compliance with the Rules lies on the Appellant and the standard  is
    the balance of probabilities. In respect of Article 8 'outside  of  the
    Rules' it is for the  Appellant  to  establish  any  matters  of  fact,
    including whether Article 8 is engaged. If I am required to assess  the
    proportionality of the decision I must do so in light of s117A-D of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.




    The Evidence

    The Appellant's Evidence


 4. The Appellant gave oral evidence and adopted  his  witness  statements,
    dated 22nd April 2015, 24th May 2016 and 30th August 2016. He  answered
    questions put to him by Mr Harrison. His evidence can be summarised  as
    follows.


 5. The Appellant is of Shona  ethnicity.  His  home  town  is  Chivhu,  in
    Mashonaland East. His parents still live there.  The Appellant was last
    in Zimbabwe in 2002 when he left the country heading for South  Africa.
    By the 4th October 2002 he had entered the United Kingdom, and  he  has
    not left since.

 6. The Appellant was  initially  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor. He subsequently varied his status so as  to  obtain  leave  to
    remain as a student,  first  as  a  student  himself,  and  then  as  a
    dependent upon his wife. His wife is also a national  of  Zimbabwe  and
    she and their two children are named as his dependents in this  appeal.
     Since approximately June 2011 no member of  the  family  has  had  any
    valid leave to be in the United Kingdom.

 7. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 18th July 2013. The  basis  of  his
    claim was his involvement with a  Zimbabwean  opposition  group  called
    'Restoration of Human Rights in Zimbabwe' (variously referred to in the
    documents as 'ROHR' and 'ROHRZ'). The Appellant states that  he  joined
    the UK affiliate of  this organisation in April  2011.    He  was  then
    living in Basingstoke and he helped to launch the Reading branch in May
    2013.  He explained that Reading was chosen as a  central  location  to
    pool members from the area. He was elected branch secretary.  His  role
    included recruiting new members, arranging  meetings  and  events.  For
    instance,  members  would  attend  the  vigil  outside  the  Zimbabwean
    embassy, take part in demonstrations calling for democratic  reform  in
    the country and sign petitions.

 8. On the 9th June 2013 the Appellant's  parents  were  visited  at  their
    homestead in Chivhu by some strangers. They showed them a photograph of
    the Appellant taken in the  United  Kingdom.  The  strangers  told  his
    parents that he was committing treason and that if he ever returned  to
    Zimbabwe he would be sent to prison.

 9. Although the Appellant knew about this visit soon after it  happened  -
    he is in regular contact with his family - he did not desist  from  his
    political activity. If anything it made him increase  it  efforts.   He
    has in the past five years taken part in numerous public demonstrations
    and has personally lobbied his MP, Mr Alok Sharma,  as  well  as  other
    British politicians, to put  pressure  on  the  Zimbabwean  government.
    Although he has been moved by 'NASS' to Rochdale he continues  to  take
    an active role and remains the Chair of Reading  branch  of  ROHR.  The
    Appellant explained at hearing that he has  a  role  co-ordinating  the
    organisation nationally, and has regular contact with branches all over
    the country, for instance in Leicester, London, Southampton, Birmingham
    and Middlesborough.

10. The Appellant believes that the CIO in Zimbabwe are aware of  his  role
    in ROHR.  He knows this partly because of the  visit  to  his  parents'
    homestead in 2013 but also because more recently his parents have  been
    discriminated against, explicitly because of his activity.  Because  of
    the drought in Zimbabwe the government have organised food hand-outs in
    the rural areas. His parents have been asked to step out of  the  queue
    and have been told that they are not eligible for assistance because of
    their son's activities.  They have come under  increasing  pressure  to
    take part in ZANU-PF events in the area.    Chivhu  is  home  to  Grace
    Mugabe and, the Appellant explains, it is important to  the  regime  to
    ensure that it remains a stronghold for them.

11. The Appellant avers that he is strongly opposed to  the  Mugabe  regime
    and that should be return to Zimbabwe he would want  to  continue  that
    opposition. All that would prevent him from doing so would be the  fear
    of persecution.




    Supporting Evidence of Political Activity

12. Mr Ephraim Tapa is described as the President and Founder of ROHR.   He
    has attended both the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  and  this
    hearing before me. He has written three written statements  in  support
    of the Appellant, the most recent of which is dated 1st September 2016.
    Mr Tapa confirms  that  the  Appellant  is  a  "key  leader"  in  ROHR,
    describing his current posts as Deputy  National  Fundraiser,  Head  of
    Welfare and Chair of Reading branch.   At the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal the Home Office produced evidence to suggest that Mr Tapa
    was in  fact  no  longer  involved  in  ROHR.  He  explained  that  the
    organisation had split and that a group using the name in Zimbabwe  was
    a front for ZANU-PF activists. A  press  release  dated  July  2011  is
    produced to rebut any  suggestion  that  Mr  Tapa  no  longer  has  any
    involvement with ROHR.  He points to the many media references  to  the
    UK organisation as evidence of its continuing relevance.


13. The  Appellant's  bundles  contain  numerous  items  of  correspondence
    between the Appellant and various British politicians about  the  human
    rights situation in Zimbabwe, including the MP  for  Reading  West,  Mr
    Alok Sharma,  the  MP  for  Rochdale  Mr  Simon  Danczuk,  and  MP  for
    Basingstoke, Mrs Maria Miller. An   article  dated  21st  January  2015
    published on Alok Sharma's home page describes how the MP organised  an
    event in parliament to discuss  the  ongoing  human  rights  crisis  in
    Zimbabwe and did so following requests from the Reading branch of ROHR.
    The Appellant is pictured with Mr Sharma and some fellow  activists  in
    the House of Commons. He is identified and quoted in the  body  of  the
    article.   This event was also covered by The Reading Post and  Reading
    Midweek.   On the 19th September 2013 The Reading  Chronicle  published
    an interview with the Appellant entitled 'Help us  Make  Zimbabwe  Safe
    Again, I Want to Go Back Home Some Day'. In it the  Appellant,  who  is
    pictured, speaks of his fear of persecution as a human rights activist.
    ROHR activities in Reading, in this instance  organising  food  parcels
    for vulnerable people  locally,  were  featured  in  local  paper  'Get
    Reading' on the 21st March 2014 and by the  Post  on  the  20th  August
    2014.   The bundle contains a number of photographs  of  the  Appellant
    attending different protests in the UK which have been published online
    by 'Nehanda Radio' (a Zimbabwean news outlet) and on Flickr.


14. In a large  bundle  submitted  by  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, there are a  number  of  other  documents,  principally  from
    websites, which identify the Appellant as an opponent of Mugabe.  These
    include screenshots from his own 'channel'  called  'Nicodimus  TV'  in
    which the Appellant is said to be  mocking  Mugabe.  This  bundle  also
    contains various letters and petitions that the  Appellant  has  signed
    protesting about the lack of human rights  in  Zimbabwe.  I  have  been
    provided, looseleaf, with a printout of an online petition entitled 'No
    Rule of Law in Zimbabwe'. The Appellant is identified as its author.



    Country Background Information

15. The core country guidance on Zimbabwe remains CM (EM country  guidance;
    disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059(IAC).    That   decision
    essentially reaffirmed the position as stated in EM &  Ors  (Returnees)
    Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC), as amended to  take  account  of  the
    Supreme Court's findings in RT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2012] UKSC 38:

         "(1)      As  a  general  matter,  there  is   significantly   less
             politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with  the
             situation considered by the AIT in  RN.   In  particular,  the
             evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the  return
             of a failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom,  having  no
             significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing  a
             real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


         (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the  case
             of a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from  the
             United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area  of
             Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South.
             Such a person may well find  it  difficult  to  avoid  adverse
             attention, amounting to serious  ill-treatment,  from  ZANU-PF
             authority  figures  and  those  they  control.   The   adverse
             attention  may  well  involve  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm  in  the
             event of failure.  Persons who have shown themselves not to be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled  to  international
             protection, whether or not they could and  would  do  whatever
             might  be  necessary   to   demonstrate   such   loyalty   (RT
             (Zimbabwe)).


         (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural  areas
             and there may be reasons why a particular individual, although
             at first sight appearing to fall within the category described
             in the preceding paragraph, in reality does  not  do  so.  For
             example,  the  evidence  might  disclose  that,  in  the  home
             village, ZANU-PF power structures or other means  of  coercion
             are weak or absent.


         (4)   In general, a returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
             Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to
             face significant difficulty from ZANU-PF  elements,  including
             the security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC  member  or
             supporter. A person may, however, be able to show that his  or
             her village or area is one that, unusually, is under the  sway
             of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.


         (5)      A returnee to Harare will in general face  no  significant
             difficulties, if going  to  a  low-density  or  medium-density
             area. Whilst  the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
             connections  will  not   face   significant   problems   there
             (including  a  "loyalty  test"),  unless  he  or  she  has   a
             significant MDC profile, which  might  cause  him  or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment,  or  would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to
             engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to
             the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


         (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will  in  general  not  suffer  the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, including the  security  forces,
             even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.


         (7)      The issue of what is a person's home for the  purposes  of
             internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and
             is not necessarily to be determined by reference to the  place
             a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her  rural  homeland.
             As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person with a well-
             founded fear of persecution in a major urban  centre  such  as
             Harare will have a viable internal relocation alternative to a
             rural  area  in   the   Eastern   provinces.   Relocation   to
             Matabeleland  (including   Bulawayo)   may   be   negated   by
             discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


         (8)      Internal  relocation  from  a  rural  area  to  Harare  or
             (subject to what we have just said) Bulawayo is,  in  general,
             more realistic; but the socio-economic circumstances in  which
             persons are reasonably likely to find themselves will need  to
             be considered, in order  to  determine  whether  it  would  be
             unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.


         (9)      The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since  the
             period considered in RN. The  replacement  of  the  Zimbabwean
             currency by the US dollar and the South African rand has ended
             the recent hyperinflation. The availability of food and  other
             goods in shops has likewise improved, as has the  availability
             of utilities in Harare. Although these  improvements  are  not
             being felt by everyone,  with  15%  of  the  population  still
             requiring food aid, there has not been  any  deterioration  in
             the humanitarian situation since late  2008.  Zimbabwe  has  a
             large informal economy, ranging from street traders  to  home-
             based enterprises,  which  (depending  on  the  circumstances)
             returnees may be expected to enter.


         (10)     As was the position in RN, those  who  are  or  have  been
             teachers require to have their cases determined on  the  basis
             that this fact places them in an enhanced or  heightened  risk
             category, the significance of which will need to  be  assessed
             on an individual basis.


         (11)  In certain cases, persons found to be  seriously  lacking  in
             credibility may properly be found as a result to  have  failed
             to show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they  would  not,  in
             fact, be regarded, on return, as aligned with  ZANU-PF  and/or
             (b) that they would be returning to a socio-economic milieu in
             which problems with ZANU-PF will arise. This  important  point
             was identified in RN ... and remains valid."

16. The last Country Information and Guidance on Zimbabwe was published  by
    the Respondent in October 2014. Entitled 'Political Opposition to ZANU-
    PF' it confirms [at 1.3.4] that since EM & Ors  was  heard,  there  has
    continued to be a significant reduction in the  number  of  politically
    motivated incidents of human rights  violations  recorded  by  the  NGO
    Zimbabwe Peace Project (ZPP). It cautions  however  that  human  rights
    violations continue to be recorded against perceived opponents  of  the
    government:

         '1.3.5 EM & others (as modified by CM) noted that the position  is,
         however, likely to be otherwise in the case  of  a  person  without
         ZANU-PF connections, returning from  the  United  Kingdom  after  a
         significant absence  to  a  rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,  other  than
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person  may  well
         find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to  serious
         ill-treatment,  from  ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those  they
         control. The adverse attention may well involve  a  requirement  to
         demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of  serious  harm
         in the event of failure. Persons who have shown themselves  not  to
         be favourably disposed to ZANU-PF  are  entitled  to  international
         protection, whether or not they could and would do  whatever  might
         be necessary to demonstrate such loyalty (RT (Zimbabwe)).


         1.3.6 Although EM & others (as modified by CM), was heard prior  to
         the July 2013 elections, it remains valid as the situation  on  the
         ground has not changed significantly.


         1.3.7 As was the case before the July 2013 elections, the  security
         apparatus  is  controlled  by  ZANU-PF,  the  enactment  of  a  new
         constitution has not improved the  human  rights  environment,  and
         there continue to be reports, albeit  declining  numbers,  of  ill-
         treatment of perceived MDC supporters,  their  families,  political
         activists,  student  leaders  and  perceived  government   critics,
         particularly in Mashonaland West, Mashonaland Central,  Mashonaland
         East, Manicaland, Masvingo and Midlands provinces and high  density
         areas of Harare.'

17. Those classed as 'human rights defenders' may also be at risk.

         '1.3.16 Those who have been or  who  are  human  rights  defenders,
         members  of  civil  society  organisations  and   journalists   are
         similarly at a heightened risk of ill treatment on account of their
         actual or imputed political opinion. The heightened risks should be
         considered alongside the individual  circumstances  of  each  case,
         including their previous employment, any activity  which  might  be
         perceived as being critical of ZANU-PF, any adverse interest by the
         authorities and an assessment of the risk  to  them  on  return  to
         Zimbabwe  whether  or  not  they  seek  to  resume  their  previous
         profession.'

18. More recent country background material does not give any indication of
    positive change.  The Appellant has submitted an article  published  in
    'The  Herald'  on  the  15th  July   2016   entitled   "Chombo   blasts
    'unpatriotic' diasporans" which reports on a statement made by the Home
    Affairs Minister Dr Ignatius Chombo. The Minister is reported  to  have
    said that Zimbabweans living abroad should be concentrating on national
    building  and  should  shun  being  used  by  Westerners  against   the
    motherland: "the so-called asylum seekers in the United Kingdom and the
    United States of America are on the forefront, fomenting hate  messages
    against government contrary to the human-rights views that they purport
    to be advancing".  This statement was made in response to a  ROHR/vigil
    picket of a meeting attended by another government minister at  Chatham
    House in London. Mr Chombo also  features  in  an  article  dated  26th
    August 2016 from The Mail Online reporting on serious violence at a MDC
    rally in Harare which was broken up by police using tear gas and  water
    cannon.  The attack on the demonstration resulted in the "worst  unrest
    since the food riots in 1998". Mr Chombo is reported to have  denounced
    opposition leaders as "foreign agents" in the aftermath.




    My Findings

      Asylum

19. I find on the lower standard of proof that the Appellant has spent much
    of the past five years as a political activist in the  United  Kingdom.
    The Respondent has pointed to the fact  that  his  political  awakening
    coincided with his wife's student visa expiring and I am asked to  take
    that into account. I have done so.  It  may  be  that  the  Appellant's
    original motivation for joining ROHR was wholly cynical but that is not
    a factor that assumes very much importance in  the  face  of  his  very
    public, prolonged and determined display of opposition to Mugabe.   The
    Appellant has produced evidence to show that he has lobbied members  of
    parliament, organised demonstrations and  petitions,  written  articles
    published online and has  successfully  managed  to  get  himself  into
    various UK newspapers denouncing the regime.  There  can  be  no  doubt
    that  a  simple  internet  search  of  his  name  would  lead  to   his
    identification as a member of the diaspora who has fomented, to  borrow
    the phrase used by Home Minister Chombo, "hate  messages"  against  the
    current government of Zimbabwe.   Whatever the original motivation  for
    his involvement  might  have  been,  I  am  satisfied  that  today  the
    Appellant is a bona fide member of the opposition.   Having  heard  his
    evidence, and having had an opportunity to see the  extensive  evidence
    of his activities in this country, I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    would wish to continue his activities in Zimbabwe, were he able to   do
    so.


20. His family home is in Mashonaland East. His parents continue to live in
    Chivhu, where Grace Mugabe has made her base. I note that this province
    was identified long ago as one where any  support  for  the  opposition
    would be particularly problematic.  It receives specific mention in the
    October 2014 Country Information and Guidance document [at 1.3.7] as  a
    place where human rights abuses persist,  notwithstanding  the  general
    decline in reported incidents across the country.   The  Appellant  has
    claimed that his parents have been targeted because of his  activities.
    Most recently he has claimed that  they  have  been  turned  away  from
    government food queues because of their son's unpatriotic behaviour.  I
    consider that this evidence has a ring of truth about it. The Appellant
    has not sought to inflate the risk his parents face, and on  the  basis
    of the country background evidence overall I find it  to  be  plausible
    that local ZANU-PF organisers would take such action,  albeit  stopping
    short of causing this elderly couple any direct harm.  It  is  apparent
    from the statements of Minister Chombo that pro-reform elements in  the
    diaspora remain a subject of focus for the  regime.  I  accept  on  the
    lower  standard  of  proof  that  the  Appellant's   vocal   opposition
    activities have come to the attention of the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe
    and that his parents have been denied state aid as a result.

21.  In 2013 the Upper Tribunal found in CM that a person  without  ZANU-PF
    connections, returning to a rural area such as  Mashonaland  East  from
    the United Kingdom after  a  significant  absence  "may  well  find  it
    difficult" to avoid the adverse attention of the authorities, and  that
    such attention would bring an attendant risk of serious  ill-treatment:
    "The adverse attention may well involve a  requirement  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm in the  event  of
    failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves  not  to  be  favourably
    disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled to international  protection,  whether
    or not  they  could  and  would  do  whatever  might  be  necessary  to
    demonstrate such loyalty (RT (Zimbabwe))".  The Appellant has been away
    since 2002  and  has  already  been  identified  as  a  member  of  the
    opposition in the diaspora.  I  am  accordingly  satisfied  that  there
    would, in his home province, be a real risk of harm to him as a  result
    of his political opinion.

22. The question remains whether the Appellant could reasonably be expected
    to avail himself of internal flight.  I must first  assess  whether  or
    not it would be safe for the Appellant to try and live  somewhere  else
    in the country, for instance with his sister-in-law in Bulawayo or in a
    medium-density area in Harare. In  CM  the  Tribunal  held  that  as  a
    general matter,  there  is  significantly  less  politically  motivated
    violence in Zimbabwe, compared with the situation considered by the AIT
    in RN.  The headnote goes on:

         "A  returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no   significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF"


         (emphasis added)

23. It is not of course the Appellant's case that he is involved  with  the
    MDC.  Mr Harrison did not however seek to draw  a  distinction  between
    the Appellant's pro-reform, pro-democracy and  anti-Mugabe  campaigning
    to that of the better known MDC.  The regime itself is unlikely to make
    a distinction.   I have accepted that ZANU-PF elements  in  Chivhu  are
    aware of the Appellant's activities. It is not likely that these  local
    ZANU-PF thugs have their own spies in Reading or Rochdale. Whilst it is
    possible that they have simply come across the Appellant's name online,
    it seems more likely that they were acting  on  information  passed  to
    them by a central source such as the CIO.  There is a  real  risk  that
    the Appellant's name does feature on  a  list  of  those  targeted  for
    harassment.   Even if this were not the case  I  am  satisfied  on  the
    lower standard of proof  that the Appellant  is  reasonably  likely  to
    want to continue in his political campaigning. If he does not, it  will
    only be because of fear of persecution. Overall I am satisfied that the
    risk to the Appellant is from the state  authorities  of  Zimbabwe  and
    that such a risk would pertain throughout  the  country.   I  need  not
    consider other matters such as whether his Shona identity  might  cause
    him problems elsewhere. There is no safe internal flight alternative.




    Article 8 ECHR


24. I now consider the matter in the alternative on the basis of Article 8.
      The Appellant and his wife would, on the  bare  facts  of  their  own
    cases, not have a sustainable argument  in  respect  of  private  life.
    Between 2002 and 2011 their status was "precarious" since  neither  can
    ever have had any valid expectation of being  able  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom permanently following a grant of leave as a Points Based
    System Migrant. As a result, little weight can  be  attached  to  their
    private life. Setting my findings  on  the  Refugee  Convention  aside,
    neither has any  right  to  remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    substantial  weight  should  be  attached  to  the  need  to   maintain
    immigration control. Although no  weight  is  placed  against  them  in
    respect of their financial independence or  ability  to  speak  English
    (both do so fluently) these are not matters that  weigh  positively  in
    their favour. Taken globally the factors set out at s117B(1)-(5) of the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 all weigh  heavily  against
    the Appellant and his wife.


25. There remains the question of s117B(6):

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

    The Appellant's son D was  born  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  2nd
    September 2009 and has now  therefore  lived  in  this  country  for  a
    continuous period of seven years. He is a qualifying child.   There  is
    no  dispute  that  the  Appellant  enjoys  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with him as his father.

26. In respect of whether or not it would be  reasonable  to  expect  D  to
    leave the United Kingdom I apply the approach taken in  PD  and  Others
    (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC)
    and MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705. The question of reasonableness is a rounded assessment of
    all of the facts, but must be made in light  of  the  Respondent's  own
    policy guidance entitled "Family Life (as  a  partner  or  parent)  and
    Private Life: 10 Year Routes", published in August 2015.  That guidance
    recognises that for a child, seven years is a long time  and  that  the
    strength and meaning of his private life is to be weighed  accordingly.
    That stability and continuity are important factors for the  well-being
    of the child has been recognised by  successive  governments  in  their
    application of the 'seven year rule' for over two decades. The  current
    policy statement reads:

         "The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more  the  balance
         will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect the
         child to leave the UK and strong reasons will be required in  order
         to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of  more  than  seven
         years."


         (emphasis added).

27. In the case of D, I cannot find there to be strong reasons  that  would
    outweigh the fact that life in the United Kingdom  is all he knows. His
    parents have been without leave since 2011 and that must be a  relevant
    consideration but it is not in itself a matter that would outweigh  his
    established private life. He has grown up here,  made  friends  and  is
    doing well at school. Return to Zimbabwe, even if his  parents  managed
    to avoid the immediate attention of the CIO, would  in  all  likelihood
    mean relocation to his aunt's small flat in Bulawayo where he would  be
    living in cramped conditions with parents under a significant degree of
    stress. In all of the circumstances I cannot find  any  strong  reasons
    why it would be reasonable for D to leave.


28. In Treebhawon and Ors (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT  674  (IAC)  the
    President held that there was no ambiguity about the way  that  section
    117B(6) was drafted. The factors at s117 (1)-(5) were all matters  that
    should be taken  into  account,  as  above,   but  in  cases  involving
    qualifying children the public interest would not require  the  removal
    of a parent where it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    follow him or her. The President does not use the language  of  'trump'
    but that was in effect how he found the section  to  be  drafted.  This
    analysis has now been adopted by the Court of Appeal in MA Pakistan [at
    14-20].

29. Having found that the Appellant's son D is a qualifying  child  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the  United  Kingdom,  I
    must therefore find that  the  Appellant  succeeds  in  his  Article  8
    appeal, since his removal is not in the public interest.


      Decisions


30. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    such that it has been set aside.


31. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:


    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


    The Appellant does not qualify for humanitarian protection  because  he
    is a refugee."




32.  There is no order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    6th
                                October 2016
