
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA034212015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 May 2016                          |On 17 June 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                          FATHIMA MUNSHIFA MAHABOOB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Fathima Munshifa Mahboob, was born 15 April 1985 and  is
    a female citizen of Sri Lanka.  The appellant appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hindson) against the decision of the respondent to
    remove her from the United Kingdom having rejected  her  asylum  claim.
    The decision was made on 12 February  2015.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed her appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At [21-22], the judge wrote:

         "I remind myself that asylum seekers may exaggerate  and  embellish
         their cases yet still give an account that is,  at  its  core,  the
         truth.  Having done all of that, I accept that the appellant  is  a
         generally credible witness and has given an account that is largely
         true.  I set out below, my reasons for coming  to  this  conclusion
         ...I found that the appellant  has  given  a  generally  consistent
         account of events in Sri Lanka.  Some  minor  inconsistencies  have
         been  identified  in  the  refusal  letter  and  by  Mr  Lees  [the
         Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal]   but   the
         appellant has explained them in a credible and cogent  way.   I  am
         therefore prepared to accept the core of her account is correct."

 3. The judge did not accept "that the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  have  an
    adverse interest in the appellant." [23].  However, as the  grounds  of
    appeal point out, a statement of  the  appellant's  mother  (which  was
    before the judge) and which is dated 27 November 2015  indicated  that,
    "...  On 26 January 2014 police came and asked about  my  daughter  ...
    and said that my husband and my daughters were  helping  LTTE.   So  we
    came to arrest [the appellant]."

 4. Further, there was a letter from a  family  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka  (Mr
    Rajendran) confirming the appellant's mother  had  told  him  that  the
    police had indicated to her that they were interested in the  appellant
    and that they wanted to arrest her.

 5. The difficulty with the judge's decision is that, having  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence as credible and accurate, it is  unclear  why  the
    judge has failed properly to assess the evidence of the mother  or  the
    letter from the lawyer.  I assume when the judge states that he accepts
    the appellant's evidence, he is accepting  as  true  all  the  evidence
    adduced by the appellant, including the witness statement of her mother
    and the lawyer's letter. At [23], the judge appears to  have  placed  a
    great deal of weight on the fact that the mother had not been  arrested
    although she had been in regular contact with the police.  However, the
    judge has failed to consider the truth and accuracy of  the  statements
    (quoted above) which prima facie suggest that the police seek to arrest
    the appellant together with the fact that the  appellant  (by  her  own
    evidence perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as, at the very least,
    an LTTE sympathiser) had been  living  amongst  the  Sri  Lankan  Tamil
    diaspora in the United Kingdom.  That evidence  appears  to  have  been
    ignored by the judge who has simply assumed that the  appellant  cannot
    be at risk because events (such as the  arrest  and  detention  of  her
    father and the kidnapping of her sisters) occurred in Sri Lanka  whilst
    the appellant has been in the United Kingdom.  Further, the  judge  has
    failed to take account of  the  fact  that,  while  she  had  not  been
    arrested, the appellant's mother claims to have been moving around  Sri
    Lanka in order to evade the authorities.  I have to say that I am  also
    concerned that the judge's assessment of  credibility  is  inadequately
    supported  by  clear  reasoning.   The  judge  has  accepted  that  the
    appellant was "generally consistent" and that her "account was  largely
    true" because she had given consistent accounts of past events and  had
    explained away "minor inconsistencies" "in a credible and cogent  way."
    I find that the judge needs to  be  rather  more  specific  than  that.
    Further, the use of the words "largely" and "generally" in what  should
    be a detailed examination of the evidence beg the question as  to  what
    parts of the account the judge did or did not accept.

 6. In the light of what I have said above, I find that the  proper  course
    of action is to set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  to
    return the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal  to
    remake the decision.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  1  January  2016  is
set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge
Hindson) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.  None of the findings  of
fact shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
