
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03691/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 December 2014                           |On 13 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A C O
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    Ms S Bassiri-Defouli (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State has permission to appeal against a  decision  in
    ACO's favour but it will be convenient to refer to the parties as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.   The appellant is  a  citizen  of
    Turkey.  His appeal against a decision to remove him  from  the  United
    Kingdom was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall ("the  judge")
    in a determination promulgated  on  6  November  2014.   The  appellant
    contended that he was at real risk on return to Turkey, the country  of
    his nationality.  The judge found that he  was  not  at  any  risk  and
    dismissed the appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.  He allowed the appeal, however, on the basis that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the  European  Community  Association
    Agreement with Turkey and could benefit  from  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules in HC 510.

2.   In the application for permission to appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State
    contended, first, that the judge had given insufficient reasons for his
    decision to allow the appeal.  In the light of his  findings  that  the
    level of business activity was not established and that the appellant's
    credibility was damaged, it was incumbent upon  the  judge  to  provide
    cogent reasons as to why he accepted on a balance of probabilities that
    a business plan had  been  provided  previously,  that  no  significant
    investment was required in terms of equipment, that such equipment  was
    available to the appellant, that his liabilities  were  affordable  and
    that third party support was sufficient.  The  author  of  the  grounds
    contended that no reasons were given for those favourable findings.  It
    appeared that the judge had allowed the appeal on the basis of only two
    points: evidence of business activity and support from  family  members
    (at paragraph 58 of the determination).

3.   Secondly, it was contended that the judge's finding that the  Secretary
    of State had found that the appellant had been running a  business  was
    misconceived.  In refusing the application for leave  made  in  January
    2013, the Secretary of State had found  that  work  undertaken  by  the
    appellant was outside the terms of his visa and did  not  constitute  a
    genuine business for the purposes of HC510.  Further, no  reasons  were
    given for the finding that discretion under  paragraph  4  fell  to  be
    exercised  in  favour  of  the  appellant.   The  appellant's  previous
    deception, attempts to mislead the Home Office and  the  Tribunal,  the
    late and false asylum claim, the period of overstaying and  working  in
    breach of conditions all fell to be taken into account in the light  of
    IY [2008] UKAIT 00081.

4.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  24  November  2014,  the  judge
    granting permission finding that it was arguable that the determination
    contained inconsistencies in approach.

5.   There was no rule 24 response.  Ms Bassiri-Defouli said  that  she  had
    been instructed that there was a cross-appeal.  A  thorough  search  of
    the court file revealed nothing in this regard and there was nothing to
    show  that  any  such  application  had  been  made.   I  said  to  the
    representatives that in those circumstances I would not take any action
    in regard to the cross-appeal said to have been brought  and  that  the
    hearing would be confined to considering whether the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  as  argued  by  the
    Secretary of State.  There was no application for  an  adjournment  and
    the error of law hearing proceeded.

Submissions on error of law

6.   Mr Melvin said that reliance was placed upon the grounds,  which  spoke
    for  themselves.   Looking  at  all   the   evidence,   including   the
    overstaying, the fate of the judicial review and the other points,  the
    judge had given insufficient reasons for allowing  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the appellant runs  a  computing  business.   In  the  first
    ground, it was contended that in  the  light  of  the  adverse  factors
    identified by the judge,  insufficient  reasons  were  then  given  for
    finding in the appellant's favour.  In the  second  ground,  the  judge
    erred in failing to properly take into account the Secretary of State's
    adverse decision, which was that the appellant had worked in breach  of
    the conditions attached to his visa, rather than a finding that he  was
    not running a  business.   The  fact  of  his  previous  deception  was
    considered in great detail in the letter giving reasons for the removal
    decision.   The  appellant's  first  application   in   2010   included
    deception.  The asylum claim was not a genuine one and there was also a
    two year period of overstaying, between the end of the judicial  review
    and the next application for leave.   The  guidance  given  in  IY  was
    relevant here.  The judge ought to have taken it into  account.   There
    were material errors in the decision.  Looking at things in the  round,
    the overall conclusion reached by the judge that the ECAA  requirements
    were met might be described as close to irrational.

7.   Ms Bassiri-Defouli said that the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  was
    clear in IY that adverse factors including  fraud  "may"  lead  to  the
    benefits of the Ankara Agreement being denied.  There was no  mandatory
    requirement.  The determination was very long and showed that the judge
    had put questions to the Presenting Officer, on precisely  the  matters
    now raised by Mr Melvin.  The judge noted carefully all the points made
    by the Secretary of State in her refusal letter, as he did the evidence
    of the witnesses and the submissions.  He looked closely at the letters
    relating to the 2010 application.  He made some clear adverse findings,
    including attaching little weight to  the  documents  produced  by  the
    appellant at the hearing.  He properly went on to find that he  had  to
    consider, nonetheless, whether the requirements of HC 510 were met.  He
    carefully highlighted  the  documentary  evidence  and  assessed  which
    findings could properly be made.  He turned to  the  case  against  the
    appellant at paragraph 54 and, again,  this  showed  that  he  had  the
    Secretary of State's case in mind.  The judge was entitled to  conclude
    that the appellant had been running a business.   He  returned  to  the
    deceptive activities at paragraph 56.  The Secretary of State was wrong
    to say that deception was not considered, as an  adverse  factor.   The
    judge found that if the appellant were relying on his own resources, he
    would be in difficulties but he could turn to his  relatives,  and  was
    able to rely on third party support.

8.    Sufficient  reasons  were  given  for  the  judge's   findings.    His
    assessment was brought together in paragraph 58 and he was entitled  to
    conclude that the requirements of paragraph 21  of  HC  510  were  met.
    There was no material error of law.  Overstaying was not  a  basis  for
    refusal in itself but could be taken into account  and  the  judge  had
    indeed done so in his assessment.  He analysed the invoices which  were
    before the Tribunal and also had  before  him  HMRC  documents  in  the
    supplementary  bundle,  as  was  clear  from   paragraph   8   of   the
    determination.



Conclusion on error of law

9.   As Ms Bassiri-Defouli said in her submissions, the determination  is  a
    long one.  It is extremely thorough and has been  prepared  by  a  very
    experienced judge.  Most of the decision concerns the  ECAA  aspect  of
    the case.  The judge gave cogent  reasons  for  dismissing  the  asylum
    claim and there was no challenge before me to those findings.

10.  As Mr Melvin said, the Secretary of State's letter  containing  reasons
    for the removal decision was detailed, including  in  relation  to  the
    ECAA application made by the appellant in March 2010.  The Secretary of
    State also identified as adverse  factors  the  period  of  overstaying
    before the appellant sought to make further efforts to  regularise  his
    stay, the failed judicial review applications and the meritless (in her
    view) asylum claim.  The Secretary of State  then  properly  considered
    paragraphs 4 and 21 of HC 510, forming a view on  the  merits  of  that
    application, taking into account supporting evidence made available  by
    the appellant's solicitors in the spring and early summer of 2014.

11.  It is clear that the judge had  all  of  these  features  of  the  case
    clearly in mind.  There is a very detailed summary of the letter giving
    reasons for the removal decision and, having read it  closely,  I  find
    that it is an accurate summary.  The Secretary of State's  emphasis  on
    factors including deception in the 2010 application and the  period  of
    overstaying are set out in the introductory  paragraphs.   The  judge's
    summary of the documentary evidence before him  is  also  detailed  and
    thorough and it has not been suggested that  any  salient  feature  has
    been overlooked.  The appellant's supplementary  bundle  included  more
    recent evidence regarding his business activities, including  a  letter
    from HMRC and invoices, the most recent dating from July 2014.

12.  The judge's full engagement with the evidence and the  issues  is  also
    shown in his summary of the evidence-in-chief and cross-examination  of
    the witnesses.  Paragraphs 18 and 19, by way of example, show that  the
    judge properly sought to clarify the evidence  regarding  the  computer
    business relied upon by the appellant, as he did  the  invoices  relied
    upon as showing business activities.   As  Ms  Bassiri-Defouli  pointed
    out, the judge also sought to  clarify  the  submissions  made  by  the
    respondent and, at paragraph 33, he  gave  the  Presenting  Officer  an
    opportunity to explain that the "standstill clause"  does  not  prevent
    Member States from penalising abuse relating to immigration, within the
    framework  of  national  law.   The  Presenting  Officer  was  able  to
    emphasise that dishonesty was an important aspect of the  Secretary  of
    State's case.

13.  The judge's assessment begins at paragraph 45.  He first considers  the
    appellant's  credibility,  with  an  appropriate  focus  on  the   ECAA
    application, introduced into the proceedings by  way  of  notice  under
    section  120  of  the  2002  Act.   Here,  the  judge   gave   detailed
    consideration to deception at the time  of  the  2010  application  and
    refusal and he made a series of adverse findings in paragraph 49 of the
    determination which were  properly  open  to  him.   He  concluded  (at
    paragraph 50) that little weight should be  attached  to  some  of  the
    documents produced at the hearing, or to the  appellant's  explanations
    regarding the references provided.   He  properly  went  on  to  direct
    himself that HC 510 required an assessment of the  application  on  its
    merits.  He had some concerns over  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    current business activities and regarding the bank statements provided.
     He took into account adverse findings made in the High  Court  in  the
    2013 application for judicial review.  Having weighed the evidence, and
    having taken  into  account  the  adverse  factors  as  well  as  those
    supporting the appellant's case, he concluded that a business plan  was
    made available to the Secretary of State at an earlier  date  and  that
    the computer repair business the appellant had established required  no
    significant  investment  in  terms  of  equipment.   He  found  in  the
    appellant's favour that third party support from relatives, within  the
    scope of the rules, was available.  He took into account and  carefully
    assessed the Secretary  of  State's  findings  against  the  appellant,
    regarding the business account and the extent of the funds available to
    meet the appellant's liabilities.  Contrary to  the  assertion  in  the
    grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal, I  find
    that there was no misconception in paragraph 56 of  the  determination.
    All the judge had in mind there was that the Secretary of  State's  own
    enquiries revealed evidence of business activity.  The judge was  clear
    that the adverse point made by the Secretary  of  State  was  that  the
    business was being  run  without  any  permission  or  authority.   His
    finding that the deception related  to  embellishing  genuine  business
    activity rather than seeking to show business activity  when  none,  in
    truth, existed was open  to  him.   His  mention  of  an  "intra  rules
    discretion" referred to his assessment of the position under  paragraph
    4 of HC 510 and, again contrary to what appears  in  the  grounds,  the
    judge gave reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  paragraph  4,  properly
    applied, should not lead to refusal of the application.

14.  The threads of the analysis are brought together  in  paragraph  58  of
    the determination and the summary which appears there  is  concise  and
    shows the reasons  why,  on  balance,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 21 of HC 510 were met.  Again, the author  of
    the grounds contends that no reasons have been given  for  the  judge's
    findings but a careful reading of the determination shows that this  is
    simply not so.  The determination  shows  a  painstaking,  step-by-step
    assessment of the cases advanced  by  both  parties  and  the  decision
    contains fully-reasoned findings of fact and conclusions.

15.   In  summary,  I  conclude,   notwithstanding   Mr   Melvin's   careful
    submissions, that no material error  of  law  has  been  shown  in  the
    decision.  The judge had in  mind  and  took  fully  into  account  the
    Secretary of State's case against the appellant and the adverse factors
    identified by her.  Having weighed the evidence overall, the judge  was
    entitled to conclude as he did.

DECISION

16.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.

17.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  an  anonymity  direction  and  I
    maintain  it.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant or any member of  his  family.   This
    direction applies both to the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent  and
    failure to comply with it might lead to contempt of court  proceedings.





Signed        Date 13 January 2015

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal R C Campbell


