
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03421/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2015                          |On 27 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                          MR ABDUL MOMIN SAHIBLADAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Selwood, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co (Solicitors) Harrow
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 1 February 1973.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  16
    November 2012 and made application for international  protection  as  a
    refugee.  On 9 May 2014 a decision was made to refuse  the  application
    and the Appellant appealed.

 2. On 2 December 2014 his appeal was heard  by  Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Manuell, sitting at Richmond.

 3. The case which the Appellant advanced, and which was accepted in  every
    material particular, "to the required standard and beyond", was as  set
    out in the application for permission to appeal following the  decision
    of Judge Manuell to dismiss the appeal and is as follows:

         "He supported and was involved with the  Hezb-e-Islami  party;  his
         step-brother Noor Ullah Sahibzadah (recognised as a refugee in  the
         United Kingdom) was a Commander in the organisation.  In  2003  the
         Appellant's house was raided by the  Taliban.   The  Appellant  was
         approached  by  the  Taliban  on  several  occasions  and  received
         threatening letters to join them.   They  kidnapped  him  in  2005,
         during which he was interrogated about  his  brother's  activities,
         starved and beaten.  He escaped and informed his nephew who  was  a
         police officer.  The police subsequently raided the place where  he
         was held, and a number of members of the Taliban were killed.   The
         Appellant's nephew was also killed, along with six  other  officers
         in 2006. The  Appellant  fled  Afghanistan  and  initially  claimed
         asylum in Italy; his application was never determined  there.   The
         Appellant eventually arrived in the United Kingdom on  16  November
         2012."

 4. Given the standard of prove which Judge Manuell found had been met,  it
    is implicit  that Judge Manuell also the Appellant's evidence  that  he
    remained on the Taliban's wanted list; they had  their  own  government
    system and had information about him.  Judge Manuell accepted also that
    the Taliban had sent  to  the  Appellant  threatening  letters.   Judge
    Manuell had looked at the country of origin  information  report  which
    supported that aspect of the Appellant's evidence.

 5. Where Judge Manuell felt that the appeal did not  succeed  was  on  the
    basis of the effluxion of time. On Judge Manuell's findings it had been
    ten years  since  there  were  any  significant  events  affecting  the
    Appellant.  Judge Manuell noted that the Appellant had requested police
    assistance in 2005  and  that  assistance  had  been  forthcoming;  the
    Appellant's nephew had been a police officer and he caused  a  raid  on
    the Taliban hideout where the Appellant  was  being  held  in  2005.  A
    number  of  police  officers  however  were   killed,   including   the
    Appellant's nephew.  Judge Manuell found the level  of  protection  now
    available sufficient and in the alternative  relocation  was  a  viable
    option.

 6. Judge Manuell had regard to the expert report of Mr Jawad Hassan  Zadeh
    expressed the view that Mr Zadeh's assessment of the  conditions  which
    the Appellant would face on return was "unduly pessimistic".

 7. Not content with the decision of Designated Judge  Manuell,  by  Notice
    dated 22 December 2014 application was made for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal. On 15 January  2015,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Deans
    granted permission. His reasons were stated as follows:

         "1)  Designated Judge Manuell dismissed this appeal on  asylum  and
             human rights grounds.  The  judge  accepted  as  credible  the
             Appellant's evidence of kidnapping  and  mistreatment  by  the
             Taliban in 2005 and the account of events which  preceded  and
             followed this.  However, the judge's conclusion was that lapse
             of time together with  the  adequacy  of  protection  and  the
             possibility of internal relocation to  Kabul  meant  that  the
             appeal would not succeed.

         2)   The application for permission to appeal, which  was  made  in
             time, contends that the judge overstated  the  lapse  of  time
             since the events in  question  occurred  and  failed  to  have
             proper regard to an expert report on the risk to the Appellant
             in  Afghanistan.   The  judge  did  not  properly  assess  the
             viability of internal relocation having regard; in particular,
             to the fact the Appellant's home was in the province of Kabul.

         3)   The grounds are arguable."

 8. For the Secretary of State, Mr Tarlow  submits  that  Designated  Judge
    Manuell had clearly had regard to the report of Mr Zadeh; reference  is
    made to it at paragraphs 25 and 26 of the Decision and Reasons.  Having
    focused on the report and noting the assistance given to the  Appellant
    by the police in 2005, in reliance upon the Secretary of State's  "Rule
    24  Notice",  dated  23  January  2015,  Mr  Tarlow  submits  that  the
    Designated Judge Manuell made findings that were open to him  and  that
    the grounds amount no more than a disagreement  with  the  findings  of
    Designated Judge Manuell all of which were open to him.

 9. The first ground of appeal focuses on paragraph 26 of the Decision  and
    Reasons  in  which  Designated  Judge  Manuell  viewed   the   expert's
    assessment of the conditions which the Appellant would face  on  return
    to Afghanistan as, "unduly pessimistic."  I invited Mr Tarlow to assist
    me in pointing to evidence which justified that contention in the  face
    of the expert evidence, when there had  been  no  suggestion  that  the
    expert was without expertise in respect of  those  matters  upon  which
    that expert had been invited  to  comment.  He  accepted  that  it  was
    something of a challenge but pointed to the assistance  that  had  been
    afforded to him by the police in 2005.

10. On the other hand, the  reasons  given  for  finding  that  Mr  Zadeh's
    assessments were unduly pessimistic  were,  in  the  submission  of  Mr
    Selwood largely immaterial.  The fact that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    foreign tourist but an Afghan national who had kept in touch  with  his
    own country was  not  a  factor  which  was  capable  of  assisting  in
    determining the extent to which the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on
    return.  The same was true of the fact that the Appellant had  kept  in
    touch with other Afghan nationals in the  United  Kingdom.   Designated
    Judge  Manuell  criticised  Mr  Zadeh's  report  for  failing  to  give
    sufficient attention to the  regular  visits  to  Afghanistan  made  by
    members of the Afghan diaspora from western countries in order  to  see
    their relatives but Mr Selwood pointed to the  fact  that  that  was  a
    point which in large measure was  supportive  of  the  Appellant.   The
    background material demonstrated that  where  individuals  have  family
    support they are less likely to be at  risk.    This  Appellant  was  a
    person who did not have that material family support.  The  whereabouts
    of his family was unknown and the nephew who had  been  able  to  offer
    protection was dead.  That the Appellant was only one of  many  Afghans
    who had encountered violence with the Taliban in the past  did  not  of
    itself assist either so that in essence Mr Selwood submitted  that  the
    only point that was  material  was  that  the  Appellant  had  received
    support from the police in 2005 though I note  too  that  reference  is
    made to the Appellant being Pashtun, being a majority ethnicity with  a
    large population in Metropolitan Kabul.

11. Mr Tarlow took me to the operational guidance note of September 2014 at
    3.10.3 which states;

         "President Kharzai has stated publically that he is open to talking
         with  anti-government  insurgents,  and  the  United   States   has
         encouraged this exploration to be an Afghan led  and  Afghan  owned
         process.  However, Taliban members made clear that they  would  not
         cease fighting, accept the Afghan constitution, or engage with  the
         Afghan government directly.  The Afghan government is  implementing
         a lower level reconciliation and reintegration process, called  the
         Afghan peace and reintegration programme.  It works to  reintegrate
         lower level and less ideological elements among the  insurgents  by
         encouraging them to end their armed opposition  to  the  government
         and to reintegrate peacefully in society.  However, the  number  of
         participants has been low, and as of June 2007, ISAF estimates  did
         not exceed 2,000 individuals."

12. Mr Tarlow sought to interpret that paragraph  as  suggesting  that  the
    number of Taliban insurgents was low  but  Mr  Selwood  invited  me  to
    accept  that  the  passage  was  simply  referring  to  the  number  of
    participants in the reconciliation  and  reintegration  process.  I  am
    bound to say that I much prefer  Mr  Selwood's  interpretation  of  the
    passage.

13. The Secretary of State's own evidence about sufficiency  of  protection
    is nuanced.  At 2.2.16 it reads:

         "If the ill treatment/persecution is  at  the  hands  of  non-state
         agents, then the provision of state protection outside of Kabul and
         other main cities might not be accessible  due  to  the  structural
         weakness of the security services.  In Kabul and other  cities  the
         authorities are in general willing to offer protection to citizens;
         however their willingness and ability to do so needs to  be  judged
         against the individual  facts  of  each  claim.   It  is  important
         therefore the caseworkers refer to the  most  up  to  date  country
         information to ascertain whether in the circumstances prevailing at
         the time the decision is made, effective  protection  is  available
         for an individual applicant, taking full account of their  personal
         circumstances."

14. Against that, Mr Zadeh's opinion, rejected by Judge Manuell,  was  that
    in Kabul the places with the majority of Pashtun  populations  are  the
    most dangerous areas where the  Taliban  and  Hezb-e-Islami  have  many
    active insurgents, spies and sympathisers.  Insofar  as  Judge  Manuell
    was suggesting therefore that the Appellant was a majority Pashtun  who
    might find protection in Kabul, that had to be read in the  context  of
    it being a dangerous area with the Taliban  having  active  insurgents.
    Further at paragraph 14 of his report, Mr Zadeh states,

         "A person to survive in Kabul or in any Afghan provinces must  have
         immediate and extended family members who are willing  and  capable
         of providing support."

    That goes to the point which I have already made with  respect  to  the
    observation of Designated Judge Manuell that  there  are  Afghanis  who
    return to Afghanistan to see their families. However, the  question  is
    whether the Appellant has that support.   Further  and  in  any  event,
    there was, Mr Selwood pointed out, material errors in the  findings  of
    fact by Judge Manuell because though Judge Manuell speaks of the events
    having occurred ten years ago, the Appellant's  nephew  was  killed  in
    2006, some eight years ago and the last letter the  Appellant  received
    from the Taliban was in 2007, some seven years ago in circumstances  in
    which it appears to have been accepted that  the  Appellant  was  on  a
    wanted list.  (In each case the calculation is by reference to the date
    of the hearing in the First-tier).

15. In my judgment there was no sufficient basis for rejecting  the  expert
    evidence of Mr  Zadeh.  Designated  Judge  Manuell  found  him  "unduly
    pessimistic" but the reasoning is, I find, and as Mr  Selwood  submits,
    insufficient given the lower standard which is to be applied  in  cases
    such as this.  The police were prepared to  assist  the  Appellant  but
    that nephew is now dead.

16. Past events inform what is reasonably likely to occur  in  the  future.
    The Appellant has been found to be a person  with  a  profile.  He  has
    demonstrated that he has been a person of interest to  the  Taliban  in
    the past. In my judgment given the expert  evidence  which  was  before
    Designated Judge Manuell to find that the Appellant was  no  longer  in
    danger were he to return was to ignore the real  risk  consequent  upon
    the Appellant, being a person with a  profile  remaining  on  a  wanted
    list.  Designated  Judge  Manuell  in  being  prepared  to  expose  the
    Appellant to that risk, in my judgement, set the  threshold  too  high.
    There is a reasonable risk of persecution facing this  Appellant.   The
    expert evidence was that  there  was  no  sufficient  protection.   The
    expert evidence was that  the  police  force  was  infiltrated  by  the
    Taliban and therefore unreliable.  Even the Secretary  of  State's  own
    evidence demonstrates that whilst there may have been some improvement,
    when taken together with the expert evidence, it is not sufficient  for
    a person such as this Appellant.

17. The issue of internal relocation arises but the Appellant  is  and  was
    from Kabul province.  Insofar as it is  suggested  that  the  Appellant
    might relocate  anywhere,  it  is  to  Kabul  which  clearly  would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh given the facts.

18. Whilst enormous respect is to be given to the attention which has  been
    given by Designated Judge Manuell, a very experienced judge, I am bound
    to find that on this particular occasion he  has  materially  erred  in
    failing to give sufficient weight to  the  expert  evidence  and  being
    influenced, as submitted in the grounds, by factors,  which  on  closer
    examination, cannot really be said to be relevant. The  fact  that  the
    Appellant would not be a not a foreign tourist but an  Afghan  national
    who has kept in touch with Afghanistan in various ways is  not  capable
    of assisting in the assessment of whether the Appellant is less  likely
    to be at risk were he to return to Afghanistan.  The same  is  true  in
    respect of the contacts which he has maintained in the United  Kingdom.
    As a Pashtun, the expert evidence is that he would be in an area  which
    is most violent and therefore  the  risk  would  be  all  the  greater.
    Designated Judge Manuell suggested that Mr Zadeh's report fails to give
    sufficient attention to regular visits to Afghanistan paid by the  many
    members of the Afghan diaspora in order to see their relatives but as I
    have already observed, the Appellant's evidence was to the effect  that
    he does not know where his family are and the one member of his  family
    who could offer protection, his nephew has been killed,  he  being  the
    one connected with the police.  That there have been many  Afghans  who
    have encountered violence in Afghanistan does not point to any enhanced
    protection to the Appellant nor is it a  relevant  consideration.   One
    needs to focus on this particular Appellant being a person who is on  a
    list.  What is more  it  was  not  ten  years  since  the  last  events
    affecting this Appellant but rather sooner.

19. In all the circumstances there is, I find a material error of law  such
    that the decision cannot stand and having regard to the totality of the
    evidence including the report of Mr Zadeh I find to the lower  standard
    that the Appellant had proved his case.


Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The  Decision  of  Designated
Judge Manuell is set aside and remade such that the appeal is allowed  both
on asylum and human rights grounds (Articles 2 and 3).



Signed        Date 26 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
