
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03212/2014
                                                               AA/03215/2014
                                                               AA/03218/2014
                                                               AA/03219/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th March 2015                   |On 15th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              (1)  Liang Jie Li
                              (2)  You Le Wang
                               (3)  Mina Wang
                               (4)  Anni Wang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Kirk (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants comprise a mother and her three children.   The  mother,
    the first Appellant, was born on 8th February 1986.  The children  were
    born consecutively on 13th August 2006, 25th  May  2009,  and  on  17th
    August 2011.  All are citizens of China.

 2. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Graham, promulgated on 5th September 2014, following a hearing at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 29th July 2014.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeals of the said Appellants.  They  subsequently
    applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is based upon  that  of  the  mother,  the  first
    Appellant, who alleges that she would face mistreatment in China due to
    her religion, and the fact that she is a follower of the Dong Sang Shan
    Dian cult.  In January 2006, the first  Appellant  discovered  she  was
    pregnant.  The first Appellant went to her boyfriend's  friend's  house
    in Fuqing City, where she lived for a month before leaving  China  with
    the assistance of an agent.  The first  Appellant's  asylum  claim  was
    dismissed because it was not accepted she was a member  of  this  cult.
    In her interview she was unable to answer basic questions regarding the
    cult's beliefs.  Her biblical knowledge was inconsistent with the claim
    to be a follower.  However, on 9th August 2010, her solicitors  made  a
    further application claiming that she had established a family life  in
    the UK as her parents-in-law had recently been granted indefinite leave
    to remain and her husband was  present  in  the  UK,  although  it  was
    accepted that he was without status.  The Appellant submitted a foreign
    marriage document confirming the date of her marriage to Xiu Ming Wang,
    a Chinese national, on 6th April 2005, in China.  She  claims  to  have
    three children by her  husband,  and  these  are  the  remaining  three
    Appellants in this appeal.  Mr Wang  is  the  illegal  entrant  in  the
    United Kingdom and he remains without status.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how,

         "The children were aged 7 years and 8 months; 4 years and 3  years.
         They were all born in the UK.  The Secretary  of  State  took  into
         account that it was generally accepted  that  the  children  should
         grow up with their families in their own  cultural  identity  where
         possible.  It was noted that the oldest child had  integrated  well
         into school in the United Kingdom ..." (Paragraph 24)

 5. Nevertheless, the Secretary of State  was  satisfied  that  the  eldest
    child would be able to resume educational skills that he  has  acquired
    during his stay in the United Kingdom in China.

 6. The judge also noted how the Secretary of State had accepted  that  the
    principal Appellant was,

         "Of good character but she had never  been  given  valid  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom, her claim for asylum being refused on
         23rd October 2006 was not appealed; she therefore should have  left
         the United Kingdom at this stage.  Although the Appellant had  been
         in the United Kingdom for a period of eight years,  she  had  never
         had any valid leave to remain ..." (Paragraph 26)

    Another feature of this claim was that,

         "The Secretary of State considered the nearly four  year  delay  in
         dealing with her submissions and acknowledged the time  delay,  but
         it was considered that this was outweighed by the illegal residence
         she [the principal Appellant] had accrued  during  her  failure  to
         leave the United Kingdom when her claim had ended." (Paragraph 27)

 7. The judge weighed the public interest in the balancing exercise.  There
    was the public interest in requiring the Appellants to return to China.
     He observed that the case of EB (Kosovo) had long ago established that
    "the weight to be attached to the public interest is reduced because of
    the delay in deciding the application" and that  "the  Section  117  of
    2014 Act requires me to consider the public interest factors listed  in
    Section 117B" (see paragraph 57).

 8. The judge concluded that the decision to remove the Appellant from  the
    United Kingdom was not disproportionate.  He decided that,

         "I find therefore that Article 8 is not engaged.   I  am  satisfied
         that even though this finding means that the three children in  the
         UK will return to  China  has  not  altered  this  finding.   I  am
         satisfied that given the ages of the children, it is in their  best
         interests to continue to live with the Appellants."

 9. The judge came to this conclusion on grounds that the children were not
    British citizens despite their lengthy stay in the UK.  They  were  all
    without status.  They could speak the local dialect upon return.   They
    could also attend schools in China.  They had  extended  family  there.
    As far as the grandparents of the children were concerned, it was noted
    that they now had leave to remain in the  UK,  but  there  was  nothing
    stopping them from visiting the children in China or  moving  there  to
    live with their son and grandchildren (paragraph 15).  The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

The Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge misdirected herself  by
    failing to consider and apply authority on the significance of a  seven
    day period of  residence  for  a  child.   In  this  case,  the  second
    Appellant, the child by the name of You Le Wang, had lived  in  the  UK
    for almost eight years, but the judge failed to adequately consider the
    significance of this period in accordance with the well-known authority
    in Azimi-Moayed v SSHD [2013] UKUT 00197.

11. In this case the Appellant had expressly relied upon Azimi-Moayed where
    the Upper Tribunal had made  it  clear  (at  paragraph  13(iii))  that,
    "lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin can lead
    to development of social, cultural and educational ties that  it  would
    be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of compelling reason to the
    contrary".   The  judge  had  made  no  reference  whatsoever  to  this
    principle.  It was plain that it had been ignored.

12. Secondly, the judge failed to apply Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act
    which provides that  there  is  no  public  interest  in  removing  the
    Appellant of a child who has  lived  in  the  UK  for  seven  years  in
    circumstances in which it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave the UK.  Whereas the judge states (at paragraph 46)  that  she
    has taken into account "the relevant provisions of  Section  117B"  she
    plainly excludes consideration of Section  117B(6)  from  the  list  of
    considerations that she expressly has regard to.

13. On 9th January 2015, permission to appeal was granted expressly on  the
    basis that the judge erred in law  in  failing  to  take  into  account
    paragraph 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.

14. On 22nd January 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that
    the  judge  had  given  regard  in  substance  to  Section  117B(6)  at
    paragraphs 55 to 56, and that  this  provision  was  not  a  standalone
    provision, in any event.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me on 20th March  2015,  Mr  Kirk,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellants, as he did in the Tribunal below, relied  upon
    the Grounds of Appeal.  He made the following two submissions.   First,
    at the date of the hearing  before  Judge  Graham,  the  eldest  child,
    namely, You Le Wang,  was  just  under  8  years  of  age.   He  was  a
    "qualifying child".  He potentially stood to satisfy  the  requirements
    of Section 117B(6).  The judge failed to give any consideration to this
    provision.

16. The judge referred to factors (4) and (5) but deliberately omitted  any
    reference to factor (6) and this must be an error of law.  Second,  the
    judge failed to take into account the import of  the  determination  in
    Azimi-Moayed.  It was expressed and brought to  the  attention  of  the
    judge.  But there is no consideration of this in the determination.

17. For his part, Mr Smart relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He  submitted
    that Section 117B(6) had in terms been taken into account if one looked
    at paragraphs 55 to 58 of the determination.  Second,  the  judge  gave
    consideration to the Supreme Court judgment in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC  74,
    where the Supreme Court had held that where things are  not  all  equal
    different considerations apply, such as  the  absence  of  any  of  the
    children  being   British   citizens   (see   paragraph   52   of   the
    determination).

18. In reply, Mr Kirk submitted that whatever the import of  Section  117B,
    it had not supplanted the jurisprudence in  Azimi-Moayed,  which  still
    applied.  The eldest child was just under 8 years old at  the  time  of
    the hearing.  He was now aged 8 years and 7 months.   The  simple  fact
    was that Section 117B(6) was just not considered at all by the judge.

Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law.  This was  on  account  of  a
    failure to consider that which ought to have  been  considered  and  to
    have regard to matters relevant to the decision.   High  amongst  these
    matters is Section 117B(6), which expressly makes  it  clear  that  the
    public interest "does not require the person's removal where" a  person
    has "a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying
    child" and it is the case that "it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom".  The plain fact  here  is  that
    the eldest child, You Le Wang, was a "qualifying child" in that he  had
    been in the UK for seven years.

20. The only  other  question  for  the  judge  was  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  Given that
    the  children  have  not  lived  in  China,  are  integrated  into  the
    educational and social fabric in  this  country,  and  given  that  the
    jurisprudence in Azimi-Moayed is clear in emphasising the importance of
    a lengthy period of stay for children amounting to seven years  in  the
    UK, it was important for the judge to give  express  consideration  to,
    whether in the context of the  position  of  a  "qualifying  child"  as
    defined in Section 117B(6), it could be  said  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to  relocate  to  China.   The  complete
    absence of any reference to Section  117B(6),  in  circumstances  where
    other factors are mentioned, is an error of law.

21. Second, and no less importantly, the complete absence to  reference  to
    Azimi-Moayed, amounts to an error of law, given that it was made  clear
    in that case that, "what amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut
    but past and present policies have identified seven years as a relevant
    period".  This is a compelling statement.

Re-Making the Decision

22. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before her, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.
     First, the Appellant children have plainly developed social, cultural,
    and educational ties with the UK which it  would  be  inappropriate  to
    disrupt in the absence of compelling reasons to the contrary.   Second,
    the fact that the eldest child, You Le Wang, was just under 8 years  of
    age, having lived all his life in the UK, is such that his seven  years
    in this country must be treated as a relevant period  of  lengthy  stay
    that cannot be easily ignored.

23. Mr Wang gave evidence before the judge (see paragraph 41) to  say  that
    "his children were all born here they  cannot  speak  Chinese  and  all
    their friends were here".  The Section 55  duty  under  the  BCIA  2009
    requires there to be an enquiry  into  what  is  in  the  child's  best
    interests, with a proper regard to the children's own wishes in respect
    of determinations from the president of the Tribunal, such as  Ugo  and
    JO,  have  confirmed  the  importance  of  this  duty.   It  cannot  be
    overlooked.

24. Finally, the dicta in Azimi-Moayed with respect to the significance  of
    a period of seven years' residence in the UK, which  in  this  case  is
    practically the entire duration of the second Appellant's  life,  means
    that, on the facts of this case, the decision  can  only  go  one  way.
    This appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        11th April 2015




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        11th April 2015
