
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03830/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21st August, 2013                          |On 30th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                                ahmedi kaaya
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Miss M Rasoul, instructed by Miles Hutchinson &
Lithgow Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Hilary Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Uganda who was born on 12th April 1981.

2.   The appellant left Uganda on a direct flight  to  the  United  Kingdom,
    arriving on 10th March, 2005.  He was arrested during a joint police/UK
    Borders Agency visit to a carwash business in  London  on  26th  April,
    2010.

3.   The appellant claimed asylum on his arrest, but his claim was  rejected
    by the respondent who, on 29th March, 2012, decided to remove him  from
    the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant. The appellant  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bircher
    on 15th  May,  2012.   She  dismissed  his  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, the Human Rights Convention and against the refusal of  the
    respondent to grant him humanitarian protection.

4.    On  20th  September  2012  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Spencer   granting
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal said this:

         "I take the view that it is arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge's treatment  of  the  report  of  Dr  Warrington,  a  Medical
         Foundation doctor, amounted to an error of  law.  She  appeared  to
         give  it  little  weight  because  she  had  already  rejected  the
         credibility  of the appellant's account and wrongly thought that Dr
         Warrington expressed the opinion only  that  the  scars  which  the
         appellant bore were consistent with the account of  how  they  were
         inflicted, given by the appellant, when in fact  there  were  three
         scars which were diagnostic of the attributions  given,  ten  scars
         which were typical of the attribution given  and  twenty-two  scars
         which were highly consistent with the  attribution  given,  besides
         twenty-seven scars which were consistent.  Dr Warrington's  opinion
         was that the total picture of the  scars  was  strong  evidence  of
         torture. All of the grounds may be argued.


         NOTE: For the reasons set out above I have  taken  the  provisional
         view that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal should  now  be  allowed
         and the Upper Tribunal should proceed to a hearing to  re-make  the
         decision  of the  First-tier Tribunal at which none of the findings
         made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  to  be  preserved.    Any
         submissions to the contrary must be  made  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), Field House, 15 Breams Buildings,
         London EC4A 1DZ, marked for the urgent attention of Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Spencer, within 28 days of the date of this Order."

5.   No submissions to the contrary were received and  the  matter  was  set
    down for hearing on 21st August, 2013, before me in North Shields.

Oral Evidence of the Appellant

6.    The  appellant  was  called.   The  interpreter  and  appellant   both
    confirmed to me that they understood each other.  The appellant told me
    that he was born on 12th April, 1981 and that he was a Ugandan citizen.



Evidence-in-Chief

7.   The appellant told me that he was unmarried but does have  a  child  in
    the United Kingdom who is now aged 1 year and 8 months.   He  is  in  a
    current relationship with his son's mother, who is Ugandan citizen. The
    appellant's son lives in London and the appellant sees him roughly once
    a month.

8.   While living in Uganda, the appellant attended university  and  studied
    religious studies and history.  He did not complete his degree.

9.   The appellant left Uganda in 2005,  because  he  thought  that  he  was
    about to be arrested by the government.  He supported Dr Besigye.   The
    appellant had supported him from 1999.  The appellant was not a  member
    of a political party at that time, but later he joined  Reform  Agenda,
    which later become FDC.  The appellant claimed to  have  joined  Reform
    Agenda in 2002.  The appellant said that  during  the  campaign  Reform
    Agenda's theme was to reform the political agenda in Uganda.

10.  I made a brief note in my Record of Proceedings that the appellant  was
    not  answering  the  questions  he  was  asked,  but  appeared  to   be
    obfusticating.  There  was  nothing  unusual  or  difficult  about  the
    questions.

11.  The appellant said that  he  joined  FDC  and  was  the  secretary  and
    organiser and a mobiliser.  This was for Bulo Town Council.

12.  In 1999 he was arrested and taken to a police cell.  He  told  me  that
    the cell was 8' by 10' and there were eight people in it.  He was  held
    in this cell for further days.  The appellant was asked why he had been
    arrested and his reply was that he had been arrested  because,  "I  was
    mobilising the youth" and he was supporting the new leader.  He gave no
    details of what he had actually  been  doing  that  caused  him  to  be
    arrested and was, I believed, another example of his obfustication.

13.  The appellant told me that his cell was dirty and a bucket was used  as
    a toilet which was never emptied.  The occupants of the cell  were  fed
    once a day and they were all being beaten almost all the  time.   Dirty
    water was thrown at them and the appellant told me that he  was  kicked
    in several places.  They were not provided with any medical  treatment.
    The appellant was stripped naked and  had  nothing  to  cover  himself.
    There was no bed to lie on.  When he was being beaten he was told  that
    he should not, "mess around with the government".  It  was  the  police
    officers who beat him who had said this.

14.  The appellant received his injuries during this time.  He has scars  on
    his legs and had bruises on his back and  swelling  on  his  chest  and
    mouth.  He bled  and  vomited  blood.   He  received  no  treatment  in
    custody.

15.  On his release, the appellant said  that  he  received  treatment  from
    hospital.  He was in hospital for three days.  His  father  got  him  a
    doctor and eventually he got better.

16.  The appellant told me that it took him a long time to  recover,  almost
    seven months.  After  his  release  he  continued  with  his  political
    activities. He was asked what he actually did  and  he  said  that  he,
    "continued to mobilise people" until the 2001 elections, but he gave no
    details.  The appellant had on several occasions been  asked  questions
    which called for him to give  an  explanation  of  what  his  political
    activities consisted of and he appeared to either be reluctant to  tell
    me, or was simply not able to tell me.

17.  The appellant said that he was arrested  and  imprisonment  because  of
    his support for Dr Besigye in 2001. He was at  the  university  at  the
    time.  He took part in a debate  when  riot  police  came  and  he  was
    arrested.

18.  The appellant said that  he  was  hurled  to  the  ground,  handcuffed,
    thrown into a pickup truck and the police sat on him.  He did not  know
    where he was.

19.  The place was pitch black and there was no light and there  was  a  lot
    of torture when he was in that place.

20.  The appellant said that "they" used electric shock  "and  a  gun  butt"
    and he was held for seven days.  He was told that he would be killed if
    he did not give up his political activities.

21.  The appellant  said  that  after  his  release  he  become  politically
    involved again.

22.  The appellant told me he would never give up.  If he were to return  to
    Uganda now he would carry out political activities.  He did not suggest
    what they might consist of.

23.  The appellant claimed to have been in hiding until  his  departure  and
    had no more problems.  The  Ugandan  government  did  not  like  people
    questioning their authority.

14.  The appellant  left  Uganda  because  the  situation  had  become  more
    dangerous.  He was assisted by his parents and took their  advice  that
    he should claim asylum.

25.  The appellant said he left Uganda because of the situation and  because
    of what he had been through.  He had become "strongly opposed"  to  the
    government.

26.  Before he left Uganda, he had been studying at university and had  been
    involved in a debate at university on  an  earlier  occasion.   Between
    2003 and 2004 he stood up at Freedom Square with youth from  UYD.   UYD
    jointly with the Besigye supporters were  speaking  out  and  the  riot
    police again attacked people. The appellant said he escaped.

27.  If he were to return to Uganda now he thought he would be arrested  and
    imprisoned, because the current situation  in  Uganda  means  that  the
    government do not allow assemblies of more than four  or  five  people.
    As a result, the appellant cannot talk to people.  He told me, "We need
    change in the country".

28.  The appellant was shown a photocopy of a Forum  for  Democratic  Change
    membership card in his name dated 10th May, 2007.  He told me that  the
    card had been sent from Kampala.  He had bought the card from the  head
    of the party. He was then shown a letter dated "5th,  05,  2010"  which
    said that it was from the secretary of the party.  It had been sent  by
    facsimile and the original was in Kampala. He told me he  was  still  a
    member of the FDC.

29.  The appellant was then shown a letter dated 11th March, 2001 signed  by
    Major General Katumba Wamala.  He said  it  was  sent  by  one  of  his
    friends he had stayed with in Kampala.  His friend is not a  policeman,
    but he has contacts with the police.

30.  The letter claimed that the appellant  was  wanted  by  the  police  in
    Uganda for crimes committed during the 2001 elections.  It was  pointed
    out to the appellant that the letter  was  dated  the  day  before  the
    election.  He said he could not remember the date. The campaigning  had
    carried on since 1999.  He was arrested and had been held.

31.  The appellant said he left Uganda in 2005. The police letter  is  dated
    2001 because the police had not arrested him. They had not arrested him
    because he was  hiding and avoiding places where he  thought  that  the
    police might get hold of  him.   He  was  studying  at  the  time.   He
    attended evening lectures.

Cross-examination

32.  The appellant confirmed that he left Uganda in 2005  after  his  father
    had suggested he should claim asylum.   He  did  not  claim  asylum  on
    arrival, because he did not know the procedure.  He was in fear because
    of what he had gone through and did not know what might happen to  him.
    When he was arrested by police and UK Border Agency officials,  he  was
    taken to Oakington.  He was booked on a flight.  Someone  in  Oakington
    was claiming asylum and they helped him make a claim.

33.  The appellant was referred to the medical report.  The  appellant  said
    he had not told the doctor that he was a keen footballer. He said  that
    he watches a lot of football but does not play football now.   He  used
    to as a child.  He told me he had not coached in football.  Between the
    date of the incident at the university and leaving Uganda the appellant
    had not been employed.

34.  He was referred to the three documents he had  produced  and  explained
    that he did not have the originals.  He believed that  his  friends  in
    Uganda may have been scared to send them to him.

Re-examination

35.  In 1999 the appellant  had  been  held  in  detention  but  then  found
    himself in hospital.  He discharged himself and went home.   After  his
    2001 detention he was simply abandoned on the street.

36.  The appellant then told me that it had been  the  military  police  who
    had detained him.

37.  The appellant confirmed that he was not married  to  his  son's  mother
    although he would like to get married when his case  is  resolved.   He
    told me he did not know if his son's mother had a visa  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom but he thought her leave had expired.

Submissions

38.  I then heard submissions from the Home Office representative  who  told
    me that she relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  She asked me  to
    note that the five years delay in claiming asylum was despite the  fact
    that the appellant claimed that his father had  advised  him  to  claim
    asylum.  She asked me to bear in mind that this was a man who had  been
    educated at university and was clearly intelligent.  She  asked  me  to
    make adverse findings on the appellant's credibility and to  attach  no
    weight to the documents he produced.

39.  Counsel reminded me that the appellant's delay in claiming  asylum  had
    been lengthy, but it had to be borne in mind that he was frightened  of
    uniforms and particularly of people in  authority.   The  documents  on
    which the appellant seeks to  rely  actually  support  the  appellant's
    claim, as does the medical evidence.   Counsel  addressed  me  at  some
    length referring to the objective evidence submitted and invited me  to
    allow the appeal.

40.  I reserved my determination.

The Law

 41. In asylum appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant to show  that
    returning him to Uganda will expose him to a real risk  of  persecution
    for one of the five grounds recognised by the 1951  Refugee  Convention
    or to a breach of his protected human rights.  The question of  whether
    a person has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason
    has to be looked at in the round in  the  light  of  all  the  relevant
    circumstances and judged against the situation as at the  time  of  the
    appeal.  In human rights appeals, if it is established that there  will
    be an interference with the appellant's human rights and  the  relevant
    Article permits, then it is for the respondent to  establish  that  the
    interference is justified.

42.  The standard of  proof  in  asylum  appeals  as  regards  to  both  the
    likelihood of persecution and the  establishment  of  past  and  future
    risks, is a real risk.  In Kacaj v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (01/TH/0634*) it was held by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal
    that the standard of proof in human rights appeals is the same as  that
    in asylum appeals.

Background Evidence

43.  I confirm that I  have  carefully  read  and  examined  the  background
    evidence.  I have of course paid particular attention to those parts of
    the background evidence that Counsel drew my attention to, but  I  must
    make it clear that I considered it all.

44.  I noted the  Voice  of  America  report  of  Peter  Clottey  dated  4th
    February 2013.  He referred to a prominent Ugandan  political  activist
    asking the International Criminal Court to  investigate  alleged  human
    rights abuses.  Dr Kizza Besigye was reported as saying:-

         "There  are  widespread  crimes  and  atrocities  that  have   been
         committed and the important thing  is  that  the  criminal  justice
         system in the country presently  is  incapable  of  handling  these
         cases because of the compromised [state] of  the  criminal  justice
         system."

45.  The next document was a report of Human Rights Network For  Journalists
    - Uganda dated 6th February, 2013, and referred to  the  police  having
    arrested  nine  anti-corruption  activists   for   distributing   anti-
    corruption materials at Makerere University.  The report said  that  it
    was the third time that members of  an  anti-corruption  civil  society
    group had been arrested and questioned by the police  for  distributing
    anti- corruption news bulletins.

46.  In a subsequent Human Rights Network For Journalist  report  dated  8th
    February, 2013, it was said that journalists continue to be attacked by
    security agencies, mainly the Ugandan police,  and  verbal  threats  of
    arrest and closure of media houses  which  "sabotaged  the  government"
    continue.

47.  The next document in the appellant's bundle was the  UK  Border  Agency
    Operational Guidance Note of 20th March 2013.   This  referred  to  the
    UNHCR registering a total of  1,021  new  complaints  on  human  rights
    violations during 2011, a 28% increase over 2010.   There  was  also  a
    22.2% increase in the number of claimants  to  UNHCR  relating  to  the
    right to a fair and speedy trial. The constitution and law provide  for
    an independent  judiciary  and  the  report  spoke  to  the  government
    generally respecting this provision in  practice.  Judicial  corruption
    was said to be a problem.  The  slow  pace  of  civilian  justice  also
    violated human rights law. Detainees  remain  in  custody  for  several
    years pending trial  and  many,  including  those  accused  of  serious
    crimes, face long remand times and lack  legal  representation  or  the
    ability to apply for bail.  Executive influence was said not  undermine
    judicial independence. The prison system  is  reportedly  operating  at
    only three times its intended capacity.

48   Mr Rasoul drew my attention to paragraphs 3.10.4  to  3.10.11  which  I
    set out below:-

         "3.10.4 Power of  incumbency  -  Many  observers  argued  that  the
         National Resistance Movement (NRM)  had  switched  its  tactics  to
         massive  payments  to  voters,  pointing  to  large   supplementary
         appropriations that had been passed by  Parliament  shortly  before
         the  elections.25  Each  party  received  an  inadequate   official
         financial allocation for its campaigns based on the number  of  its
         representatives in Parliament, a policy that  advantaged  the  NRM.
         NRM candidates, particularly the president, tapped state funds  for
         their races.  Parliament  passed  a  supplemental  budget  of  $260
         million in January 2011 that observers believed was  largely  spent
         on campaigns. Further, the NRM  mobilized  far  more  contributions
         from foreign and local business interests than other parties.26

         3.10.5 Space for opposition - Approximately  38  political  parties
         were registered. The ruling NRM party operated without restriction,
         regularly holding  rallies  and  conducting  political  activities.
         Authorities occasionally restricted some  activities  of  the  main
         opposition parties by refusing permission for them to  hold  public
         demonstrations and preventing opposition leaders from appearing  on
         local radio stations.27 This was particularly  the  case  in  rural
         areas.  Many  candidates  were  threatened,  had   business   loans
         recalled, had tax bills hiked, and found it difficult to  get  time
         on radio and TV stations.28

         3.10.6 While the constitution provides for freedoms of assembly and
         association,  the  government  did  not  respect  these  rights  in
         practice. The UPF continued to  require  advance  notification  and
         approval for public gatherings, despite a 2008 Constitutional Court
         decision nullifying  section  32(2)  of  the  Police  Act  and  the
         requirement to obtain written police approval for any  assembly  of
         25 persons or more. During the year the  UPF  routinely  restricted
         the right to assemble freely. Opposition parties and civil  society
         organizations  critical  of  the   government   that   sought   UPF
         authorization for public  gatherings  often  received  no  official
         response or were instructed  not  to  assemble.  Police  often  met
         attempts to assemble by these
         groups with excessive and brutal force.29

         3.10.7 The government's  respect  for  the  rights  of  freedom  of
         association and assembly deteriorated  over  the  past  few  years.
         Political and civil society  activists  were  frequently  attacked,
         arbitrarily arrested, and held for long periods without trial.  The
         police prevented or aggressively broke up several rallies in  which
         demonstrators were demanding a change  in  the  membership  of  the
         Electoral Commission in 2009 and 2010. In  2011,  police  tried  to
         prevent the  -Walk  to  Work|  demonstrations.  In  doing  so,  the
         security forces killed  at  least  ten  protestors  and  repeatedly
         arrested scores of others, including many civil  society  activists
         and politicians.  To  prevent  Kizza  Besigye,  a  main  opposition
         candidate, from -walking to work the police  confined  him  to  his
         home while refusing to charge him. In several recent  cases,  while
         attempting to maintain political order,  police  have  killed  both
         demonstrators, including students protesting  conditions  in  their
         schools, and bystanders.30

         3.10.8 The government maintained its intolerance for opposition for
         the rest of the year. In September, Vincent Nzaramba, the author of
         a book advocating  peaceful  protest  to  overthrow  Museveni,  was
         detained for several days and said  he  was  physically  abused  in
         custody. Attempts to renew the April-May protests in October led to
         40 arrests and treason charges-which can carry the  death  penalty-
         for three of the organizers. The charges  were  pending  at  year's
         end.31

         3.10.9 While there were no reports of  political  prisoners  during
         the year, hundreds of  opposition  politicians,  supporters,  civil
         society  activists,  journalists,  or  others   critical   of   the
         government were detained on politically motivated grounds for short
         periods. Many of these individuals were  released  without  charge.
         Others were released  after  being  charged  with  crimes  such  as
         treason, inciting violence, and promoting sectarianism. None of the
         hundreds of people arrested for protesting rising prices during the
         walk-to-work campaign were convicted  of  an  offense,  and  courts
         dismissed all walk-to-work related cases brought to  trial  by  the
         DPP for lack of evidence.32



         3.10.10 Conclusion. Despite Uganda  allowing  the  registration  of
         opposition political  parties,  some  opposition  political  groups
         continued to face restriction on  their  ability  to  assemble  and
         their supporters were subjected to political  violence,  harassment
         and sometimes ill treatment by  the  authorities.  Some  opposition
         supporters were detained by  the  security  forces  and  some  face
         charges of treason. However, others  who  were  similarly  detained
         were released without charge.


         3.10.11 Each case must  be  decided  on  its  individual  facts  to
    determine whether a
         particular applicant is at risk. In some cases, particularly  those
         of prominent members of  political  parties  or  those  accused  of
         treason who have been detained for long periods  of  time  and  who
         have suffered at the hands of the Ugandan authorities, a  grant  of
         asylum or Humanitarian Protection may be appropriate.  However,  in
         other cases such as that of a low level activist detained for a few
         days and then released without charge, the harassment suffered will
         not reach the level of persecution or breach Article 3 of the  ECHR
         and therefore they will not  qualify  for  a  grant  of  asylum  or
         Humanitarian Protection."


49.   The  Human  Rights  Watch  World  Report  2013  for  Uganda   reported
    increasing threats to freedom of expression, assembly  and  association
    as raising concerns about Uganda's respect for the  rule  of  law.  The
    security forces continue to enjoy immunity for  torture,  extrajudicial
    killings and the death of at least 49 people during  protests  in  2009
    and 2011.

50.  Police  interference  in  unlawful  obstruction  of  public  gatherings
    remains  a  significant  problem  often  accompanied  by  arrests   and
    detentions of organisers and participants.

51.  The police leadership described  the  police  rapid  response  unit  in
    December 2011 explicitly  because  of  its  poor  human  rights  record
    renaming it the "Special Investigations Unit".  However the police have
    failed to investigate abuses committed by Rapid Response Unit  officers
    or ad hoc operatives, some of whom continued to  work  in  the  Special
    Investigation Unit. Four members of the  Forum  for  Democratic  Change
    appeared before court charged with treason.  They complained of torture
    in detention having been detained by the SIU for fourteen days.

52.   Electoral  violence  was  said  to  have  marred  six  of   the   nine
    parliamentary bi-elections held between February and September 2012.

53.  I also read the US State Department Report for 2013  which  also  spoke
    of the constitution and law prohibiting cruel,  inhumane  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment.  It referred to parliament  having  passed  an
    anti-torture bill to criminalise torture. Anyone committing an  act  of
    torture faces up to fifteen years imprisonment and a fine equivalent to
    US$2,860  or  both.   The  penalty  for  aggravated  torture  is   life
    imprisonment.

54.  Prison conditions remain poor  and  in  some  cases  life  threatening.
    Arbitrary arrests during police swoops also remained a problem  as  did
    arbitrary arrests based  supposedly  on  sedition,  treason,  promoting
    sectarianism, incitement of violence or terrorism charges.  There  were
    reports of political prisoners during the  year  and  in  addition  the
    authorities detained  several  opposition  politicians  and  more  than
    twenty supporters on politically motivated grounds for short periods.

55.   While  the  constitution  provides  for  freedom   of   assembly   and
    association, the government was said not to have respected these rights
    in practice.  The UPF routinely restricted the right to assemble freely
    and police officer meet attempts to  assemble  by  opposition  activist
    students and workers with excessive and brutal force.  Police  arrested
    hundreds of persons for allegedly participating in  unlawful  assembly.
    During the year none of the hundreds of protestors arrested during  the
    2011 "walk to work" events, protests that began against  the  country's
    soaring fuel and food prices, had been  convicted of any offence.

56.   According  to  "New  Vision  Uganda"  dated  10th  January  2001,   48
    supporters  of  presidential  aspirant  Nasser  Ntege  Sebaggata   were
    remanded in Luzira prison for allegedly taking  part  in  the  previous
    Monday's riots at Ntinda, a Kampala suburb.

57.  I was provided with a copy of a similar document dated 3rd  March  2001
    comprising an interview with a former major Okwir Rabwona.  I also read
    the report of Voice of America dated  20th  March,  2001  referring  to
    Besigye being questioned after a series of  violent  attacks  following
    the presidential elections.  I also read the Voice of America Report of
    10th March, 2011 written shortly before the presidential elections, the
    report of 20th November, 2000 referring to Ugandan opposition  policies
    bracing for a confrontation with the security forces following an order
    from the police to stop the ongoing campaign  and  rallies  by  various
    aspirants  who  have  had  declared  an  interest  in  contesting   the
    presidential elections and I read the US State  Department  Report  for
    2009 and the US State Department Report for 2003. Also included  within
    the report was an Amnesty International Report for 2000 and an  Amnesty
    International Report for  2001  but  my  attention  was  not  drawn  to
    anything in particular in either of those documents. Finally I  confirm
    that I have read the Freedom of the World  2011:  Ugandan  paper  dated
    12th May 2011 which added littlie to the information I gleaned from the
    earlier documentation.

Medical Report

58.   Included  within  the  bundle  was  a  medical  report  following   an
    examination of the appellant by Dr S Warrington on 10th September 2010,
    6th October, 2010 and  22nd  October,  2010.   Dr  Warrington  recorded
    numerous scars on the appellant that she saw  during  her  examination.
    Two scars, one on his right arm and one on his left arm were attributed
    by the appellant to his elbows being tied behind his back.  The  doctor
    referred to the marks as being diagnostic of prolonged  application  of
    tight ligatures. She said that it was difficult to imagine  any  trauma
    of this nature occurring in everyday life. Two  further  scars  on  his
    arms were attributed by the appellant to being dragged on  the  ground.
    These were also said to be consistent with the  attribution  given.   A
    scar on the appellant's right arm and right leg were said to be typical
    of a burn with  a   hot  object  and  that  on   his  leg  was   highly
    consistent with a stab wound. Other scars were  attributable  to  being
    beaten with cables. The linear nature of the  scars  was  said  by  the
    doctor to be  highly  consistent  with  beatings  with  a  cable.   The
    appellant attributes one scar on his arm, a cut with a stick which  was
    found to be consistent, but it was pointed out that it  may  have  been
    sustained by any sharp object. Further scars were consistent with being
    caused by cables but it was said that they could have  been  caused  by
    any form of sharp instrument. Two scars  were  said  to  be  caused  by
    beatings with sticks or beatings with cables and they  were  consistent
    with the attribution given.

59.  Further scars were said to be caused by beating  as  a  result  of  the
    appellant using his arm to protect his face.  Those scars were   highly
    consistent with the attribution given.  The appellant attributed a scar
    on his leg to a burn as he withdrew from a  hot  knife.  The  scar  was
    cyclical of contact with a hot object  and  the  well  demarcated  line
    suggested that contact was more prolonged than that resulting  from  an
    accidental  brief  contact.   There   are   other   scars   which   are
    unattributable which were also said to be consistent with  the  history
    given of severe beatings and ill-treatment.  A scar on the  appellant's
    back was attributed to being beaten with sticks and the scars were said
    to be highly consistent.  A further scar on his back was attributed  to
    being beaten.  The report points out that its location means that it is
    very unlikely to  have  been  accidental  in  nature  and  was   highly
    consistent with trauma such as being beaten. Scars on  his  trunk  were
    said to be consistent with the claimed beatings as were  scars  on  his
    legs.  There were further scars  attributed  to  being  kicked  by  the
    appellant which were found to be consistent and scars caused by  burns,
    also said to be consistent.

60.  The appellant attributed one scar to being stabbed  with  a  knife  and
    another to being stabbed but the implement  used  was  not  identified.
    The wounds were said to be typical.  The doctor attributed  four  scars
    to bayonet stab wounds which were said to be indicative and typical  of
    stab wounds. The doctor  pointed  out  it  was  difficult  to  envisage
    accidental causes for the four deep penetrating wounds.  The  appellant
    had other scarring which were found to be  consistent  and  the  doctor
    found that scars or his ankle were diagnostic of prolonged  application
    of tight ligatures.  It was stated by the doctor that it  is  difficult
    to envisage any sort of trauma occurring in everyday  life  to  produce
    these appearances.  The appellant attributed scars on his leg to  being
    burned with hot water and an irritant chemical.  The scar was  said  to
    be the typical of a burn and was in  a  highly  unusual  place  for  an
    accidental burn.  Two further scars were also said  to  be  in  unusual
    locations for an accidental trauma. They were also said  to  be  highly
    consistent with deliberately inflicted traumas such as beatings.

61.  I have not sought to detail every scar identified by the doctor, but  I
    have very carefully read the report in  full.   In  her  conclusion  Dr
    Warrington says:-

         "[the appellant] is a 29 year old man from Uganda who describes two
         detentions in 1999 and 2001 during which he was beaten with  sticks
         and electric cables, kicked, slapped and burned.  He  was  forcibly
         restrained, stabbed with bayonets and knives and immersed in  human
         waste. The medical evidence gives me no reason to doubt Mr  Kaaya's
         history of  his ill-treatment.


         He is suffering from significant and chronic  psychological  stress
         related to his experiences.  I believe that he  is  suffering  from
         PTSD as a result of what he has been  through.


         In my examination I have documented three scars that are diagnostic
         of the attributions of torture given and ten scars that are typical
         of attribution of torture given.  He has 22 scars that  are  highly
         consistent with the attribution of torture given and 27 scars  that
         are consistent, bearing in mind that a number  of  scars  had  been
         grouped together for ease of description.  Given the total  picture
         of the scars, these scars in fact constitute strong evidence of the
         torture as  described  i.e.  they  are  typical  rather  than  only
         consistent.  Ultimately,  it  is  the  overall  evaluation  of  all
         lesions and not the consistency of each lesion  with  a  particular
         form of torture that is important in assessing the torture story.


         The number of scars themselves is significant. When taken together,
         and having observed Mr  Kaaya's  affect,  demeanour  and  responses
         throughout, it is difficult for me to reach a conclusion that  they
         were caused in any innocent manner. "

62.  It was in the light of the  background  evidence  and  Dr  Warrington's
    medical report I considered the evidence before me and made my findings
    of fact.

Findings of Fact

63.  Before reaching any conclusions on the  evidence,  I  examined  it  all
    carefully in the round.  The fact that I have dealt with my findings in
    the order I have is not to be taken as an indication that I have  first
    looked at one piece of evidence and reached a conclusion on it, without
    considering all the evidence.  I first considered it  all  and  in  the
    round. I have been careful to set the evidence into context against the
    background evidence and I bore very much in  mind  the  report  of  the
    highly experienced  doctor  who  carried  out  an  examination  of  the
    appellant.


64.  I make the following findings of fact and give  my  reasons  for  those
    findings:-

    (1)  The appellant is a citizen of Uganda, who was born on 12th  April,
         1981.


    (2)  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  his  own  passport
         on 10th March, 2005.  He claimed asylum  following  his  arrest  by
         police and UK Border Agency officers on 26th April, 2010.


    (3)  I was left with the very clear impression of the  appellant  being
         someone who appeared to me to be politically na�ve.


    (4)  I thought it curious that whenever the appellant was asked what he
         did he declined to give specific  examples,  instead  making  vague
         claims about, "bringing the  youth  together  to  get  involved  in
         current affairs in order to achieve democracy in Uganda".


    (5)  He claimed to have been, "stopping the mistreatment of people", of
         trying to "limit the  level  of  unemployment",  of  "stopping  the
         government from harassing people", of "fighting for a better life".
         But when he gave oral evidence  he  gave  no  examples  at  all  of
         precisely work he did on behalf of the party.  I was left with  the
         very distinct impression that the evidence the appellant was giving
         me was made up and bore no relationship to the truth.


    (6)  I did not believe that  if  the  appellant  had  been  politically
         active in Uganda he would have found it so difficult,  when  giving
         oral evidence, to have given me examples of what he  actually  did.
         He gave me only one answer where he actually described what it  was
         that he  had  done,  but  not  in  giving  oral  evidence.  He  was
         specifically asked at his interview how he motivated the  youth  to
         become involved with the FDC and he replied:

             "We introduced football games with trophies  from  village  to
             village including both boys and girls.  We  awarded  different
             trophies so we could  meet and introduce our  reasons  and  to
             inform everybody."

    7) The appellant claimed that he was arrested  by  police  officers  in
       1999 and held for fourteen days in Bulo village. He did not tell  me
       what he was actually doing which lead to  his  arrest,  but  he  was
       asked.


    8) During his detention, he claims that  he  was  beaten  severely.  He
       claims that he was electrocuted and  kicked.   He  was  slapped  and
       punched.  His hands were tied by behind him and his legs  were  tied
       and he was repeatedly kicked.  He refers to hot metal  being  placed
       on his right thigh and to being cut. He was hit with  metal  on  the
       left leg and beaten and water was poured over him.  He was hit  with
       a gun. He was punched, kicked and he confirmed  that  he  was  never
       officially charged. He was asked if he was released  after  fourteen
       days and he replied that he was not taken to court. He  claims  that
       "they took me to hospital for three days. On  the  fourth  day  they
       took me back home and then my father obtained a doctor  and  treated
       me whilst I was at home".

    9) The appellant claimed that attended at a university at Makerere  and
       claims that in 2001, during a public political  debate,  the  police
       came and arrested people.  He did not explain why he  was  arrested.
       When asked he simply said it because of his support for  Dr  Besigye
       in 2001.

   10) He claimed that he was taken to an unidentified location and beaten.
       He had said he was pulled after he fell to  the  ground  and  beaten
       father and his thigh was burned with hot metal.  His head was placed
       under a small chair with his hands tied  behind  him  while  he  was
       kicked and beaten with guns. Later he was kicked in the stomach  and
       genitals. He was held for seven days with eleven others. When he was
       released he was told not to talk about the government again.  He was
       not charged. The appellant then claimed that in 2003, 2004 while  at
       university he was attending a debate on the current state of affairs
       in the country and the police raided the meeting and  he  dispersed.
       He went back to his hall of residence. He was chased by officers and
       the appellant ran to the second floor where he lived.  His room  was
       tear-gassed and he managed to run away.   The  appellant  was  asked
       why, if the last problem he had was in 2003  or  2004,  he  had  not
       decided to come to the United Kingdom until 2005. He explained  that
       he was still a supporter of  the  FDC  and  his  problems  had   not
       stopped. He said he was fed up with being tortured and, "my life was
       in the line of being arrested and killed, for I was still  insisting
       in belonging to a party that fights to topple the government".


   11) The appellant did not claim that he feared being arrested  following
       the events of 2003 or 2004.  He told me that he had been  in  hiding
       and yet, at the same time, he attended evening lectures.


    (12)     I did not believe  that  the  appellant  had  been  in  hiding
         between 2003 or 2004 (whichever it was) and when he left in 2005. I
         did not think it credible that if he was being actively  sought  by
         the Ugandan police, he would have  been  able  to  attend  lectures
         without being arrested.


    (13)     The appellant left Uganda on his validly  issued  passport.  I
         did not believe that he would have been able to  obtain  a  Ugandan
         passport in his own name if he was actively  being  sought  by  the
         police at the time.

    (14) It was only during the hearing that the appellant  suggested  that
         the police officers who arrested  him  may  not  have  been  police
         officers, but people dressed up as police officers.  He alluded  to
         this when it was pointed out to him that the letter from FDC  dated
         5th 05 2010  spoke  about  him  being  kidnapped  by  "plainclothes
         military  intelligence  officers".   At  his  interview  he  simply
         referred to them as being "the police".


    (15)     At  the  hearing  the  appellant  was  specifically  asked  to
         describe the releases from his detention. He said that in  1999  he
         found himself in hospital and was discharged and taken   home.   In
         2001 he was simply abandoned on the street.  I do not believe  that
         either is credible if he was treated the way he described and if he
         was genuinely thought to  have  been  wanting  to  bring  down  the
         government as he claims.


    (16)     I am prepared to accept that there is a real  likelihood  that
         the appellant has, at sometime in the past, been detained and  that
         he may even have been detained in Uganda.  I am  even  prepared  to
         accept that he may  well  have  been  detained  on  more  than  one
         occasion, but I do not accept that this appellant was detained  for
         political  activities  and  neither  do  I  accept  that   he   was
         necessarily detained by the Government of Uganda.  He was  able  to
         describe his claimed political activities to me other than  is  the
         vaguest of terms and when giving evidence was reluctant  to  answer
         simple questions put to him without going off at a complete tangent
         in his answer.  He gave me the very clear impression of  making  up
         his evidence as he was giving it.  I  believe  that  he  was  vague
         because he was anxious not to be caught out contradicting  himself.
         I do not believe that the events he described actually happened.

    (17)     The appellant claims that he fears he is going to be  arrested
         if he returned to Uganda, but he  appears  to  have  lived  without
         difficulty between either 2003 or 2004, and when he left  in  2005.
         He claims that he was in hiding, but I  do  not  believe  him.   He
         claims that he was attending evening lectures.  I believe  that  if
         he had been actively sought by the police (or some other government
         agency) he would not have been able to attend university  lectures.
         The authorities had,  according  to  the  appellant,  broken  up  a
         meeting at the university.  The first place they would have started
         looking for the appellant would have been  at  the  university,  if
         they had truly been interested in detaining him.


    (18)  I  believe  that  it  has  wholly  undermines   the   appellant's
         credibility that having been advised by his father in 2005 to leave
         the country and seek asylum elsewhere, the appellant  came  to  the
         United Kingdom and waited until after he was arrested,  five  years
         later, before claiming asylum.   He is an intelligent and  educated
         man.  I did not believe that he could possibly have not  known  how
         to claim asylum, if he had been advised by his father to leave  the
         country and to seek asylum elsewhere.


    (19) Applying the low  standard  of  proof  to  which  I  have  earlier
         referred, I am prepared to accept that the appellant has,  at  some
         stage in the past, been the subject of mistreatment,  but  who  was
         responsible and in what circumstances, it is impossible for  me  to
         say.  I am left in no doubt, however, that it was not sustained  in
         the manner in which he describes.


    (20) Even if I had believed that the appellant had  been  detained  and
         ill-treated by the authorities, (and in case  there  is  any  doubt
         about it, I wish to make  it  perfectly  clear  that  the  evidence
         before me is such that it is insufficient to allow me to say that I
         believe that there is a real risk that he  was  detained  and  ill-
         treated by the Ugandan Government or their agents) the fact is that
         he had subsequently been released.  I do not condone torture or ill-
         treatment, but the appellant remained  in  Uganda  for  four  years
         after his last arrest.


    (21) The  documents  on  which  the  appellant  relies  simply  further
         undermines the appellant's claim. The FDC card  is  actually  dated
         10th May, 2007 by which time he was already in the United  Kingdom.
         It refers to  him being aged 28 years  and  being  in  the  Kampala
         district, the Kawembe-South  constituency  and  the  Kawempbe  sub-
         county and the parish is described as  being  Makerere  University.
         The appellant was born in 1981.  When  he  arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom, it was just before his 24th birthday.  The card  is  dated
         10th May, 2007, but at that time the appellant would only have been
         26 years of age, not 28 years of age.  It was clearly issued to him
         when he was in the United Kingdom.


    (22) The next letter purports to be signed by a Major  General  Katumba
         Wamala, Inspector General of Police and purports to come  from  the
         Central Police Station Kampala. It is headed "Re Wanted" and says:-

             "This is to notify  authorities  and  the  public  that  Kaaya
             Muhamed is wanted by the  Central  Police  Station  Kampala  -
             Uganda  to  be  charged  for  inciting  violence  against  the
             government of the Republic of Uganda.

             He did this crime in the 2001 presidential elections, he is  a
             renowned Forum For Democratic Change (FDC - leading opposition
             party) Youth Wing leader (Makerere University Branch)  and  he
             used his position to incite violence.


             If anyone knows his whereabouts/traces, he should  notify/help
             the police. Help the police and help you.


             Yours in service."

    (23)     The letter is dated 11th March 2001, one day before  the  2001
         presidential elections. Apart from being a very curious document to
         issue in the first place, I did not believe that if  the  appellant
         was genuinely wanted by the police, he would be describes as  being
         "a renowned Forum For  Democratic  Change  (FDC-leading  opposition
         party) Youth Wing leader".  I did not believe that a police office
         anxious to arrest someone who wanted to bring about the  down-throw
         of  the  Ugandan  Government  would  actually   describe   it   as,
         "renowned".   Similarly  I  thought  it  curious  that  the  letter
         referred to FDC   - "leading opposition party" and the fact that it
         described him as being a "Youth Wing  leader  (Makerere  University
         Branch)" simply gave some further cause to doubt its  authenticity.
         I believe that the penultimate sentence includes a typing error.  I
         believe that the words "way about" is intended to be  "whereabouts"
         and this further undermined the  authenticity  of  the  letter.   I
         concluded that it was not a document on which  I  could  place  any
         reliance.


    (24) I then considered the letter from the FDC Kampala.  The  date  was
         stated to be 5th, 05, 2010 and it was addressed to  the  UK  Border
         Agency.  Unfortunately the copy supplied to me appeared to  be sent
         by facsimile on several occasions and was very poor.  In  parts  it
         was barely legible. It said


             "I  hereby  introduce  you  to  the  above  gentleman  who  is
             presently in  UK.   Mr  Kaaya  Ahmed  was  among  our  leading
             Makerere University campus working as a  secretary  for  youth
             and  [indecipherable]  in   Reform   Agenda   (FDC).    During
             presidential [illegible] election Mr Kaaya was kidnapped by  a
             plainclothes as a [indecipherable]  of  military  intelligence
             (CMI) officers and was incarcerated  without  the  reassurance
             that people were aware [indecipherable].  He was interrogated,
             tortured  and  detained  in  different  cells  [indecipherable
             safe].


             After a certain period Mr Ahmed was abandoned along  the  road
             during the night due to ditorship and poor governance we  have
             here in Uganda.  [indecipherable] was  advised  to  leave  the
             country and to seek a political [indecipherable].  We [Kampala
             District FDC office] hereby recommend him/her for a  political
             asylum."

    (25)     Quite apart from the obvious fact that the letter did not give
         any indication as to  how  the  author  (who  signed  his  name  in
         handwritten print) was aware of the information  contained  in  the
         letter, the fact that it was dated May 2010 indicated to me that it
         was written after the appellant's arrest in the United Kingdom.  It
         was clearly written at the request of the  appellant  and  again  I
         felt unable to place any weight on it.


    (26) The appellant had clearly been in possession of a  UK  multi-entry
         visit visa granted to him in Kampala when  he  entered  the  United
         Kingdom.

    (27) As a further example the appellant's lack of credibility, I  noted
         that when he was asked by Ms Rackshaw on more than one occasion  if
         he had ever played or coached football, he said he had never played
         football, except as a child. However, at his asylum  interview  the
         appellant claimed that  he  was  mobilising  the  youth  to  become
         involved with the FDC by introducing football games  with  trophies
         from village to village to both boys  and  girls,  suggesting  that
         even if he was not actually involved in playing football, he had on
         his own account been organising football games. Quite why  he  felt
         unable to give an honest answer to the Presenting Officer I did not
         know.


Credibility

65.  I do not believe that the appellant is a witness of the truth.  I  have
    no doubt at all that he has completely fabricated his claim  to  be  in
    need of international protection.  He is not a credible witness  and  I
    did not believe anything he had said which was material to his claim to
    be in need of international protection.

66.  I do not believe that the appellant left Uganda in  2005  after  having
    spent time hiding from the authorities in Uganda. I do not believe  the
    authorities,  be  they  the  Ugandan  police,   military   intelligence
    officers, or anyone else in authority in Uganda, have any  interest  at
    all in the appellant.  He may very well have  been  detained  and  ill-
    treated at some stage in the past and it might even possibly have  been
    in Uganda, but the circumstances of  such  detention  and  mistreatment
    were not as he  described  to  me.  I  do  not  believe  there  is  any
    likelihood that on his return he will face any  serious  harm  or  ill-
    treatment.

67.  I dismiss the appellant's asylum claim.

Humanitarian protection appeal

68.  Since the appellant's humanitarian protection claim and Article  8  and
    3 the European Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms claims are based on the  same  factual  matrix,  I
    dismiss that also.

Human rights appeal - Article 8

69.  The appellant did not make a claim  that  on  his  removal  his  rights
    under Article 8 of the European Convention would be breached.  However,
    given that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2010  and
    given  also  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dealt   with   the
    appellant's Article 8 rights, I consider that I should consider whether
    the appellant's removal would cause the United Kingdom to be in  breach
    of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

70.  The appellant cannot bring  himself  within  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules (Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC  395,
    as amended).  It is necessary for  me  to  consider  his  rights  under
    Article 8 jurisprudence (see MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2012]
    UKUT 393 (IAC)).

71.  Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides for  respect  for  a  person's
    private and family life, their home and correspondence.  The  appellant
    has to show that the subject matter of the Article 8 subsists and  that
    the decision of the respondent will interfere with it.  If he does  so,
    it is for the respondent to show that the  decision  is  in  accordance
    with the law, that it is one of the  legitimate  purposes  set  out  in
    Article 8(2) in this case for the economic well-being of  the  country,
    for the prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others, and that it is necessary in a democratic
    society, which means that it must be proportionate.

72.  At paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham of Cornhill said this:
         "17.  In considering whether  a  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision to remove a person  must  clearly  fail,  the
             reviewing court must, as it  seems  to  me,  consider  how  an
             appeal would be likely to fare before an adjudicator,  as  the
             tribunal responsible for deciding the appeal if there were  an
             appeal. This means that the reviewing court  must  ask  itself
             essentially the questions which would have to be  answered  by
             an adjudicator.  In  a  case  where  removal  is  resisted  in
             reliance on article 8, these questions are likely to be:
             (1)      Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a
                  public authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's
                  right to respect for his private or (as the case may  be)
                  family life?
             (2)      If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                  such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of
                  article 8?
             (3)      If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
                  law?
             (4)      If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                  society in the interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
                  prevention of disorder or crime, for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
                  freedoms of others?
             (5)      If so, is such interference proportionate to the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"
73.  Undoubtedly the appellant has a well established a private life in  the
    United  Kingdom  even  having  been  here   for   some   eight   years.
    Unfortunately I have very little information about  his  private  life.
    The appellant does appear to have a family life but gave me very little
    information about it apart from the fact that he has a son who is now 1
    year 8 months old. The child's  mother  is  a  citizen  of  Uganda  and
    according to the appellant, her visa has expired. I am  satisfied  that
    the appellant does enjoy a family life, at the very least with his  son
    and possibly also with his son's mother, and the respondent's  decision
    does  amount  to  an  interference  with  it.   I  believe  that   such
    interference does have consequences of such gravity as  potentially  to
    engage the operation of Article 8;  the  threshold  for  which  is  not
    especially high (see paragraph 28 of the judgement of Sedley LJ  in  AG
    (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ
    801).

74   In the leading case of Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11,  [2007]  2AC  167  Lord
    Bingham said at paragraph 20:
           "In an article 8 case where this question [i.e. the question  of
           proportionality] is  reached,  the  ultimate  question  for  the
           appellate immigration authority is whether the refusal of  leave
           to enter or remain, in  circumstances  where  the  life  of  the
           family cannot reasonably be expected to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,
           taking full account of all considerations weighing in favour  of
           the refusal, prejudices to the family life of the applicant in a
           manner sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
           fundamental right protected by article 8. If the answer to  this
           question  is  affirmative,  the  refusal  is  unlawful  and  the
           authority must so decide."
75.  The interference is in accordance with the law and is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society for the economic well-being of the country; for  the
    prevention of disorder or crime; and for the protection of  the  rights
    and freedoms of others; the question is whether or not interference  is
    proportionate.  I have to bear in mind in considering  the  appellant's
    Article 8 appeal the fact that there is only one family life  and  that
    it is necessary to look at the family as a whole  and  to  regard  each
    affected family member as a fiction (see  Beoku-Betts  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39). I must also have  regard
    to the best interests of the appellant's child in the way  required  by
    paragraph 29 of the judgements in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4.   There
    are  no  considerations  inherently  more  significant  that  the  best
    interests of children.

76.  I have very little information concerning the appellant's son,  but  it
    must be in the child's best interests to live  with  both  his  parents
    although at the moment his is living only with his mother.   Since  his
    mother, apparently, has no right to remain in the United Kingdom, there
    would appear to be no reason at all why she should not return to Uganda
    with the appellant, if she and the appellant wish to be  together.   In
    any event, she has no right to remain in the United Kingdom.

77.  The appellant chose not to give any evidence relating  to  his  private
    life and appeared to be very reluctant to tell me anything at all about
    his family life or about his relationship with  his  son's  mother.   I
    accept that he sees his child once a month, but his mother  is  also  a
    citizen of Uganda and if they wish to live together and bring up  their
    child together, there would appear to be no reason why they  could  not
    do that in Uganda.

78.  I concluded that the appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom  was
    an entirely appropriate response on the part of the Secretary of State.
    This appeal is dismissed.

Summary
The appellant's asylum claim is dismissed.

The appellant's humanitarian protection claim is dismissed.

The appellant's human rights appeal claim is dismissed.








Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
