
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03331/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 29 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              JALALDIN AHMADZAI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty of Counsel instructed by Brighton Housing
Trust


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blake promulgated on 17 November 2014  allowing  Mr  Ahmadzai's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 6 May 2014 to refuse to
    vary leave to remain and to remove him from the United Kingdom.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Ahmadzai  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with   the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    Mr Ahmadzai as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.


Background


3.   The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. There was an initial  issue
    concerning his age, but following two age  assessments  the  Respondent
    accepted his date of birth as being 1 January 1996.


4.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in or  about  January  2009
    and claimed asylum on 19 March 2009.   His application was refused on 4
    September 2009 but he was granted discretionary leave until 4 September
    2012 as an unaccompanied minor.  On  4  September  2012  the  Appellant
    applied for further leave to remain which in due course was refused  on
    6 May 2014, and the decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  was  made  in
    consequence.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC. His appeal was allowed  for  reasons
    set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake.


6.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted on 8  December  2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Astle.


Consideration


7.   The Appellant's claimed history is summarised in the two  'Reasons  for
    Refusal Letters' ('RFRLs') of 4 September 2009 and 6 May  2014.  It  is
    also set out at paragraphs 16-29 of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It is unnecessary to repeat that claimed history here: I make
    reference as is incidental for the purposes of this decision.


8.   The experienced First-tier Tribunal Judge in a lengthy,  detailed,  and
    careful determination, having heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant
    made positive findings as to credibility.  In doing  so  he  took  into
    account those matters raised against the Appellant by  the  respondent:
    see determination at paragraphs 99 and 152.


9.   The Judge made the following findings in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    history at paragraphs 100-105:


          "100. I noted at the time of his arrival in the UK he had been but
             12 years of age. I accepted his account of the destruction  of
             his home and the death of his parents. I further noted that he
             had lost contact with his brothers.  I also  took  account  of
             the fact that at the time of his interview the  Appellant  had
             been only 13 years of age.


         101.  I further noted that he no longer considered himself to be  a
             Muslim. I noted from his appearance  before  me  that  he  had
             become westernised. I took into  account  the  fact  that  his
             foster care had been with English and Irish families.


         102.  I accepted the Appellant's  account  in  the  course  of  his
             evidence that his memory and behaviour had  changed  since  he
             had lived in the UK. I accepted from his account that  he  had
             undergone quite traumatic change.


         103. I further noted that he claimed he  had  lived  in  the  small
             village of Dubandai in the Loghar province and that  this  had
             been destroyed  in  the  course  of  hostilities.   I  further
             accepted his account that the only known relatives he had  had
             been that of his paternal uncle and cousins who had lived near
             the family home.  I accepted his  account  that  he  had  lost
             contact with them.


         104.  I noted that the Appellant had  made  contact  with  the  Red
             Cross and that he had been unable to trace his brothers or any
             other family.  I further noted that  the  Appellant  had  been
             absent from Afghanistan for some  six  years  and  had  become
             westernised.


         105.  I further took account of the  fact  that  the  Secretary  of
             State had made no attempt to seek  to  trace  the  Appellant's
             family. In respect of this  I  took  into  account  the  Upper
             Tribunal  decision  in  SHL  (Tracing  obligation/trafficking)
             Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00312 (IAC)."


10.  The Judge explained his findings, and also conducted a thorough  review
    of the supporting materials particularly relied upon by the Appellant -
    including both  evidence  in  respect  of  the  country  situation  and
    evidence in respect of the Appellant's  circumstances:  see  paragraphs
    108-151.  In respect of the country situation, it is to be  noted  that
    the Respondent did not place any particular  documentation  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and  did  not  expressly  rely  upon  any  specific
    country guidance cases in either of the RFRLs or at the hearing.


11.  The Judge then stated  his  conclusions  as  to  the  issue  under  the
    Refugee Convention at paragraph 157 in these terms:


          "I found that the Appellant was in danger of being returned  to  a
         hostile environment where he might be targeted by the  Taliban.   I
         found that he was westernised and on the evidence before me he  was
         likely to be singled out for ill-treatment on that basis.  I  found
         him to be a vulnerable individual who still depended  partially  on
         the assistance and help of social workers in the UK."


12.  The Judge then  went  on  to  consider  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules: see  paragraphs
    161-165.  The Judge found that the Appellant met  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules in this  regard.   At  paragraph  164  the  judge
    states:


          "I considered Rule 276ADE.  I found that the  Appellant  qualified
         under subparagraph (vi). I found that he was over 18 and had  lived
         in the  UK  for  less  than  20  years  but  there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to his reintegration into Afghanistan  if  he
         were required  to  leave  the  UK.   I  therefore  found  that  the
         Appellant was entitled to leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
         private life in the UK."


13.  I pause to note that the Respondent in the grounds in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal has not raised  any  challenge  in
    respect of the Judge's conclusions on  paragraph  276ADE,  and  thereby
    Article  8  private  life.   Ms  Holmes  acknowledged   that   in   the
    circumstances she  would  be  in  difficulties  in  pursuing  any  such
    challenge before me and does not seek to do so.  In those circumstances
    the  Judge's  decision  in  respect  of  Article  8,  taken  under  the
    Immigration Rules, stands.


14.   The  Respondent,  however,  does  raise  challenge  to   the   Judge's
    conclusions in respect of  protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention.
    Five bases of challenge are set out in the grounds in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal and Ms Holmes  relies  upon  those
    grounds.  I address them in turn.


15.  The first ground argues that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    his application of the standard of proof.  The ground is in two  parts.
    There is a general criticism with particular reference to  the  wording
    employed by the Judge at paragraph 157 of the determination.  Secondly,
    there is a challenge in respect of the Judge's  comments  at  paragraph
    123 of the determination.


16.  The Judge sets out his principal self-direction in  respect  of  burden
    and standard of proof at  paragraph  6.   The  Respondent,  through  Ms
    Holmes, acknowledges that there is nothing objectionable in that  self-
    direction.  Reliance however is placed by the Respondent on the use  of
    the words "might" and  "likely"  in  the  following  sentences  already
    quoted from paragraph 157.


          "I found that the appellant was in danger of being returned  to  a
         hostile environment where he might be targeted by the  Taliban.   I
         found that he was westernised and on the evidence before me he  was
         likely to be singled out for ill-treatment on that basis."


17.  Ms Easty acknowledged that  the  use  of  'might'  and  'likely'  could
    possibly  be  characterised  as  a  'looseness  of  terminology',   but
    emphasised that such conclusions and such wording must be seen  in  the
    overall context of the determination.  I agree.   I  am  not  persuaded
    that  the  use  of  those   words   denotes   a   misunderstanding   or
    misapplication of the relevant standard clearly set out  in  the  early
    part of the determination.  There is nothing else in the  determination
    to suggest that the Judge, as he embarked upon a careful  and  thorough
    analysis of all materials, had misunderstood or  misapplied  his  clear
    self-direction on burden and standard of proof.


18.  The Respondent's further aspect of challenge in this regard relates  to
    paragraph 123 which is in the following terms:


          "In the light of  this  background  information,  I  accepted  the
         Appellant's account of the trouble in his  home  district  and  his
         fears of returning there without any  family  networks  to  support
         him."


19.  The Respondent argues that this only indicates  an  acceptance  of  the
    Appellant's subjective fears,  and  therefore  does  not  constitute  a
    finding of whether or not those fears are well-founded.


20.  In my judgement paragraph 123 must  be  read  in  the  context  of  the
    preceding paragraphs,  in  particular  paragraphs  119-122.   In  those
    paragraphs the Judge makes reference to country information relating to
    the Appellant's home area and the level of violence and armed  military
    activity.  Given that paragraph 123 starts  with  the  phrase  "In  the
    light of this background information", it seems to me abundantly  clear
    that when the Judge states that he accepts  the  Appellant's  fears  of
    return at the present time he is making a finding that the  Appellant's
    expressed fears are well-founded against that background information.


21.  Accordingly I reject the  first  ground  of  challenge  raised  by  the
    Respondent.


22.   The  second  ground  of  challenge  is  in  respect  of  the   Judge's
    characterisation of the Appellant as being 'westernised'.  It is argued
    that  the  Judge  failed  to  identify  adequate  reasons  for  such  a
    conclusion.   Further, although not expressly pleaded in  this  way  in
    the written grounds, Ms Holmes queried what it was that the Judge meant
    by the term 'westernised'.


23.  In my judgement the appropriate  starting  point  is  to  consider  the
    basis upon which such a characterisation might have  been  relevant  to
    the Judge's overall conclusion that the Appellant would be at  risk  if
    returned  to  Afghanistan.   In  this  context  I  note  in  particular
    paragraph 151 in which the Judge quotes from the expert opinion  report
    of Dr Liza Schuster of the School of Social Sciences, City  University,
    London.  The relevant quotation is in the following terms:


          "To sum up - the level of violence over the  past  year  in  Kabul
         (and elsewhere) has increased and the decision  as  to  whether  it
         approaches  the  level  required  to  engage  Art.  15(c)  of   the
         Qualification Directive will need to be revisited regularly.  While
         the majority of  Kabul  citizens  go  about  their  everyday  lives
         accustomed to the risk of being in the wrong palace  at  the  wrong
         time, if it seems likely [the Appellant's] ethnicity or destitution
         forced him to live in certain parts of the city,  he  would  be  at
         greater risk from those who would see him as  contaminated  by  his
         time in the West, or assume that time spent abroad would mean he or
         his family would be able  to  pay  a  ransom.  Neither  the  Afghan
         government forces or the international forces are in a position  to
         offer protection to such individuals."


24.  In circumstances where the Judge has  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    'westernisation' might lead to him being singled out for  ill-treatment
    (see paragraph 157), the concept of being westernised must be  seen  to
    be understood through the perspective of those that might perceive  the
    Appellant "as contaminated by his time in the West".


25.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings in respect  of  the  Appellant
    being 'westernised' in  my  judgement  are  clearly  derived  from  the
    following aspects of the evidence that the Judge identifies:


         (i) "I further noted that he no longer considered himself to  be  a
         Muslim. I noted from his appearance before me that  he  had  become
         westernised.  I took into account the fact that his foster care had
         been with English and Irish families." (paragraph 101).


         (ii) At paragraph 125  where  the  Judge  makes  reference  to  the
         evidence of Mr Daniel Russell, the Appellant's social  worker,  who
         confirmed "that the Appellant had spoken to him about feeling  more
         English than Afghani".


         (iii) At paragraph 129 where reference is made to  the  Appellant's
         "self image as a UK resident".


26.  Ms Holmes queried the relevance of appearance to the concept  of  being
    westernised.  I accept that appearance is not a determinative indicator
    of how an individual may feel and think. Nonetheless, in  my  judgement
    it is a possible indicator that is appropriately taken into account 'in
    the round' with other factors.


27.   In  this  context  in  addition  to  the  observations  made  in   the
    determination by the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  Ms  Easty  directs  my
    attention to the nature of the  supporting  material  which  inevitably
    must have informed the Judge in reaching his conclusions, including  in
    particular photographs of the Appellant socialising with his friends in
    groups of mixed gender and in public bars.


28.  It is also to be noted that the context of  the  Judge's  consideration
    is in respect of an individual who has spent his adolescent years -  in
    reality having grown up in the sense of transitioning from childhood to
    manhood - in the United Kingdom.   It is also observed in the  evidence
    and noted by the Judge that the Appellant had a girlfriend  who  had  a
    child from a previous relationship.


29.  In all of the circumstances the Judge's conclusion that  the  Appellant
    was westernised in the sense that he might  possibly  be  perceived  as
    'contaminated by the West' is in  my  judgement  not  to  be  impugned.
    Accordingly I reject the second aspect of the Respondent's challenge.


30.  The third ground of challenge raised by the Respondent in  the  written
    grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal  relates
    to the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant  was  still  dependent  or
    partially dependent upon social services in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    ground pleads  that  it  is  arguable  that  no  adequate  reasons  are
    provided.


31.  I reject that argument.  It seems to me that  it  is  abundantly  clear
    that the Judge relied on the evidence of the Appellant's social  worker
    who  indicated  that  he  was  still  seeing  the   Appellant   on   an
    approximately monthly basis: see paragraph 131.


32.  Ms Holmes seeks  to  present  this  aspect  of  the  challenge  with  a
    slightly different emphasis, and submits that the Judge's findings  are
    not sufficient to reach the conclusion expressed at paragraph 157  that
    the Appellant was a vulnerable individual.


33.  In the first instance I note that the concluding sentence at  paragraph
    157 in reality adds nothing to the finding on  risk  in  the  preceding
    sentences: to  that  extent  the  vulnerability  or  otherwise  of  the
    Appellant is not directly material to the conclusion that he  would  be
    at risk if returned to Afghanistan.  Nonetheless, it seems to  me  that
    'in the round' there was sufficient material over and above the monthly
    contact with social services  to  indicate  that  the  Appellant  could
    properly be characterised as vulnerable - that this  was  a  conclusion
    open to the Judge on the materials before him.


34.  In this context I note in particular that reference  was  made  to  the
    Appellant  having  been  offered,  but  having  declined,   therapeutic
    support. The fact of such an offer is  indicative  of  there  being  an
    underlying reason requiring therapeutic  input  which  in  turn  is  an
    indicator of potential vulnerability. It is  also  the  case  that  the
    Appellant's social worker described the Appellant as  being  vulnerable
    (paragraph 130).


35.  In all such circumstances I also reject the  Respondent's  third  basis
    of challenge.


36.  As regards the fourth and fifth  bases  of  challenge,  Ms  Holmes  was
    somewhat circumspect in seeking to advance these  with  any  particular
    vigour.


38.  So far as the fourth ground is concerned, it is pleaded that the  Judge
    did not "resolve conflicts  in  the  objective  evidence".  The  ground
    argues that "If the Judge prefers the report  of  Dr  Schuster  to  the
    objective material (including the country guidance case law of RQ) then
    it is respectfully submitted that the reasons for so doing, and in what
    respects, are not clear".


39.  Ms Holmes acknowledges that she is not able to identify in what way  Dr
    Schuster's evidence was in conflict with the country guidance  case  of
    RQ (Afghan national army - Hizb-e-Islami risk)  Afghanistan  CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 00013 which in any event did not seem to be on point  in  respect
    of the Appellant's particular circumstances and claimed  risk  factors.
    In those circumstances Ms Holmes realistically  acknowledged  that  she
    could not advance that particular ground any further.


40.  In ground 5 of the Respondent's challenge it is argued that  the  Judge
    failed to take into account relevant authority: reference  is  made  to
    the country guidance cases of HK and Others (Indiscriminate violence  -
    forced recruitment by  the  Taliban  -  contact  with  family  members)
    Afghanistan CG [2010] and RQ.


41.  Again Ms Holmes very fairly acknowledged that  those  reported  country
    guidance cases did not appear to be  directly  on  point.   Insofar  as
    reliance may have been placed in the grounds on  the  case  of  HK,  Ms
    Holmes accepted that this applied to children and the Appellant was  no
    longer a child.  In any event,  paragraph  2  of  the  headnote  in  HK
    (referenced in the Respondent's grounds) indicates no more than that  a
    case sensitive analysis of possible risk is required.  In my  judgement
    this is exactly what the First-tier Tribunal Judge undertook.   As  was
    acknowledged in respect of ground 4, the  decision  in  RQ  is  not  on
    point.


42.   In  the  circumstances  I  also  therefore  reject  the   Respondent's
    challenge based on grounds 4 and 5.


43.  Accordingly in all the circumstances I find that there was no error  of
    law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and  accordingly  his
    decision stands.


Notice of Decision


44.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    stands.


45.  The Secretary of State's challenge is dismissed. Mr  Ahmadzai's  appeal
    remains allowed under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  on  human  rights
    grounds (Articles 3 and 8 - the latter pursuant to paragraph 276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules).





The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the hearing on 15 January 2015.




Signed        Date: 27 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

