
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03275/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 5 January 2016                    |on 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              MOHSEN KHANIZADEH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr G P McGowan, of Quinn, Martin & Langan,
                    Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 15  November  1964.   By  a
    decision promulgated on 21 September 2015, Judge Bradshaw dismissed his
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against refusal of recognition  as  a
    refugee.  He appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

         "The judge states  at  paragraph  54  that  he  has  given  careful
         consideration to all documentation including the  evidence  of  the
         appellant and his son at the hearing.  However, there is nowhere in
         the determination that the  judge  assesses  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant's son.  It is clearly material  to  the  outcome  of  the
         appeal and failure to reason why he rejected the son's evidence  is
         a clear error of law.

         Although the  judge  has  stated  on  many  occasions  that  before
         reaching any conclusions he has looked at all of  the  evidence  in
         the round (of paragraphs 55, 57, 90 and 95), it is  clear  that  he
         has not taken all of the evidence into account  and  in  particular
         has ignored;

               1. The preamble to the Screening Interview that the appellant
                  will  not  be  asked  to  go  into  the  details  of   his
                  substantive claim and that he will have an opportunity  to
                  do so at a later date at his substantive interview,

               2. That the appellant, therefore, had no  opportunity  to  go
                  into more detail with the Home Office until  the  date  of
                  the substantive interview.

               3. That the purpose of the solicitor's  letter  to  the  Home
                  Office after the Screening Interview was to correct errors
                  of fact and interpretation rather than to provide the full
                  basis of the client's claim.

               4. The significance of  the  appellant's  indication  at  the
                  Screening Interview that he was fine or "would be in a few
                  days".  The psychologist's report made it clear  that  the
                  onset of his depression was dated October 2014  which  was
                  after the date of his Screening Interview.  For the  judge
                  to  fail  to  recognise  this  was  clearly  material  and
                  erroneous in law.  Moreover the judge has failed to reason
                  why he rejected the psychologist's conclusions, especially
                  bearing in mind the linked  medical  evidence  from  other
                  professionals.

               5. The evidence from the  physiotherapist  and  GP  that  the
                  shoulder injuries were consistent with the mode of torture
                  described  and  the  fact  that  this   was   a   separate
                  corroborative element to the claim.

         The judge also uses an odd turn of phase  in  connection  with  the
         evidence in paragraphs 78, 82, 85 and 88 that  the  appellant  "has
         not provided full and accurate information to  the  respondent  and
         this damages credibility."   It  is  not  clear  in  what  way  his
         information has not been full.

         In all the circumstances the errors are material and have  affected
         the assessment of credibility to such an extent that the case  will
         have to be reheard and the evidence reassessed by another judge."

 2. In a Rule 24 response  to  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  the
    respondent submits as follows:

         "...

          4. The First-tier Tribunal has clearly noted that the appellant's
             son gave evidence (paragraph 10 of  the  determination).   The
             First-tier Tribunal also expressly states that "I  have  given
             careful consideration to all the documentation before  me,  to
             the evidence of the appellant and his son at the  hearing  and
             to the submissions made on behalf of both parties"  [paragraph
             54] (emphasis added).  It is further  noted  at  paragraph  55
             that the First-tier Tribunal has "looked at all  the  evidence
             in  the  round  and  had  the  opportunity  of  observing  and
             listening to the appellant and his son give  evidence  at  the
             hearing" (emphasis added).  It is clear from the determination
             that the First-tier Tribunal has properly taken  the  evidence
             of the appellant's son into consideration before reaching  its
             credibility findings.

          5. Paragraph 2 of the grant of permission suggests that the First-
             tier Tribunal was incorrect to  rely  upon  responses  in  the
             appellant's Screening Interview as evidence of  inconsistency.
             ... the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to  consider  those
             responses  and  has  in   the   determination   properly   and
             appropriately assessed the weight  that  can  be  attached  to
             those responses.

          6. ... the conclusions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  well-
             reasoned, sustainable and not vitiated by any  material  error
             of law."

 3. Submissions for appellant.  Although the judge said repeatedly that  he
    took the son's evidence into account, he gave no reason  for  rejecting
    it.   That  evidence  amounted  to  essential  corroboration,  and  the
    appellant was entitled to  know  why  it  was  not  accepted.   In  the
    preamble to the screening interview the appellant was specifically told
    not to go into detail about his case, so no finding  should  have  been
    reached based on absence of information at that  stage.   It  was  also
    wrong to found on the absence of further information in the  subsequent
    solicitor's letter, which was not written for that purpose.  The  judge
    failed  to  take  into  account  that  the  onset  of  the  appellant's
    depressive  illness  occurred  only  after  the  screening   interview.
    Although the judge narrated the terms of the medical reports, he failed
    to engage with them  and  reached  no  conclusion,  except  to  say  at
    paragraph 96 that the appellant's depression arose from  concern  about
    the asylum process and his separation from his wife and  son  in  Iraq.
    That was completely illogical because as the  judge  found  the  asylum
    claim to be false, the appellant could have no  genuine  anxiety  about
    return.  The judge failed to explain why he rejected the evidence  from
    the GP that the appellant's shoulder injury  might  be  the  result  of
    torture.  The medical reports amounted to  adminicles  of  evidence  in
    favour of the appellant but the judge simply rejected them on the basis
    of not believing the appellant.  A fresh hearing was required.

 4. Submissions for respondent.   The  final  argument  for  the  appellant
    amounted to criticising the  judge  for  reaching  his  conclusions  in
    isolation from the medical evidence, but that  point  was  not  in  the
    grounds.  In any event it was not made out as the judge was  repeatedly
    at pains to examine the evidence in the  round,  and  had  to  set  out
    matters in some order.  The judge narrated at  paragraph  91  that  the
    appellant said he was physically and mentally  well  at  the  screening
    interview, but he did not develop that into a  reason  for  a  negative
    conclusion.  He considered the  psychologist's  and  GP's  evidence  in
    detail and in context.  The GP's report was not couched in terms of the
    Istanbul Protocol  and  so  did  not  assess  the  consistency  of  the
    appellant's injuries with  his  claims  according  to  the  appropriate
    scale.  To state that an injury might possibly be the result of torture
    did not significantly advance the  case.   The  judge  dealt  with  the
    screening interview in detail from paragraph  63  to  78,  specifically
    taking into account at paragraphs 74 and 76 that the appellant had been
    asked for only brief reasons why he might  not  return  to  Iran.   The
    judge further allowed for the appellant  encountering  on  his  day  of
    arrival in a strange country an alien  culture  and  foreign  language,
    particularly  as  a  genuine  asylum  seeker  might  have  had  adverse
    experiences with the authorities in his country of origin.  It was well
    recognised  that   apparent   discrepancies   between   screening   and
    substantive interviews should be approached with care, but that is what
    the judge did.  The decision was not based, as the appellant contended,
    on mere lack of detail at the screening interview  but  on  failing  to
    mention at all the substantive claim on which  he  later  relied.   His
    solicitor's letter was to correct matters of detail  in  the  screening
    interview record, but the judge was entitled to note that  it  did  not
    set out the quite different basis of claim on which  he  later  relied.
    The appellant's strongest point was that it would have been  better  if
    an explicit conclusion had been stated on the son's evidence, which did
    incorporate a further claimed incident to which the appellant  was  not
    party.  However, the decision overall was thorough and clear  and  made
    it plain why the appellant's account was rejected, giving several  good
    reasons.  It was not to be presumed that the judge had left  the  son's
    evidence out of account in forming his final conclusion.  It was  plain
    that evidence had also been rejected, and the fact that the  conclusion
    on that specific point was only implicit was not a material error.

 5. Response for appellant.  In his written statement the appellant gave  a
    detailed account of events which showed that his eventual claim was not
    a different one but  rather  an  expansion  of  what  he  said  at  the
    screening interview.

 6. I reserved my determination.

 7. The judge's approach to the screening interview was very  careful.   He
    was entitled to note that matters were not  further  developed  in  the
    subsequent letter from the appellant's solicitor.  As to paragraph 4 of
    the grounds, the judge did not fail to recognise that the onset of  the
    appellant's depression was after the screening interview.  The sequence
    is plainly narrated at paragraphs 90 - 93.   It  is  not  illogical  to
    consider that an appellant might be  anxious  and  depressed  over  the
    asylum process and separation from family.   There  is  no  reason  why
    those making false claims should be immune from anxiety  -  rather,  it
    would seem a  quite  natural  response.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant had not simply developed his previous claim
    but had advanced it on a basis which was inconsistent with its original
    version.

 8. It might have been a counsel of perfection to state a specific separate
    conclusion regarding the son's evidence, but that is a minor omission.

 9. Broadly, I prefer the submissions for the respondent, for  the  reasons
    which the Presenting Officer advanced and which are  summarised  above.
    I do not find the appellant's grounds and submissions in essence to  be
    more than disagreement with the outcome.  They do  not  show  that  the
    appellant has received a less than legally adequate explanation of  why
    his claim was rejected.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           16 December 2016
