
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/03201/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Taylor House  Decision and Reasons promulgated
On 23rd October 2015   On 17th May 2016

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K V
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For  the  Appellant:      Ms  A  Brockleby-Weller,  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:     Ms  E  Harris  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Nag  Law
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




Background

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Steer
promulgated on 27 July 2015, allowing the appeal of KV against the  decision
of the Secretary of State for the Home Department dated 13 February 2015  to
remove him from the UK following refusal of an asylum claim.



Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant  and  KV  is  the
respondent, for the sake of consistency  with  the  proceedings  before  the
First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to KV as the Appellant  and  the
Secretary of State as the Respondent.




The Appellant's personal details and immigration history  are  a  matter  of
record on file and known to the parties; they are also set out in  the  body
of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is  unnecessary  to  re-
rehearse all such matters here. What is particularly pertinent  for  present
purposes is that the Appellant arrived in the UK on 31 May 2012 and  claimed
asylum on the following day. He claimed a fear of  the  authorities  in  Sri
Lanka on the basis that he had  been  identified  as  an  LTTE  member.  The
Appellant's claim for asylum was refused for reasons set out in  a  'reasons
for refusal' letter (RFRL) dated 13 February 2015, and a decision to  remove
the Appellant from the UK was taken consequence




The Appellant appealed to the IAC. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowed
the Appellant's appeal for reasons set out in her determination.




The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by FTTJ  Landes
on 17 August 2015.


Consideration: Error of Law




Although Judge Landes did not limit the scope of the grant of permission  to
appeal, nonetheless reservations were expressed as to  the  strength  and/or
materiality of some of the grounds. In light of such  observations,  and  in
any event, Ms Brockleby-Weller indicated that she did  not  seek  to  pursue
the first of the grounds  pleaded  in  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal (which appears to be premised upon what is more likely an  inelegance
of expression on the part of Judge Steer, rather than  an  inconsistency  of
findings/reasoning amounting to an error of law). It was  also  acknowledged
that the second ground - which related to the application of GJ  and  others
(post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 to the  facts  of
the case - was essentially 'parasitic' on the other grounds and as such  did
not constitute a freestanding basis of challenge in  itself.  Judge  Steer's
observations in respect of the materiality of the third ground - in  respect
of section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)
Act 2004 - were also noted. Accordingly the focus  of  challenge  before  me
related to the fourth ground in respect  of  the  adequacy  of  the  Judge's
reasoning in respect of the supporting medical evidence relied upon  by  the
Appellant.




It is a core element of the  Appellant's  asylum  case  that  following  his
surrender to the Army in April 2009 and his placement with his family  in  a
camp  for  displaced  persons  in  Vavuniya,  he  was  picked  out   in   an
identification parade as a perceived LTTE member,  arrested  and  taken  for
questioning on 10 June 2009. He claims that during the subsequent  detention
and interrogation at the Joseph Camp he was ill-treated. In support of  this
aspect of his case the Appellant has relied upon  what  is  described  as  a
'Diagnosis Ticket'  said  to  have  been  issued  by  the  Vavuniya  General
Hospital showing an admission on 11 June 2009 and a  discharge  on  14  June
2009; the Appellant  also  relies  upon  a  report  headed  'Medical  Report
(Scarring)' prepared by Mr M Andrew Mason, dated 22 June  2015  pursuant  to
an examination date of 16 June 2015.




The Judge summarised the contents of Mr Mason's report at  paragraph  25  in
the following terms:


           "[Mr Mason] could not date the scars  on  the  Appellant's  body
           more precisely than to say that they resulted from injuries that
           had occurred in excess of twelve months earlier.  The  scars  on
           the Appellant's back were typical of the scars that would result
           from being beaten, a severe beating a heavy stick or baton.  The
           scar  on  the  Appellant's  hand  was  non-specific,   but   was
           consistent  with  the   Appellant's   account   of   being   cut
           deliberately  with  a  knife  while  being   interrogated.   Any
           laceration, however, caused  accidentally  or  under  any  other
           circumstances might produce a scar of this type.  Likewise,  the
           scars on the  Appellant's  legs  were  non-specific.  They  were
           consistent with the  Appellant's  account  that  they  were  the
           result of being beaten and scalded, but  scars  in  those  areas
           were commonplace, often resulting  from  the  lifestyle  of  the
           individual."




At  paragraph  39  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  acknowledged   that   the
Respondent's Presenting Officer made submissions  critical  of  the  medical
report and of its value  as  corroborative  evidence:  "The  author  of  the
report had not used the correct terminology under the  [Istanbul]  Protocol,
did not deal with self-infliction by proxy, was contradictory in  parts  and
referred to certain of  the  injuries  possibly  being  caused  by  everyday
injuries".




Bearing in mind what is said in KV (scarring - medical evidence)  Sri  Lanka
[2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) at paragraph 294, these criticisms are  not  without
substance:


           "For completeness we need to clarify what doctors should  do  or
           say about the SIBP possibility  when  there  are  no  presenting
           features to suggest it. We only mean here to identify what we as
           judges consider as best practice in respect  of  preparation  of
           medico-legal reports for use in asylum cases.  It  follows  from
           our earlier conclusion - that  SIBP  cannot  be  excluded  as  a
           possible cause, either a priori or routinely - that (i)  doctors
           should indicate in their assessment  that  SIBP  as  a  possible
           cause has been considered (in the same way as  Professor  Katona
           said it was best  practice  for  doctors  to  consider  feigning
           generally as a possible cause; and  in  the  same  way  that  Dr
           Zapata-Bravo considered whether the appellant's  scarring  could
           have been caused by tattooing); but (ii) if there is an  absence
           of any presenting feature giving  rise  to  a  concern  about  a
           "false allegation of torture" of this type, then all the  doctor
           need do is state that whilst SIBP as a possible cause  has  been
           considered, there is no presenting feature making it more than a
           mere or remote possibility."




The Judge also summarised the Appellant's Counsel's response:  "The  medical
report did refer to the Protocol in Part 6. The author  had  considered  the
possible causes of the scars and provided  an  opinion,  as  to  the  likely
causes. The timeframe accorded  with  the  Appellant's  account"  (paragraph
42). I pause to note that this summary of response does not engage with  the
submission in respect of 'self-infliction by proxy'.




In setting out her findings the Judge, at  paragraph  52,  having  addressed
issues in respect of  an  apparent  discrepancy  between  the  date  of  the
Diagnosis Ticket and the Appellant's own statement as to  the  date  of  his
discharge, states this in respect of the medical report:


           "In addition to the diagnosis ticket, the Appellant  provided  a
           medical report. The report substantiated his account of torture,
           at least as to the beatings to his back."




Further, although there is no additional amplification or  analysis  of  the
medical report, it is clear from  paragraph  54  that  the  Judge  took  the
medical report into account favourably in  her  overall  evaluation  of  the
Appellant's account.




I accept the criticisms made by the Respondent in respect  of  the  adequacy
of the Judge's reasoning with regard to  accepting  the  medical  report  as
'substantiating' the Appellant's account. The Judge  has  not  engaged  with
the criticisms made of the report by the  Respondent's  representative,  and
to that extent has failed expressly to  adjudicate  upon,  or  otherwise  to
offer any reasons for  any  such  adjudication  upon,  a  significant  issue
between the parties - the resolution of which was material  to  the  outcome
of the appeal.




In all such circumstances I am satisfied that there was a material error  in
law in that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal fails to engage  with  a
material issue  between  the  parties,  and  otherwise  lacks  reasoning  in
respect of the issue. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be  set
aside accordingly, and requires to be  remade.  Because  the  error  impacts
upon the credibility assessment of the Appellant, and upon  remaking  it  is
not possible to deal with the  issue  discreetly:  accordingly  a  full  re-
hearing is required with all issues at large. It is  common  ground  between
the parties, and I agree, that  the  appropriate  forum  is  the  First-tier
Tribunal.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained a material error  of
law and is set aside.




The decision in the appeal is to be remade before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
before any Judge other than Judge Steer with all issues at large.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     10 May 2016

