
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 03826 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2014                               |On 18 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                    kaminda harsha kumara seekku-wellage
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bagraz, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This case came before me on 1 November 2013 when I found that the First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law.  On  that  occasion  Ms  J  Smeeton  of
    counsel represented the appellant  and  Ms  E  Martin  represented  the
    respondent. I gave my reasons for finding error of law  and  directions
    for the future conduct of the case in writing and these  were  sent  to
    the parties on 10 February 2014.  Miss Bagraz pointed out  that  I  had
    made a mistake in paragraph 2 where I had added  an  adjective  to  the
    word "trafficking" at paragraph 2 of my reasons.   This  was  simply  a
    mistake which has been corrected in the  version  of  the  Reasons  For
    Finding Error of  Law  that  is  set  out  below.   Subject  to  slight
    alteration in an attempt to  correct  minor  grammatical  errors  these
    reasons now form part of this decision.

 2. Miss Bagraz also pointed out that I had omitted to make any decision in
    my reasons on  the  grounds  alleging  that  there  was  a  Trafficking
    Convention point to be considered. Arguably the decision  was  "not  in
    accordance with the law". Further enquiries show that this was not  the
    startling omission that it first seemed.  By the  time  the  case  came
    before me in November an application had been made and  considered  and
    the respondent had now ruled that this is not a case  where  there  are
    obligations under the Trafficking  Convention.   It  follows  that  any
    error identified in the grounds for  that  reason  was  immaterial.  By
    reason of intervening events the appellant would be  in  precisely  the
    position that he is in now.

 3. I now set out and incorporate the reasons  for  finding  error  of  law
    identified above.

                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

         1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He was  born  on  11
         June 1974 and so is now 39 years old.  He appeals the  decision  of
         the respondent on 4 April  2013  to  remove  him  from  the  United
         Kingdom.  It is his case that he is a refugee or otherwise entitled
         to international protection.  His appeal was  dismissed  by  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Raymond in a determination  promulgated  on  17
         July 2013.

         2.   Essentially there were two reasons for  giving  permission  to
         appeal.  It is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
         found the decision complained of contrary to the law because it did
         not take account of the appellant's  claim  to  be  the  victim  of
         trafficking and secondly it was arguable  that  the  appeal  should
         have been allowed because the appellant is gay and  cannot  live  a
         gay lifestyle in Sri Lanka without fear of persecution.

         3.   The First-tier Tribunal's decision was  careful  and  thorough
         and I cannot consider  the  criticisms  without  spending  sometime
         looking carefully at the determination and setting out exactly what
         the First-tier Tribunal said.  Clearly the judge  disbelieved  much
         of the appellant's evidence.

         4.   It is the appellant's case that he entered the United  Kingdom
         at Aberdeen Airport on 19 June 2010 and was given leave  to  enter.
         This appears to be so that he could  join  a  ship  as  a  merchant
         seaman because the respondent received a report  showing  that  the
         appellant had deserted his vessel on 1 July 2010  and  his  details
         were circulated as an absconder.  He was arrested  on  15  December
         2012 and detained.  He claimed asylum on 20 December 2012.

         5.   The appellant identified himself as a Sri Lankan of  Sinhalese
         ethnicity who followed the Buddhist religion.

         6.   The First-tier Tribunal summarised the reasons for refusal  in
         the following terms at paragraph 2 of the determination:

           "The essential basis for the refusal was that the asylum account
           of the appellant amounted to a confusing amalgam consisting of a
           vague and contradictory account lacking in detail of his life as
           a homosexual whilst growing up in Sri Lanka  then  as  an  adult
           whilst living in that country and working abroad  as  a  seaman;
           whilst concomitantly claiming that he had been assaulted because
           of militating for a particular political  party;  and  asserting
           that after an arrest by police for having been found having  sex
           with a man he knew on the beach and his release by  means  of  a
           bribe this placed him in peril from local villagers antipathetic
           to homosexuals; was such as to lack credibility.  There is  also
           the dimension of whether the appellant is fleeing  circumstances
           of a debt which adds to the confusion."

         7.   The First-tier Tribunal summarised  the  documentary  evidence
         before it.  This included a letter apparently generated in response
         to the appellant reporting a  crime  to  a  police  website  called
         "Action Fraud" dated 18 December 2012.   The  appellant  said  that
         this  related  to  abusive  and  inhuman  working   conditions   he
         experienced whilst working on a fishing boat at Aberdeen

         8    The First-tier Tribunal then considered with conspicuous  care
         and certainly  very  thoroughly  the  appellant's  account  of  his
         emerging sexuality having noted that the appellant had said  during
         an interview on 17 December 2012 that he would return to Sri  Lanka
         if he could be reimbursed for the money he had paid to get a job in
         Aberdeen.  He later explained that he was ashamed to  disclose  his
         sexuality at the earlier interview because he was interviewed by  a
         woman.

         9.   At paragraph 112 of the determination the First-tier  Tribunal
         dealt with the complaint to the police.  The appellant said in  his
         witness statement:

           In December 2012 I reported George Maskame to  Action  Fraud,  I
           informed them that I was a victim of fraud.  However,  I  should
           have made  the  report  on  trafficking  instead  of  fraud.   I
           received a letter from them with regards to the report  I  made.
           I also made a complaint against George Maskame  to  the  Glasgow
           Police, informed them that he is trafficks' [(sic)  -  this  was
           presumably drafted by  the  solicitors  and  means  "trafficking
           people"] I also informed the  police  that  I  am  a  victim  of
           trafficking.  I made this complaint so that what happened to  me
           would not happen to anyone else.  The police did not do anything
           about my complaint."

         10.  The determination explains  how  the  appellant  came  to  the
         attention of the authorities when he was arrested in December  2012
         after being in the company of a friend at a night club when he  was
         noticed by the police.

         11.  The First-tier Tribunal then asked itself if the appellant had
         adopted a gay lifestyle in the United Kingdom.  Judge Raymond said:

           "Has the appellant lived as a gay man in the UK?

           122.   Asked in first interview if whilst in the UK he  has  had
           any relationships; he replied - "No, I was scared here.   I  did
           not have any relationships at all" (AIR  1/Q73);  he  had  never
           been to any gay clubs in the UK (AIR  1/Q127  -  presumably  the
           night club where he was arrested by the police at Q122  was  not
           such).  But asked why  in  a  country  where  his  sexuality  is
           accepted he had not formed any such relationship; he  replied  -
           "I did not have(?) the relationship with  anyone  -  I  was  not
           looking to meet anyone" (AIR 1/Q126).  He was not openly gay  in
           the UK, and has not told any of his  friends  of  his  sexuality
           (AIR 1/Qs118 - 119).

           123.   However, in second interview whilst  confirming  that  he
           was not openly  gay  in  the  UK;  when  asked  if  he  had  any
           relationships in the UK he replied - "I  have  been  socialising
           with some gay people all from LKA"; asked whether "yes or no" he
           had any relationships he  replied  -  "no";  asked  why  not  he
           replied - "I would like to establish a relationship but  because
           of the impact and reaction  of  neighbours  and  insult  by  the
           police in LKA I am still in  fear  -  I  was  arrested  in  this
           country  and  detained  for  two  months"(AIR  2/Qs328  -  331).
           Earlier when asked in the context of his saying he had been  too
           scared to claim asylum before his arrest whether having  clearly
           lived amongst the Sri Lankan community in  the  UK  he  had  not
           discussed his sexuality with them insulted by; he replied  -  "I
           did not want to talk about my sexual organisation (sic) or being
           gay to Sri Lanka and in fear of  being  insulted  by  them."(AIR
           2/Qs85 - 87)."

         12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted  many  inconsistencies  in
         the appellant's account which was a major reason  for  his  overall
         adverse credibility finding but he was nevertheless satisfied  that
         the appellant is gay.  He noted at paragraph 311 that the appellant
         "denied having had a life within the gay community in the  UK"  and
         he said later in that paragraph:

           "I find it very likely that the appellant has  led  a  gay  life
           both in Sri Lanka and in the UK, but in a discreet manner  which
           has not brought him into conflict with the authorities so far as
           Sri Lanka is concerned so as to be targeted by them.   He  could
           continue to do this upon his return to Sri Lanka.  As such,  and
           taking into account the core asylum narrative of  the  appellant
           has been found to be a fiction in all  fundamental  respects,  I
           find that he does not come within the guidance of HJ Iran  as  a
           gay man,  particularly  as  the  objective  evidence,  given  in
           particular the lack of prosecution under the  relevant  criminal
           legislation in Sri Lanka, and the evidence of  the  offer  of  a
           proposed dialogue with the  gay  community  emanating  from  the
           Prime Minister, even if followed  through,  does  not  establish
           that openly gay persons are targeted as a result of a  concerted
           government policy and societal morays."

         13.  The Judge also directed himself in paragraph 311 that a person
         would not be entitled to refugee status if he were gay in a country
         where  gays  risked  persecution  but  chose  to  conduct   himself
         discreetly for reasons other than a fear of persecution.

         14.  Before finishing his determination Judge  Raymond  noted  that
         the appellant had complained through his solicitor that he had been
         trafficked for the purposes of cheap labour and drew her  attention
         to her duties as explained in the case of EK (Article 4 ECHR: Anti-
         Trafficking Convention) Tanzania [2013] UKUT 00313 (IAC).

         15.  There is at paragraph 311 of the determination  an  impeccable
         self-direction where the judge reminds himself that  a  gay  person
         will only be entitled to protection  if  he  is  going  to  conduct
         himself in a way that attracts  attention  or  if  he  is  discreet
         because he fears the consequences.  Undoubtedly some people  prefer
         to conduct their sexual activity with  great  discretion  and  some
         people prefer to talk about their "private life" not  because  they
         are euphemistic but because they really do not think it  is  anyone
         else's business to comment  on  or  know  how  they  express  their
         sexuality.  It is very easy to conclude that a person who expresses
         his sexuality discreetly in the  United  Kingdom,  where  there  is
         increasing tolerance of the gay sex, cannot be expected to want  to
         express his sexuality openly in a country where  it  would  not  be
         tolerated.

         16.  At paragraph 311 the judge records  the  appellant's  evidence
         and explains how he has lived a gay life in a discreet manner which
         has not brought him to the attention of the authorities.   He  then
         says: "he can continue to do so upon  his  return  to  Sri  Lanka".
         This may very well be right but the judge does not ask himself  why
         the appellant would continue to be discreet.  I cannot be satisfied
         from the  determination,  notwithstanding  Ms  Martin's  determined
         efforts, that the judge has actually applied the crucial  test  and
         therefore I have to set aside the determination.

         17.  I see no reason why any of the findings of historic events are
         in any way undermined by the arguments before me.  I summarise them
         as being acceptance that the appellant is gay and that he has  been
         involved in gay activity in the United Kingdom and in Sri Lanka but
         has conducted himself with discretion.  I also find it  established
         that the appellant would not do that in the event of his return  to
         Sri Lanka.  There has to be another hearing so  I  can  answer  the
         question "why?"

         18.  I have tarried somewhat in reaching this conclusion because  I
         wanted to give the determination thorough reading.  It is  somewhat
         puzzling that the First-tier Tribunal Judge could identify the test
         so accurately but then fail to apply it and if he has applied it he
         has not explained his decision in a  way  that  I  can  follow  and
         therefore I have made the decision that I have.

         19.  As there is only one remaining issue to be decided I think  it
         better that the appeal remains before me in the Upper Tribunal.

 4. I then gave directions for the hearing before me.

 5. It is for the appellant to prove that there is a real risk of his being
    persecuted in the event of his return to Sri Lanka  or  of  his  rights
    under the European Convention on Human Rights being breached.  This  is
    not a case that can succeed under Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 6. The appellant made a statement dated 28  February  2014.  He  explained
    that when he was aged  about  12  years  he  saw  contemporaries  being
    humiliated and hurt because they were suspected of being gay.   He  saw
    people throw stones at gay children  and  punch  or  slap  them.   Such
    children were ostracised by other  children  whose  parents  would  not
    allow them any contact and on one occasion he saw a child abandoned  by
    his family because he was gay.  Gay activity was  seen  as  sinful  and
    shameful.

 7. He heard of an incident about a boy being expelled from school  because
    he was gay.  He said that villagers made a "big issue" of  the  child's
    sexuality so that a child could not go to school.

 8. He was advised by a distant uncle not  to  disclose  his  sexuality  to
    anyone because of the problems that would follow.

 9. He related one incident where he was arrested by the  police  who  took
    him to his home so that they knew where he lived.  The villagers  found
    out the reasons for the police involvement and  started  to  stone  his
    house.  His father arranged for his release by bribing the  police  and
    an officer advised him to leave the country because he would only  have
    more trouble.

10. He then explained how when he was working for a Greek shipping  line  a
    Sri Lankan colleague found out about his  sexuality  and  bullied  him.
    For example if he tried to talk to the ship's captain about his work he
    was subject to suggestions that he was  having  a  secret  relationship
    with  the  captain.   He  was  excluded  from   team   activities   and
    occasionally overtly humiliated.

11. Most of his friends in the United Kingdom are Sri Lankan but  only  two
    know that he is gay.  He dare not tell them.

12. His bad memories kept him awake at night.

13. He would not disclose his  sexuality  in  Sri  Lanka  because  of  past
    experiences and the fact that his conduct is contrary to the law.

14. He said that if he returned to his own community he would be  known  to
    be gay and he had already had trouble with the police there.  He  found
    the need to suppress his sexuality oppressive.  For example he  had  an
    inclination to touch the hands of someone to whom he was speaking.

15. He did not feel able to be overtly gay in the United Kingdom because he
    still depended on the goodwill of the  Sri  Lankan  community  for  his
    maintenance and accommodation.

16. He adopted this evidence before me.  He was cross-examined.

17. Mr Wilding asked him to explain why he  had  not  said  on  an  earlier
    occasion how he had  been  ostracised  whilst  working  for  the  Greek
    shipping line.  He replied that he had not been asked.   He  also  said
    that he had pushed the problem out of his mind because he was living in
    fear.  He  explained  that  the  person  concerned  had  been  a  close
    colleague and he wrongly thought that the colleague may have been  gay.
    He made overtures that were not appreciated.

18. He was asked if the two friends in the United Kingdom who knew that  he
    gay were the two friends who had provided witness statements for him in
    the course of proceedings.  This was a  straightforward  question  that
    the appellant seemed to find extraordinarily difficult to  answer.   He
    eventually decided that one of them knew that  he  was  gay.   It  also
    emerged in cross-examination that  there  was  some  uncertainty  about
    where the appellant actually lived.  He had given  an  address  in  the
    statement which was different from the address originally given to  the
    Tribunal.  There is nothing inherently wrong or even  suspicious  in  a
    person changing addresses and I was left with the  distinct  impression
    that the appellant, for some reason, was not being entirely frank about
    his circumstances.  It may be that he had a  succession  of  short-term
    addresses but it was all rather unsatisfactory.

19. The appellant had also produced additional background material.  I  was
    particularly  assisted  by  a  Kaleidoscope  Trust   article   entitled
    "Speaking Out" dated 10  November  2013.   The  Kaleidoscope  Trust  is
    particularly concerned with the rights of LGBTI people in Sri Lanka. It
    might for that reason be thought to be partial in the sense that it  is
    more than usually interested in the rights of and  difficulties  facing
    gay people.  However, I am satisfied it is also an organisation  intent
    on cultivating a reputation for reliability and fair  reporting  and  I
    give weight to what it says.  This is partly  because  its  conclusions
    are wholly in line with the material before me.

20. In summary this report explains that homosexual acts are punishable  by
    up to ten  years'  imprisonment.   The  law  is  rarely  enforced  but,
    significantly, it is said the illegality of gay  activity  is  used  to
    threaten and harass LGBTI people.  It  quoted  a  study  by  the  Human
    Rights Organisation "Equal Ground" but found that "90% of trans  people
    and 65% of gay men reported experiencing police violence base don their
    sexuality and/or gender identity".

21. This is supported by the COIR Report of March 2012 which, I am told, is
    the most recent COIR Report on Sri Lanka.  It quotes a  report  of  the
    NGO Shadow Report to the Committee on the Elimination of all  Forms  of
    Discrimination against Women dated January 2011.  This  too  makes  the
    point that although there have been no convictions (I assume of  women)
    of same sex activity offenses:

         "The criminalisation paves the way  for  the  police  and  anti-gay
         groups to brand all lesbians, bi-sexual, transgendered  persons  as
         'perverts' and  criminals.   The  fear  of  being  apprehended  and
         identified  as  a  person  of  non-normative  sexual  behaviour  or
         practice leads to  a  cycle  of  silence  by  members  of  the  LBT
         community, by their families and friends and by society as a  whole
         and makes them vulnerable to a range of abuses including extortion,
         intimidation,  unlawful  arrest  and  detention,   harassment   and
         torture."

22. The COIR Report then quotes the USSD 2010 Report  to  the  effect  that
    "police harassed and  extorted  money  or  sexual  favours  from  those
    persons and assaulted gays and lesbians in Colombo  and  other  areas."
    The report also suggested that many incidents of crimes against members
    of the LGBT community were unreported.

23. The "Gay Times Gay Guide, Sri Lanka" entry on the Gay Times website  on
    1 February 2012 acknowledges that there is a "sizeable gay  population"
    in Sri Lanka and it says there is "no gay scene in the  western  sense"
    and many gay people cannot come to terms  with  themselves  because  of
    family pressure and cultural restraint and expectation.  A  Sri  Lankan
    gay organisation "Woman's Support Group" in June  2011  said  how  LGBT
    people are at risk of blackmail and ostracisation by  their  family  or
    loss of career or home so that it is difficult for "members of the LGBT
    community to live their lives fully and openly.  Around you  there  are
    many people who hide their sexual gender  identity  from  those  around
    them due to the fear of what may happen to them if  their  identity  is
    known."

24. Putting everything together I am entirely satisfied  that  it  is  very
    difficult for a gay person to "come out" in Sri Lanka.   If  the  Equal
    Ground report is correct the  clear  majority  of  gay  men  experience
    violent ill-treatment at the hands of the police.  That is a staggering
    statistic and I would like to know more about the research methods used
    by Equal Ground but in the absence of any evidence to  discredit  it  I
    give it some weight.   It  is  certainly  wholly  consistent  with  the
    picture created by other sources of gay people  being  apprehensive  of
    ill-treatment either by the authorities or in circumstances  where  the
    authorities would do nothing to help.

25. Mr Wilding, properly and helpfully urged me to read again the  decision
    in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  With that urging in mind I set out
    a long quotation from the judgment of Lord Rodger  in  that  case.   He
    said:

         "61. A fear of persecution is by no means the only  reason  why  an
         applicant might behave  discreetly  if  he  were  returned  to  his
         country of nationality.  For example, he might not  wish  to  upset
         his parents or his straight friends  and  colleagues  by  revealing
         that he is gay; in particular, he might worry  that,  if  the  fact
         that he was gay was  known,  he  would  become  isolated  from  his
         friends and relatives, be the butt of jokes or unkind comments from
         colleagues or suffer other discrimination.  Indeed,  in  a  society
         where  gay  men  are  persecuted,  it  is  quite  likely  that  the
         prevailing culture  will  be  such  that  some  of  an  applicant's
         friends, relatives and colleagues would react  negatively  if  they
         discovered that he was gay.  In these circumstances it is at  least
         possible that the  only  real  reason  for  an  applicant  behaving
         discreetly would be his perfectly natural wish to avoid harming his
         relationships  with  his  family,  friends  and  colleagues.    The
         Convention  does  not  afford  protection  against   these   social
         pressures, however, and so an  applicant  cannot  claim  asylum  in
         order to avoid them.  So if, having considered  the  facts  of  any
         individual case, the Secretary of State  of  State  or  a  tribunal
         concluded that the applicant would choose to behave  discreetly  on
         his return simply to avoid the social  pressures,  his  application
         for asylum would fall to be rejected.  He would not  be  a  refugee
         within the terms of article 1A(2) of  the  Convention  because,  by
         choosing to behave  discreetly  in  order  to  avoid  these  social
         pressures, the applicant would simultaneously choose to live a life
         in which he would have no well-founded fear of being persecuted for
         reasons for his homosexuality.   A  similar  point  arose,  in  the
         context of religion, in NABD of 2002 v Minister of Immigration  and
         Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs (2005) 79 ALJR 1142, discussed
         at para 70 below.-

         62. Having examined the relevant evidence, the Secretary  of  State
         or the Tribunal may conclude, however, that the applicant would act
         discreetly partly to avoid upsetting his parents, partly  to  avoid
         trouble with his friends and colleagues, and partly due to a  well-
         founded fear of being persecuted  by  the  state  authorities.   In
         other words the need to avoid the threat of persecution would be  a
         material reason, among a number of complementary reasons,  why  the
         applicant would act discreetly.  Would the existence of these other
         reasons make a crucial difference?  In my view not at all.   A  Jew
         would not  lose  the  protection  of  the  Convention  because,  in
         addition to suffering state persecution, he might also  be  subject
         to casual, social anti-semitism.  Similarly, a gay man who was  not
         only persecuted by the state, but also  made  the  butt  of  casual
         jokes at work, would not lose the protection of the Convention.  It
         follows that the question can be further refined: is  an  applicant
         to be regarded as a refugee  for  purposes  of  the  Convention  in
         circumstances where the reality is that, if he were returned to his
         country of nationality,  in  addition  to  any  other  reasons  for
         behaving discreetly, he would have to behave discreetly in order to
         avoid persecution because of being gay?

         63. It is convenient to use a phrase such as 'acting' or 'behaving'
         'discreetly' to describe what  the  applicant  would  do  to  avoid
         persecution.  But in truth he could do various things.  To  take  a
         few examples.  At the most extreme, the applicant might live a life
         of complete celibacy.  Alternatively, he might  form  relationships
         only within a circle of acquaintances whom he could  trust  not  to
         reveal to others that he had gay relationships.  Or, he might  have
         a gay partner, but  never  live  with  him  or  have  him  to  stay
         overnight or indulge in any display of affection in public.  Or the
         applicant might have only fleeting anonymous sexual contacts, as  a
         safe opportunity presented itself.  The gradations are infinite.

         64. Suppose the Secretary of State or the Tribunal  were  satisfied
         that, if the applicant took some  such  precautions,  he  would  be
         unlikely to suffer any actual harm.  Would the applicant then  have
         no well-founded fear of persecution by reason of being gay  and  so
         be unable to claim asylum under the Convention?

         65. Surely not.  As already explained in paragraph 53 above, so far
         as the social group of gay  people  is  concerned,  the  underlying
         rationale of the Convention is that they should  be  able  to  live
         freely and openly as gay men and  lesbian  women,  without  fearing
         that they may suffer harm of the requisite  intensity  or  duration
         because they are gay or lesbian.  Their home state  should  protect
         them and so enable them to live that way.  If it does not and  they
         will be threatened with serious harm if they live openly, then most
         people threatened with persecution will  be  forced  to  take  what
         steps they can  to  avoid  it.   But  the  applicant's  country  of
         nationality  does  not  meet  the  standard  of   protection   from
         persecution  which  the   Convention   envisages   simply   because
         conditions in the country are such that he would be able  to  take,
         and would in fact take, steps to avoid  persecution  by  concealing
         the fact that he is gay.  On the contrary, the fact that  he  would
         feel obliged to take these steps to  avoid  persecution  is,  prima
         facie, an indication that there is indeed a threat  of  persecution
         to gay people who live  openly.   His  country  of  nationality  is
         therefore not affording him the necessary level of protection.   So
         the receiving country should."

26. Mr Wilding drew my attention to the decision of  this  Tribunal  in  MD
    (same-sex oriented males: risk)  India  CG  [2014]  UKUT  615.   As  is
    apparent from the title the case is about the persecution of gay people
    in India.  Mr Wilding was not suggest that India is  the  same  as  Sri
    Lanka but he did suggest that the case is  a  useful  guidance  on  the
    correct approach to take to the persecution of gay people in a  country
    where gay activity is illegal  and  prosecutions  are  rare  and  where
    extortion, harassment and discrimination by the police and the  general
    population does take place.

27. Certainly the case illustrates how a person might  face  discrimination
    without facing persecution.  However, it was integral to the Tribunal's
    findings in MD  that  there  is  within  India  a  "large,  robust  and
    accessible LGBTI activist and support network, mainly to  be  found  in
    the large cities".  Although occasionally subject to direct persecution
    itself the support networks  are  able  to  act  overtly  and  to  help
    members.

28. There was no evidence before me that  any  comparable  support  network
    exists in Sri Lanka.

29. Notwithstanding my concerns about the appellant's  evidence  concerning
    his address I am  entirely  satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  lived
    discreetly as a gay man in a large part because of the fear  of  social
    rejection if he was overt about his sexuality.   I  am  also  satisfied
    that gay people are persecuted in Sri Lanka.  I am satisfied that a lot
    of men experience violence at the hands of the police and that for many
    the degree  of  isolation  they  experience  extends  beyond  unwelcome
    comments or teasing  and  bullying  but  rather  becomes  a  degree  of
    opposition and pressure that they  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to
    tolerate.

30. I am quite satisfied that there is a real risk that the appellant would
    face not merely discrimination and hostility but persecution if he were
    open about his sexuality in Sri Lanka.

31. I am also satisfied that this is not the  only  reason  but  it  is  an
    important reason for his not being open and in the circumstances he has
    proved his case.

32. It follows therefore that I allow this appeal.

33. I do not for a moment suggest that this  decision  is  intended  to  be
    guidance about gay people in Sri Lanka generally.  I have based  it  on
    the limited evidence before me and the findings of fact that  bound  me
    before I made the decision.  This case does not decide that gay  people
    generally are at risk in Sri Lanka.  It does decide that this appellant
    has proved his case and I allow his appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 June 2014                   |

