
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03931/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CLC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Fripp instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  CLC's  appeal  against  a
decision to refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom following  the  refusal
of her asylum claim. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  refer  to
the Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent  and  CLC  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Honduras, born on 17 July  1992.  She  arrived
in the United Kingdom from USA on 26 May 2014  and  claimed  asylum  at  the
airport. Her claim was refused on 9 June 2014.

The basis of the appellant's claim is that she  is  at  risk  on  return  to
Honduras as a result of her gender and ethnicity, and in light of  the  rise
in violence and crime in that country over the past few  years.  She  claims
to have previously been consistently bullied because of  her  ethnicity  and
to have been insulted because of her skin colour, her  eyes  and  her  Asian
background, at school, at work and in  the  streets.  Her  parents  owned  a
hardware store in the capital of Honduras and when she was six years of  age
there was an armed robbery at the store. The police  came  and  her  parents
filed a report of the incident. Her father died of cancer in 2006  when  she
was 14. Her mother subsequently fell ill and so she helped in the store  and
would go to the market and on errands for her mother. She  was  harassed  by
men when she went shopping and men tried to seduce her on  the  streets  and
blew kisses at her and touched  her  inappropriately.  She  and  her  mother
constantly received threats from gangs demanding money,  which  they  called
war tax and when she was 15 years of  age  she  received  a  telephone  call
demanding the tax. As a result of the threats her mother moved the  shop  to
Comayaguela in 2009. In 2012 the appellant moved to Maine, in  the  USA,  to
study  after  securing  a  full  tuition  scholarship.  In  May   2013   she
transferred to the University of Central Florida to  work  at  Disney  as  a
professional intern in  the  engineering  department  until  May  2014.  She
graduated in May 2014 with a BA in Civil Engineering. Her  mother  was  shot
and killed by organised criminals in 2012 and a sign was found on  her  body
saying "charging more tax". She returned to Honduras  in  June  2012,  after
her mother's death, to sort everything out and close down the  store.  There
was an attempted burglary whilst she was there.  After  she  graduated,  her
university advisor advised her to claim asylum which she did,  in  the  USA,
but was refused as she had missed the deadline.  Her  adviser  than  advised
her to claim asylum in the United Kingdom, which is what she did.

The respondent did not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of  her  mother's
murder and did not accept that she had claimed asylum in USA. Whilst it  was
accepted that there was discrimination on the basis of gender  in  Honduras,
it was not accepted that the appellant would be at risk  of  persecution  on
return.  The  respondent  considered  that  there  was  a   sufficiency   of
protection  available  to  the  appellant  and  that  she  could  internally
relocate within the country.

The appellant appealed against that decision. Her  appeal  was  heard  on  1
July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Tiffen. Judge Tiffen heard  from  the
appellant and considered an expert report from  Professor  Mark  Ungar.  She
found the appellant's account of her experiences, including  the  murder  of
her mother and her unsuccessful asylum claim in the USA, to be credible  and
she accepted that she would be at risk on return to Honduras  as  result  of
the targeting of Asian people and the  gender-based  violence.  She  allowed
the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds in  a
decision promulgated on 2 July 2014.

The respondent sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on four grounds: that the judge  had  erred  by  relying  on  minor
errors in the refusal decision in concluding that there had been a  lack  of
serious consideration by the respondent of the appellant's claim;  that  the
judge had erred by speculating about the reasons for there being  no  record
confirming the appellant's claim to have applied for  asylum  in  USA;  that
the judge had erred in her consideration of internal  relocation;  and  that
the judge had erred in her consideration of the "real risk" of persecution.

Permission to appeal was granted by myself on 1 August 2014 on all  grounds,
but primarily on the last ground.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

The appeal then came before me and I heard submissions from both parties  on
the error of law.

Mr Wilding submitted that the judge had failed to explain how the  views  of
the country  expert,  Professor  Ungar,  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the
appellant was  at  risk  of  persecution,  rather  than  discrimination.  He
submitted that there was an inadequacy of reasoning in the judge's  decision
in regard to the risk of persecution, as well as in regard to  the  question
of internal relocation.

Mr Fripp submitted that the evidence  showed  a  differential  risk  to  the
appellant on the basis of her ethnicity and gender  and  that  there  was  a
lack of effective state protection, such that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
conclude that she was a refugee. If the appellant had not shown  she  was  a
refugee, then she was still entitled to humanitarian protection.

Mr Wilding, in response, did not accept  that  the  judge  had  made  proper
findings  to  show  that  the  appellant  was   entitled   to   humanitarian
protection.

I advised the parties that in my view the judge had  erred  in  law  in  her
decision as she had failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  she
concluded that the appellant was at  risk  of  persecution,  as  opposed  to
discrimination, in Honduras. The judge's findings on  risk  on  return  were
therefore unsustainable, by reason  of  inadequacy  of  reasoning,  and  her
decision had to be set aside and re-made. There  was  no  challenge  to  the
judge's findings of fact and it was agreed  by  all  parties  that  the  re-
making of the decision was therefore confined to the  question  of  risk  on
return and could be addressed by way of submissions,  without  any  need  to
adjourn the proceedings.

Re-making the Decision

Mr Fripp relied on the cases of Fornah  (FC)  (Appellant)  v.  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2006]  UKHL  46  and  Sivakumar,  R  (on  the
application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] UKHL  14
in submitting that the appellant had demonstrated an  effective  reason  for
being persecuted and  had  shown  a  differential  risk  by  reason  of  her
ethnicity and gender, as confirmed by the conclusions in the expert  report.
He submitted that there was a reasonable likelihood that she was a refugee.

Mr Wilding submitted that the expert report did not support the  claim  that
the appellant would be at risk of persecution. Whilst it was  accepted  that
there was a risk of discrimination, the evidence did not support a claim  as
to a well-founded objective fear of persecution.  The  appellant  could  not
succeed on asylum or humanitarian protection grounds.

Mr Fripp reiterated his earlier submissions by way of response.

Consideration and findings

There is no challenge to the positive credibility  findings  made  by  Judge
Tiffen and the appellant's past experiences are indeed consistent  with  the
country information about Honduras and the conclusions in the expert  report
of Professor Ungar. There is no dispute that gang violence  in  Honduras  is
endemic and that  there  exists  ethnic  and  gender  based  discrimination.
However, as Mr Wilding submitted, there is nothing in  any  of  the  country
and expert reports to support a claim that the appellant would  be  at  risk
of treatment amounting to persecution in Honduras. Indeed,  the  appellant's
own past experiences do not support such a conclusion.

The appellant, in her Statement of Additional Grounds,  described  her  past
experiences as consisting of being judged, insulted, bullied  and  made  fun
of because of her skin colour, her small eyes and her  Asian  heritage,  and
of being harassed by men in the street. At question 43 of her interview  she
said that she had suffered societal harassment  due  to  her  ethnicity.  At
question 51 of her interview the appellant  confirmed  that  she  had  never
been physically harmed and that she  simply  feared  returning  to  Honduras
because she felt vulnerable as an Asian girl. At question 119 she could  not
think  of  any  other  reasons  why  she  could  not  return  to   Honduras.
Accordingly it is plain that her past experiences did not approach  anything
beyond  discrimination  and  harassment  and  could  not  be  described   as
persecution.

Furthermore,  although  the  appellant's  past  experiences  also   included
demands and threats from  organised  criminals,  those  incidents  were  all
related to protection money  for  the  family  store.  The  appellant's  own
evidence  in  her  statement  of  additional  grounds  (page   E4   of   the
respondent's bundle) was that her  mother's  murder  was  a  result  of  her
inability to pay the protection money. It is clear from  the  expert  report
at [2] on page 2 that extortion is  endemic  in  Honduras,  and  that  small
businesses are particularly targeted due to their vulnerability. It is  also
clear from the report that corruption within the police  is  rife  and  that
gangs are in control of  many  urban  areas.  The  expert  report  therefore
supports the appellant's account of  her  family's  experiences  with  their
store. However the report does not support a claim of  targeting  by  reason
solely of ethnicity.  At  [10]  Professor  Ungar  refers  to  discrimination
against minorities such as Asians but goes on to  state  that  there  is  no
history of systemic discrimination  against  people  of  Asian  descent.  He
refers to the targeting  of  such  communities  only  insofar  as  they  are
associated with small businesses which are easy targets for robbery.

Accordingly, whilst Professor Ungar's report supports the appellant's  claim
as to her past experiences in Honduras of discrimination  on  the  basis  of
her gender and  race  and  threats  of  violence  related  to  her  family's
economic status and livelihood, it goes nowhere near  to  providing  support
for a conclusion that she experienced persecution in the past  or  that  she
would be at risk of persecution  on  any  basis  on  return.  Significantly,
also, the report does not address the issue of how the  appellant  would  be
regarded and treated as an  educated  woman  with  qualifications  and  work
experience from the USA.

For  all  of  these  reasons  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
demonstrate that she would be at risk of  anything  approaching  persecution
in Honduras. Her  profile  as  an  educated  and  qualified  woman  is  very
different to the profile she previously had and there is no reason  why  she
would be at risk from criminal gangs or from any other source  if  she  were
to return to that country. There is no basis for concluding that  she  would
be susceptible to threats and extortion as a small business  owner,  as  the
family store no longer exists. As  she  accepted  in  her  evidence  at  her
interview, at question 122, there were many young, single females living  in
Honduras and there is no reason why the appellant could not find  employment
with the qualifications and skills she has since acquired.

There is, furthermore, nothing in  the  country  information  to  support  a
claim that there exists in Honduras  a  degree  of  indiscriminate  violence
reaching such a high level as to meet the  test  in  Elgafaji  (Justice  and
Home Affairs) [2009] EUECJ C-465/07, so as  to  qualify  the  appellant  for
humanitarian protection.

The  appellant's  appeal  therefore  falls  to  be  dismissed   on   asylum,
humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing CLC's appeal on all grounds.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I continue that
    order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008).




                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
