
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03900/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 1 March 2016                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                                     R B
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. M K Mustafa, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born  on  1  May  1985.  Her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 21 January 2015  to
    refuse to grant her asylum and to remove her by way of directions under
    s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, was dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision promulgated on 20 August
    2016.

 2. The Judge noted at [9] that the National Referral Mechanism was not  in
    the Home Office bundle. It had been concluded by  the  respondent  that
    the appellant was not a victim of human trafficking.

 3. The Judge stated that he was left only with the respondent's  assertion
    that  that  the  appellant's  account  of  her  incarceration  by   her
    traffickers is unreliable.  He was, in the  circumstances,  "driven  to
    agree" with counsel for the appellant and felt obliged  to  proceed  on
    the basis that the appellant had established that she had been a victim
    of trafficking and that the Tribunal must accept her account up to  her
    escape from her abductors [22].

 4. It was submitted  by  the  presenting  officer  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that "the protection issue/asylum claim is independent of  the
    trafficking issue." Neither party  sought  to  adjourn  the  appeal  to
    enable the NRM to be produced [22].

 5. The Judge stated at [24] that "... it is not being suggested  that  the
    appellant qualifies for refugee protection because, for example, of the
    risk of reprisals because as a  formerly  trafficked  person,  she  has
    given evidence against her traffickers". Neither is it  being  asserted
    that she is  part  of  a  particular  social  group,  namely  "formerly
    trafficked women".  He stated that she had not been trafficked  by  her
    own family [24].

 6. The Convention reason relied on by the appellant  was  that  she  is  a
    former  victim  of  human  trafficking  for  the  purpose  of  domestic
    servitude and that she is a single woman in Bangladesh.

 7. She claimed that her  uncle  in  the  UK,  [Abdul  A],  sent  money  to
    Bangladesh for the care of her  grandmother.  The  appellant  was  then
    looking after her. On her grandmother's  death  in  October  2010,  her
    uncle stopped sending money.

 8. She met a Mr Ali at a wedding in Bangladesh. He was visiting  from  the
    UK. A week later, on 10 May 2011, she married him. She did not tell her
    parents until after the marriage. Her parents were initially angry  but
    they allowed them to stay in the home before he returned to the UK. Her
    husband later came back to Bangladesh and rented a flat  where  he  and
    the appellant stayed. Her siblings visited her there.

 9. When she arrived in the UK, after eventually receiving  her  visa,  her
    husband sent her to stay with his friend and his  wife  as  he  had  to
    work. He told her that she would live separately  from  the  family  as
    they would not accept her. After leaving her there, she had no  contact
    with him. She accordingly stayed with [Anwar A], his wife and their six
    children; she had her own room in the attic.

10. She was mistreated by [Anwar A] and his wife for the five or six  weeks
    she stayed there. She was required  to  do  extensive  domestic  duties
    including gardening. On two occasions [Anwar A]  made  sexual  advances
    towards her. [Anwar A]'s wife, [Sitara B], also beat her.

11. She left after they allowed her to visit her uncle; she told  him  what
    was happening. She went to stay with her uncle in Birmingham  in  June.
    He collected her from his maternal aunt's house in Ilford. She received
    a call from them in July.

12. In the same month, [Anwar A] came to her uncle's  house  in  Birmingham
    with six or seven other people, including his wife. They wanted to take
    her away but  her  uncle  refused  and  they  threatened  to  have  him
    imprisoned for keeping the appellant in the UK and also  threatened  to
    have her brother in Bangladesh killed.

13. The appellant then suffered a panic attack; the ambulance  was  called.
    Her uncle called her husband but he denied knowing the appellant and he
    hung up. She then became depressed.

14. [Anwar A] later phoned the uncle, threatening  him  but  this  was  not
    reported to the police and the uncle changed his SIM card.

15. She reported her mistreatment in the UK to the police in 2014.

16. [Anwar A] went to Bangladesh in December and  visited  the  appellant's
    brother with some other men. He said they would attack the appellant if
    she ever returned to  Bangladesh.  In  February  2014  her  father  was
    threatened.

17. She takes medication for depression and is undergoing tests for unknown
    medical issues. Her family in the UK consists of one uncle,  who  is  a
    British citizen.

18. The appellant feared that her ex-husband, his brothers and his  friend,
    [Anwar A], will kill her if she returns to Bangladesh.  The  police  in
    Bangladesh cannot protect her and her family.

19. As noted, the appellant had made a spousal  visa  application  in  June
    2012 which was initially refused but was later allowed.  The  visa  was
    issued on 26 April 2013. She arrived in the UK on 4 May  2013  to  join
    her husband, [Moboshir A].

20. On 26 September 2013 she made an application for leave to remain  under
    a domestic violence concession. Limited  leave  was  granted  until  26
    December 2013. She then made an application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a result of domestic violence which was refused  on  6  March
    2014. Her leave was curtailed on the same date. An appeal against  that
    decision was subsequently withdrawn by the appellant and the appeal was
    listed as concluded on 19 June 2014.

21. She then made an appointment to claim asylum in the UK in May 2014  and
    formally sought asylum.

22. The Judge had regard to the appellant's contention at [25] that if  she
    returned to Bangladesh, she believed that the  friend  of  her  husband
    would kill her because he wants her to return to his house  in  the  UK
    and live with him. As she is not going to do that, she  feels  he  will
    kill her in Bangladesh. This she had stated in her screening interview.



23. The Judge noted that no explanation had been offered for a delay  of  a
    year before she contacted the police. She claimed in evidence that  she
    had contacted the police, that they had telephoned her subsequently but
    she had been out and had missed the call.

24. The Judge found that account to be "most unlikely".  The  police  would
    take allegations of trafficking/domestic slavery "extremely seriously"-
    [28]. They would not deal with it in such a cursory  manner.  He  noted
    that her uncle, [Abdul A], asserted in his statement  that  as  at  May
    2014 he had been afraid to speak to the police  but  that  one  day  he
    might go and report it to the police in the UK.

25. The Judge noted that he was considering this matter in the  context  of
    whether the appellant has a genuine fear of  serious  harm  from  these
    individuals and concluded that notwithstanding that  he  accepted  that
    she had been the victim of trafficking, since her "escape" she had  not
    taken the steps which a reasonable person would to ensure  her  abusers
    were brought to justice and more importantly, to  protect  herself  and
    neither has her uncle, her present guardian. He concluded that  neither
    she or her uncles are in fear of her husband and his accomplices [29].

26. The Judge referred to the lethargy which  the  appellant  displayed  in
    reporting matters to the police in the UK, which  contrasted  with  the
    "alacrity" with which her brother in Bangladesh who had been threatened
    by the same  individuals,  reported  the  matter  within  days  to  the
    apparently far less effective Bangladeshi  police  force.  He  obtained
    proof of doing so.

27. That report is in the Home Office bundle. The respondent did not accept
    that document as genuine. The Judge found that on the face of it, it is
    difficult to do so. "It seems to be a jumble of words." He had not been
    provided with the  original,  and  given  the  ease  with  which  false
    documents are commonly available in Bangladesh, and  having  regard  to
    the lethargy displayed by the appellant in reporting matters to the  UK
    police, he was not satisfied that he can rely on the document [31].

28. He stated that even if he were wrong about that, the  appellant's  case
    has not substantially progressed.  Since  the  claimed  report  to  the
    police, there have been no further  threats.  Accordingly,  either  the
    document is false  which  would  impact  on  her  credibility,  or  the
    document is valid and the  approach  to  the  police  has  stopped  the
    harassment from the individuals in question [32].

29. He stated that the fact is that the appellant only reported the  events
    since her arrival in the UK after she made a claim for asylum  and  her
    domestic violence application was  refused  [33].  That  was  behaviour
    likely to delay the resolution of the claim and fell within s.8 of  the
    2004 Act, damaging her general credibility [33].

30. He noted that the appellant asserts  that  she  cannot  return  to  her
    family in Bangladesh as they have rejected her following her  marriage.
    He however found that unlikely [34]. His impression  from  her  witness
    statement "is of a very close and loving family, her parents were  very
    concerned about her marrying [Mobishir A]" and "my parents told him  he
    had better not ruin my life. They pleaded with him".

31. He then stated: "That their daughter  has  been  duped  and  then  held
    captive in domestic slavery is hardly her fault and I do not think  any
    reasonable person,  notwithstanding  any  cultural  differences,  would
    think otherwise." [34]

32. He found in the alternative that in the unlikely event that that is not
    the case, the appellant has an extended family in  Bangladesh  to  whom
    she could turn. She has a brother she is  in  touch  with  and  he  has
    presumably provided the police report.  Although  she  stated  she  was
    estranged from him on account of her marriage, she went on to say  that
    the only reason she did not talk to  him  was  that  communication  was
    generally through her uncle in the UK [35].

33. The Judge was fortified in his conclusion that  she  is  not  estranged
    from her family by the fact that her protector in the UK has  been  her
    uncle, [Abdul A]. The appellant contended that having been  in  the  UK
    for 20 years, he is culturally different  and  more  liberal  than  her
    extended family in Bangladesh.  However,  the  Judge  noted  that  even
    though he had been here for 20 years, he cannot write his statement  in
    English indicating a lack of "enculturation" [36].

34. He stated that 'a  more  significant  point'  is  that  though  he  has
    befriended the apparently estranged appellant, he has not been cut  off
    by his brother, the appellant's father. Nor has he been cut off by  the
    family in Bangladesh but would seem to  be  in  constant  communication
    with them. Accordingly, any rift between the appellant and  her  family
    has been healed or  is  very  easily  "healable."  The  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant has established that she cannot return  to
    Bangladesh and have the protection of her family [36].

35. If that is not correct, he found that the appellant could avail herself
    of the protection of the authorities in Bangladesh. He referred to  the
    Country Information Guidance relating  to  Bangladesh,  dated  November
    2014. He could not find  that  there  is  a  sustained  and  systematic
    failure  of  state  protection  on  the  part  of  the  authorities  in
    Bangladesh [37].

36. Moreover, the appellant is a single woman, "unencumbered by  a  child".
    [38] She has previously  worked  as  a  carer  and  tailor.  She  could
    internally relocate and it would not be unreasonable for her to do  so.
    It might not be easy, but the Judge could not find that she  could  not
    establish herself in a large city such as Dhaka or Chittagong. Both are
    large cities, far away from her abusers who apparently  come  from  the
    next door local village in  Bangladesh.  He  referred  to  the  refusal
    letter where  the  respondent  points  out  that  she  would  have  the
    practical and financial assistance of Refugee Action [38].

37. The Judge was not asked to consider the appellant's case under  Article
    8.

38. On  16  October  2015,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis that it  is  arguable  that
    the Judge, given that he accepted the  appellant's  account  of  having
    been trafficked (simply on the basis that the respondent had failed  to
    produce the NRM report which according to the respondent  decided  that
    she had  not  been  trafficked)  did  not  adequately  reason  why  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return.

39. Mr Mustafa, who did not  represent  the  appellant  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing,  relied  on  the  skeleton  argument  produced  on  4
    February 2016.  He  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    finding at [23] and [24] regarding the  appellant's  Convention  reason
    for fear of persecution, lacked clarity and at  best  could  be  termed
    "clouded." The "root cause" of her claim  was  that  she  is  a  former
    victim of human trafficking for the purpose of domestic  servitude  and
    is a single woman in Bangladesh.

40. He submitted that there is nothing in the determination  to  show  that
    the appellant, having been trafficked to the UK, would face a  risk  of
    trafficking again. He was obliged to look at both the past as  well  as
    the future risk which has not been considered. He  submitted  that  the
    general principle is that past persecution is a serious  indication  of
    risk on return.

41. The reasoning why the appellant would not be at risk on  return  "lacks
    sufficiency" and is materially flawed. He referred to the "remarks"  by
    the Judge regarding the issue of delay at [29] and [33]. That delay, he
    submitted,  "does  not  detract  anything  from  the  merits   of   the
    appellant's claim" and the explanation given by her.  He  relied  on  a
    passage from  paragraph  12.184  of  Macdonald's  Immigration  Law  and
    Practice, 9th Edition.

42. Even if it is accepted that the Judge was  correct  to  find  that  the
    appellant's credibility had been damaged, the Judge  failed  to  attach
    sufficient weight to the fact that the "centrepiece" of her  story  and
    her risk of being persecuted on return holds strong ground.  He  relied
    on Chiver (Asylum:  discrimination:  employment:  persecution)  Romania
    [1994] UKAIT 1075 to the effect that it is possible for an  adjudicator
    to believe that a witness is not telling the truth about  some  matters
    still to be persuaded that the centrepiece of the story stands.

43. Further, the Judge's assertion at [31]  that  the  respondent  did  not
    accept the police report from Bangladesh to be a genuine document is  a
    "misstatement"  of  the  respondent's  position.  The   respondent   in
    paragraph 26 of her decision merely stated that limited weight could be
    applied to the documents in question. That mistake called into question
    "the quality of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision."

44.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge's  remarks  between  [34]   and   [36]
    demonstrated a failure to address his mind to the "correction question"
    (sic) which is whether state  protection  is  adequate  as  opposed  to
    whether family protection is adequate.

45. The finding at [37] that there is no sustained or systematic failure on
    the part of the Bangladeshi authorities is unsafe for want of reasoning
    and in view of the objective evidence contained in the 2015 Trafficking
    in Persons Report. The report noted that the alleged complicity of some
    Bangladeshi  government  officials  and  police   officers   in   human
    trafficking remained a problem. Corrupt politicians, police, and Border
    Security forces on both sides of the India-Bangladesh border reportedly
    recognised a token used by human traffickers to evade arrest if  caught
    at the border.

46. Further, the report asserted that the government made  limited  efforts
    to protect victims of trafficking. There was a lack of formal mechanism
    for the authorities to refer victims to care. The  government  did  not
    provide services specifically designed  for  trafficking  victims.  The
    victims could access support services  for  vulnerable  people  through
    nine  multi-purpose  shelters.  NGOs  provide  shelter   and   services
    specifically for trafficking victims; police sometimes refer victims to
    these services on an ad hoc basis.

47. Finally, he submitted that the Judge's findings  relating  to  internal
    relocation  at  [38]  failed  to  take  into  account  (i)  the  social
    positioning of the  appellant,  including  factors  such  as  religion,
    education, economic  independence,  region,  cultural  and  traditional
    values, marital status - and the manner in which such factors would act
    as a barrier; and (ii) security and socio economic  conditions  in  the
    proposed area of relocation.

48. He referred  to  the  respondent's  country  information  and  guidance
    relating to Bangladeshi women  dated  December  2014  setting  out  the
    general position of women in Bangladeshi society. If  those  conditions
    apply to them, then internal relocation may be unduly harsh  for  women
    with no support networks and there are no real  prospects  of  securing
    access to a livelihood. He referred to paragraph 14, 15 and 16  of  the
    appellant's witness statement. There she stated that she  went  against
    her family when she married as she did not tell them  beforehand.  They
    are ashamed of her actions and she will not be accepted by  them  going
    back after a failed marriage. It is a great  shame  for  a  husband  to
    leave a wife in Bangladesh and often the girl is blamed, even if she is
    not at fault.

49. Moreover, her brother has had problems due to her and therefore he will
    not accept her, given that he has his own family to worry about,  which
    she would add to if she lived with him.

50. She cannot go and live anywhere on her own  in  Bangladesh  as  a  lone
    female as it is not safe. She will be targeted for sexual  exploitation
    and other worse fates.  Women  are  second  class  citizens  and  often
    exploited and demeaned. This is  100  times  worse  for  women  without
    families to protect them.

51. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Mills submitted that the Judge directed
    himself appropriately.  The  findings  are  properly  reasoned  and  in
    particular his assessment as to why the appellant would not be at  risk
    on return.

52. He referred to [23] and [24] to which I have  set  out.  He  emphasised
    that she has not been trafficked by her own family.

53. The presenting officer did not have the  NRM.  There  were  however  no
    applications for an adjournment to obtain it. The Judge noted  that  it
    was not being argued that the appellant qualified for asylum simply ion
    the basis of her having been a  victim  of  trafficking.  Rather,  "the
    appellant's  assertion  is  that  her  having  been  trafficked   being
    unchallenged  that  provides  her  asylum  claim   with   support   and
    consistency" (sic).  The Judge at [24] stated that it was not suggested
    that she qualified for refugee protection because, for example, of  the
    risk of reprisals as a formerly trafficked person when  she  has  given
    evidence against her traffickers.

54. He submitted that the contention that the Judge had not properly  given
    effect to paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules has to  be  taken  in
    context. There is a difference  between  the  claim  by  a  person  who
    established that as a child she had been trafficked abroad and was made
    to work as a slave, who on return as an adult  would  still  remain  at
    risk.

55. Here the appellant had been party to a marriage which was not arranged.
    She met her husband and married a week later. This  had  occurred  when
    she was not a young person. The factual context  must  be  appreciated.
    Although initially her family were angry they had  eventually  come  to
    accept the relationship. Her husband  had  rented  a  flat  where  they
    started. They had subsequently applied to be admitted to the UK as  his
    spouse. She received that visa. She came to the UK in 2013. Her husband
    sent her to stay with a friend who kept her at his home and  where  she
    was subjected to working for them as well as an approach by  [Anwar  A]
    who made sexual advances towards her.

56. She finally was "given permission"  to  go  to  her  uncle's  house  in
    Birmingham. She told him everything that was going on. He told  her  to
    stay with him and not to go back. After two weeks, [Anwar A], his  wife
    and a few family members tried to force her to return  with  them.  Her
    uncle refused. Her brother was then threatened in Bangladesh.

57. In this case, however, he submitted that the appellant could return  to
    her family. In her witness statement, she notes that  her  parents  let
    them "stay the night" after she informed them  that  she  had  married.
    There they consummated the marriage and her husband stayed his last few
    days with her. He went to the airport from their home. Her  parents  in
    fact told him that he had better not ruin her life. They  pleaded  with
    him as set out at paragraph 29 of  her  statement  in  support  of  her
    asylum claim, referred to by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at [34].

58. He submitted that the Judge carefully considered this  at  [34]  noting
    that "their daughter" has been duped and then held captive in  domestic
    slavery. This was not her fault. No reasonable person,  notwithstanding
    cultural differences, would think otherwise [34]. The  Judge  found  it
    was unlikely that she could not return to her family in Bangladesh.

59. Accordingly, past persecution does not add to the risk.

60. With regard to the issue of delay, the Judge's findings  are  contained
    at [26]. He noted that the full extent of contact with the police  with
    regard to the reporting of her abductors occurred about  the  beginning
    of July 2015: the reference to July 2014 at [26] is clearly  incorrect.
    No explanation was offered for the delay of a year in contacting them.

61. The Judge also found at [29] that she  had  not  taken  steps  which  a
    reasonable person would have, to ensure her  abusers  were  brought  to
    justice and to protect herself. Neither  had  her  uncle,  her  present
    guardian, done so. Accordingly he concluded that neither  she  nor  her
    uncles were in fear of her husband and his  accomplices.  He  submitted
    that that was a proper finding based on the evidence.

62. With regard to the  assertion  that  the  document  presented  was  not
    "genuine", there was a reference to the  respondent's  characterisation
    in the refusal letter.  The  Judge  however  gave  proper  reasons  for
    finding that he could not rely on the  document  [31].  He  accordingly
    properly followed the approach set  out  in  the  decision  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed. All the evidence and points needed to be looked at in the round.

63. Insofar as the ground relating to protection and return  is  concerned,
    the Judge had properly found that the appellant was not  at  real  risk
    from traffickers. He also found that she  would  have  the  benefit  of
    family support. Even if there were a fear of  traffickers,  her  family
    support is relevant. The Judge considered  alternatives  to  protection
    from her own family,  by  having  regard  to  her  extended  family  in
    Bangladesh, and in particular her  brother.  Nor  had  the  appellant's
    father become estranged from the appellant's uncle [Abdul A],  who  had
    been in the UK for 20 years. That uncle had not been  cut  off  by  his
    brother, the appellant's father, nor by the family  in  Bangladesh.  He
    has been in constant communication with  them.  Accordingly,  any  rift
    between the appellant and her family  has  been  healed  or  is  easily
    'healable' [36].

64. The Judge then appropriately dealt with her  case  on  the  basis  that
    those sources of protection might not be available, by referring to the
    prospect of protection from the authorities  in  Bangladesh:  [37]  and
    [38]. His findings that there is not  a  systematic  failure  of  state
    protection on the part of  the  Bangladesh  authorities  and  that  the
    appellant would have practical and financial assistance if she were  to
    live alone was based on the available evidence.

65. Even though internal relocation may be harsh,  he  submitted  that  the
    Judge has adequately considered that she could internally relocate  and
    that it would not be unreasonable for her to do so.

    Assessment

66. I have set out in some detail the competing submissions relating to the
    assessment and findings of the Judge.

67. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    given  that  he  accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  having   been
    trafficked on the basis of the failure to produce the NRM report, which
    according to the respondent decided that she had not  been  trafficked,
    the Judge did not adequately reason why the appellant would not  be  at
    risk on return.

68. I have however considered all four grounds raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

69. I find that the Judge's findings regarding the  appellant's  Convention
    reasons for fear of persecution do not, as contended, lack clarity. The
    Judge considered in some detail the context in  which  the  appellant's
    claim was made. He particularly emphasised that the appellant  had  not
    been trafficked by her own family in Bangladesh.

70. It was in that context that the Judge considered  her  contention  that
    should she return to Bangladesh, she would be subject to serious  harm.
    The Judge noted, as already referred to, that the appellant had delayed
    for a year prior before reporting  her  abductors  to  the  police.  In
    evidence,  she  claimed  that  she  had  contacted   the   police   who
    subsequently contacted her but she was out at the time.

71. In the circumstances, he found that neither she nor her  uncle  are  in
    fear from her husband and his accomplices. He referred to the  lethargy
    the appellant displayed in reporting matters to the police in the UK.

72. As part of the assessment as a whole, he  was  not  satisfied  that  he
    could rely on the police document relating to the alleged threat to her
    brother in Bangladesh.  The  Judge  had  not  been  provided  with  the
    original and given the ease with  which  such  documents  are  commonly
    available and the lethargy which the appellant displayed  in  reporting
    matters to the UK police, he was satisfied that he could not rely  upon
    it.  The Judge did not view that document in isolation but  had  regard
    to the evidence in the round.

73. Similarly, his finding that her  behaviour  was  likely  to  delay  the
    resolution of her claim within  s.8  of  the  2004  Act,  damaging  her
    general credibility, was not considered  in isolation but  with  regard
    to the evidence as a whole.

74. The Judge considered the appellant's claim that she  cannot  return  to
    her family in Bangladesh  as  they  have  rejected  her  following  her
    marriage. Although her father and her family in  general  were  against
    her marriage initially, they accepted it and condoned  it  by  allowing
    them to remain in the house for several days. The  appellant's  husband
    also rented a flat  in  Bangladesh  for  the  appellant.  Although  her
    parents were concerned about that marriage, her parents told  him  that
    he had better not ruin her life and they pleaded with him.

75. As noted by the Judge, their daughter had been "duped" and held captive
    in domestic slavery. This was hardly her fault.

76. In those circumstances, he found it unlikely that this close and loving
    family would reject the appellant and would not accept her  should  she
    turn to them on return to Bangladesh.

77. The Judge however has also considered whether she would be able to turn
    for support to an extended family  in  Bangladesh  should  her  parents
    reject her. He noted that the appellant has a brother with whom she has
    been in touch. He noted that although she said she was  estranged  from
    him on account of the marriage, the only reason she did not talk to him
    from the UK was that communication was generally through her  uncle  in
    the UK.

78. The Judge also reached the conclusion that she is  not  estranged  from
    her family by taking into account that her "protector" in the  UK,  her
    uncle [Abdul A], was not being cut off by his brother, the  appellant's
    father, or the family in Bangladesh. It would seem that he had been  in
    constant  communication  with  them.  There  was  therefore  a   proper
    evidential basis for the conclusion by the Judge that any rift  between
    the appellant and her family had either been healed or could easily  be
    healed. Accordingly,  she  would  on  return  to  Bangladesh  have  the
    protection of her family [36].

79. The Judge also considered whether, if he were wrong  about  having  the
    protection from her family or extended family, she could avail  herself
    of the protection of the authorities in Bangladesh.  Having  regard  to
    the COIG Bangladesh, November  2014,  there  is  not  a  sustained  and
    systematic failure of state protection on the part of  the  authorities
    in Bangladesh.

80. He noted that as a single woman, she  would  not  be  encumbered  by  a
    child. She had previously worked as a carer and tailor. If she  had  to
    internally relocate, that would  not  be  unreasonable  for  her.  Even
    though it might not be easy, he did not  conclude  that  she  would  be
    unable to establish herself in a city such as Dhaka or  Chittagong.  In
    any event, she would have the practical  and  financial  assistance  of
    Refugee Action.

81. In  summary,  the  Judge  properly  considered  paragraph  339  of  the
    Immigration Rules and has given sustainable reasons  for  his  findings
    that the appellant would not be at risk on return.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law. The  decision  shall  accordingly
    stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 24/2/2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
