
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03567/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AS
                          (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this decision I will refer to the appellant  as  "the  Secretary  of
    State" and to the respondent as "the claimant".

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  7th  April  2015  allowing   the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    30 March 2013, to refuse his application for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

 3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    claimant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all  parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

The Claimant

 4. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan who arrived in  the  UK  on  5
    December 2011 and immediately claimed asylum.

 5. The claimant claims his date of birth is 4 September 1997.

 6. On 16 December 2011 an age assessment was carried out by Croydon Social
    Services which found the claimant to be 16 years old and on 3 May  2012
    Croydon Social  Services  carried  out  another  age  assessment  which
    concluded the claimant's date of birth was 4 September 1995.

 7. On 3 February 2012 an age assessment was carried out by Dr  Birch,  who
    found the claimant to be 14 or 15 at that date.

 8. The Secretary of State refused the claimant's application. Her  reasons
    are set out in a refusal letter dated 30 March 2013  (hereinafter  "the
    Refusal Letter"). In sum,  the  application  was  refused  because  the
    Secretary of State  did  not  find  the  claimant's  account  of  being
    kidnapped and tortured by the Taliban to be credible; she found that he
    had family in Afghanistan who could offer him  support  and  protection
    upon return; and  she  found  that  in  any  event  he  could  relocate
    internally.

 9. One of the  key  issues  considered  in  the  Refusal  Letter  was  the
    claimant's age.  The  Refusal  Letter  states  that  according  to  the
    assessments by Croydon Social Services the claimant was  17  years  and
    207 days old but based on Dr Birch's assessment he would be only 15  or
    16 years of age.  There is a lengthy discussion  of  negative  judicial
    treatment of Dr Birch's methodology and approach and the Refusal Letter
    concludes that Dr Birch's assessment  cannot  be  used  as  a  reliable
    indicator of the claimant's age. The claimant is found to be  17  years
    and 6 months old and therefore not able to  quality  for  Discretionary
    Leave as an asylum seeking child.

10. In the meantime, the claimant brought judicial  review  proceedings  in
    relation to the assessment of his age by Croydon Social Services. In  a
    decision promulgated on 18 November 2013, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Latter
    found the claimant to not be a reliable witness about his  age,  to  be
    older then he claimed "by a reasonably significant margin" and to  have
    a probable date of birth of 4 September 1995.

The First-Tier Tribunal Decision

11. The appellant appealed the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum or humanitarian protection and his appeal was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cooper ("the judge") on 3 February 2015.

12. The judge was satisfied that the claimant's account of his treatment in
    and escape from Afghanistan was credible and consistent with  objective
    evidence. She was also satisfied that the claimant had provided medical
    evidence pertaining to his mental health that showed there to be a risk
    of his mental health deteriorating further if he was required to return
    to Afghanistan. The judge accepted that the claimant did not  know  the
    whereabouts of his family and found that there would not be  sufficient
    of protection for the claimant as  an  unattached  child  returning  to
    Afghanistan.

13. The judge gave detailed consideration to the issue  of  the  claimant's
    age (paragraphs [34] - [56] of the decision)  and  found,  on  balance,
    that his date of birth was 4 September 1997. The judge  commented  that
    this finding was of importance  in  considering  any  discrepancies  or
    inconsistencies  in  the  claimant's  evidence  and  the  question   of
    sufficient of protection on return.

14. In considering the issue of the claimant's  age,  the  judge  made  the
    following findings and observations:

      a. She was not bound by the decision in the Upper Tribunal which found
         the claimant's probable date of birth to be  4  September  1995  as
         there was a different (and  lower)  standard  of  proof  in  asylum
         appeals and she had taken into account evidence that was not before
         the Upper Tribunal.  She stated at paragraph [53]  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal's findings were the starting point but  she  could  depart
         from them if there are good reasons.

      b. At paragraph [44] she commented that the claimant had not relied on
         Dr Birch's assessment but as it was evidence  before  her  she  was
         entitled to give it consideration.  She  went  on  to  discuss  the
         report and compare  it  to  those  of  the  social  workers  before
         concluding, at paragraph [54], that "on balance I prefer  and  give
         more weight to the report of  Dr  Birch  than  to  the  two  social
         services assessments given their inconsistencies, lack of precision
         and vague unreasoned assessments."

      c. She found the Taskira, stating the claimant's age as 12 in  October
         2009, to be valid. This finding was made in light of a report by Dr
         Giustozzi which concerned its veracity. The judge noted  that  this
         report, to which she 'gave weight', was not available to the  Upper
         Tribunal.

      d. The judge also gave weight to the evidence of the claimant's GP and
         his solicitor's statement which she said confirmed the claimant had
         continued to grow since arriving in the UK.

      e. She concluded that based on the evidence in the round, and  at  the
         lower standard of proof, she was satisfied the claimant's  date  of
         birth was 4 September 1997.

15. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal submit that:

      a. The judge failed to inform  the  parties  that  reliance  would  be
         placed upon Dr Birch's age assessment, the claimant having said  he
         would not be relying on it. Before  the  judge  took  into  account
         evidence explicitly not relied upon by the claimant she should have
         put the parties on notice and asked for submissions on the same.

      b. The judge's comment, at paragraph  [37],  that  London  Borough  of
         Croydon may have an interest in the claimant being older  than  his
         claimed age, indicates a lack of impartiality.

      c. There was a failure to take proper account of the  judicial  review
         findings, and in particular the credibility findings  therein  with
         regard both to the social workers (to whom the Upper Tribunal  gave
         considerable weight) and  the  claimant  (whose  evidence  was  not
         considered credible or reliable).

      d. With regard to the Taskira, there  was  a  failure  to  follow  the
         approach in Tanveer Ahmed ([2002]  UKIAT  00439)  that  documentary
         evidence along with provenance needs to be weighed in light of  all
         the  evidence  and  does  not  carry  with  it  a  presumption   of
         authenticity. There must be an appraisal in light of  the  evidence
         about its nature, provenance, timing and background evidence and in
         light of all the other evidence in the  case  especially  from  the
         claimant.

Submissions

16. Ms Fijiwala, on behalf of the Secretary of State, argued  that  placing
    reliance on Dr Birch's report without first allowing the  Secretary  of
    State  an  opportunity  to  make  submissions  in  respect  of  it  was
    procedurally unfair and amounted to an error of law.  She  argued  that
    the error was material because it was clear the judge had relied on the
    report in reaching  her  view  on  the  claimant's  age  and  that  the
    appellant's age was critical to the judge's overall findings.

17. Ms Fijiwala  also  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  given  proper
    consideration to the Upper Tribunal's decision about the claimant's age
    in the recent judicial review  proceedings.  The  Upper  Tribunal  made
    clear findings with respect to the two social workers who  carried  out
    the age assessments. Having  heard  them  given  oral  evidence,  Judge
    Latter stated at paragraph [53] that they were entirely professional in
    their approach and had not  been  influenced  by  the  fact  they  were
    employed by the local authority. He described them as giving an  honest
    assessment and attached considerable  weight  to  their  opinions.  The
    judge in this appeal, who did not hear oral evidence  from  the  social
    workers, took a very different view without an adequate explanation  as
    to why she  was  departing  from  the  considered  view  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

18. Mr Mackenzie submitted that even on the Upper Tribunal's view as to the
    claimant's age, he was a minor when he entered the UK and  only  19  at
    the date of the hearing. Given the factual findings by the judge  which
    have not been challenged including in particular about  the  claimant's
    mental health, he was, if not a child, then a  vulnerable  young  adult
    and as such the judge's analysis regarding  sufficiency  of  protection
    and risk on relocation pertained whether he was 17 or 19.  Accordingly,
    if there was  an  error  in  the  judge's  approach  to  assessing  the
    claimant's age, it was not material.

19. Mr Mackenize argued that the judge's approach to assessing age did  not
    disclose an error of law. Dr Birch's report was in the bundle  and  the
    Secretary of  State  was  able  to  make  submissions.  In  any  event,
    submissions had been made in the Refusal  Letter  which  gave  detailed
    reasons for objecting to Dr Birch's report. Mr  Mackenzie  argued  that
    the Secretary of State had not explained what further  objections,  not
    already in the Refusal Letter, she had to Dr Birch's report and  it  is
    clear the judge had had regard to the criticisms set out in the Refusal
    Letter.  Any  further  submissions  in  respect  of  the  report  would
    therefore not have been material. He also submitted that if  the  judge
    had erred in his approach to Dr Birch's evidence that  would  not  have
    been material as there was ample other evidence upon  which  the  judge
    relied in reaching her conclusion about the claimant's age.

20. With respect to the judicial review proceedings,  Mr  Mackenzie  argued
    that the judge had directed herself  accurately  to  the  law  and  was
    entitled to reach a different conclusion to the Upper Tribunal in light
    of the different evidence before her and different burden of proof.

Consideration

21. For the reasons set out below, I find there to be a material  error  of
    law such the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh in its entirety.

22. The judge was entitled, despite the claimant's decision to not rely  on
    Dr Birch's report, as recorded at  paragraphs  [36]  and  [44]  of  her
    decision, to have regard to and take account of Dr Birch's  report  but
    if she decided to do so it was  incumbent  upon  her  to  forewarn  the
    parties in order to give them the opportunity to make submissions  with
    respect to the report. In the  absence  of  being  so  advised  it  was
    reasonable of the Secretary of State to assume it was not necessary  to
    make any submissions in relation to the report given that the  claimant
    had said he was not relying on it.  Failure to so  advise  the  parties
    was an error that affected the procedural fairness of the appeal.  This
    was particularly the case because Dr Birch's report formed an important
    part of the judge's assessment and  she  attached  to  it  considerable
    weight. At paragraph [54] she stated that she preferred and  gave  more
    weight to it than the other reports before her. Moreover, the judge was
    aware that the Secretary of State had serious  reservations  about  the
    report that were grounded in judicial criticism of the methodology used
    by the author in earlier cases. The judge recognised this and commented
    that Dr Birch had not used certain methodologies that were the  subject
    of the criticism and had adhered to the guidelines issued by the  Royal
    College of Paediatricians.  However,  she  reached  this  view  without
    giving the Secretary of State an opportunity  to  make  submissions  or
    develop arguments about the report.

23. Mr Mackenzie argued that even if the judge erred in her approach to  Dr
    Birch's evidence, the error was not material because the other evidence
    about the claimant's age was sufficient to justify her findings.  I  do
    not agree. The judge made clear that her finding on the claimant's  age
    was based on all the circumstances "in the  round."  Whilst  the  judge
    could, arguably, have reached the  same  view  without  relying  on  Dr
    Birch's report - indeed, that appears  to  be  what  the  claimant  was
    asking her to do as he explicitly chose to not rely  on  the  report  -
    that is not what she did and it is clear that she  placed  considerable
    reliance on the report. Indeed, it is apparent from the  decision  that
    the weight she gave to Dr Birch's report was a determinative factor  in
    reaching her finding about the claimant's age.

24. Having found that the judge erred  in  relying  on  Dr  Birch's  report
    without first giving the Secretary of  State  an  opportunity  to  make
    submissions about it and that this error was material  to  the  finding
    about the claimant's age, the next issue is whether  the  finding  that
    the claimant was born in September 1997 rather than September 1995  was
    material to the overall question of  whether  the  claimant  should  be
    granted asylum. The judge devoted a considerable part of  her  decision
    to assessing the claimant's age and then made her findings as  to  risk
    on return, sufficient of protection  and  internal  relocation  on  the
    basis of the claimant being a child. Arguably it may have been open  to
    the judge to find that even if she was mistaken  about  the  claimant's
    age there was in any event a sufficient basis to find he satisfied  the
    requirements to be granted asylum. However, that was not  the  approach
    the judge took and instead her decision makes clear that  her  findings
    in respect of  asylum  are  bound  up  with  her  findings  as  to  the
    claimant's age.  Accordingly, I find that there  has  been  a  material
    error of law such that the judge's decision should be set aside.

25. I have  considered  whether  the  factual  findings  unrelated  to  the
    claimant's age can be preserved. However, the issue of  the  claimant's
    age cannot be disentangled and separated from the rest of the  findings
    and therefore my conclusion is that the appeal should be remitted for a
    de novo rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal heard
afresh.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh before
a judge other than Judge R Cooper.

Anonymity order made


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    Dated
