
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03231/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 15th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    S Z-M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1958.   Her  appeal  against
    the decision to remove her to Iran was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Asjad on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds
    in a decision promulgated on 10th November 2015.

2.   The Appellant appealed against the decision on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge failed to properly apply Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.  Further,
    her approach to the Appellant's evidence was fundamentally  flawed  and
    contrary to the principles set out in AS and  AA  (Effect  of  previous
    linked determination) Somalia [2006] UKAIT 00052 in which the  Tribunal
    found:

         "66. Returning to the reasons which might be  given  for  citing  a
             decision or determination made in an application or appeal  by
             a related claimant, there is surely no reason, in principle or
             authority, to give the previous determination evidential value
             to  the  case   now   under   consideration.    The   previous
             determination is not the result  of  the  application  of  the
             rigorous requirements of the criminal law; and the fact that a
             previous court or other decision maker has reached a  view  on
             facts which are in issue in  the  present  appeal  is  not  of
             itself any evidence as to those facts.  On the other hand,  in
             the general interests of good administration, it  is  probably
             true  to  say  that  decisions  should  not  be  unnecessarily
             divergent. It is that principle of good administration  which,
             so far as we can see, provides the sole basis in logic  or  on
             authority  for  saying  that  the  result  of   the   previous
             litigation may be relevant in the present appeal.

         ...

         68.  We can  see  no  possible  basis  for  the  assertion  that  a
             determination in one Appellant's case has any  binding  effect
             on any other individual.  All  the  authorities,  as  well  as
             principle, are against that.   Still  less  can  we  find  any
             reason for saying that favourable decisions  are  binding  but
             unfavourable decisions have no lasting effect  at  all.   That
             latter submission, if we may say so, is only too  obviously  a
             demonstration of the way in which the appellate process may be
             the subject of cynical manipulation.

         ...

         72.  There is one final point we would make. As we have said above,
             the contents of a previous determination or decision may be of
             value as evidence of what was said before  that  decision  was
             reached.  The decision itself, however,  is  only  a  starting
             point for the second Tribunal. It is the point  from  which  a
             departure may  be  made.  Crucially,  the  conclusion  of  the
             previous decision maker is not in itself any evidence  of  the
             facts upon which the conclusions appears to have been based."

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dineen
    on 4th December 2015 on the following grounds:

         "Although the judge  carefully  set  out  at  [15]  the  guidelines
         provided in the appeal of Devaseelan there was an arguable error of
         law in that the credibility findings which followed were in respect
         of a different previous Appellant in a different appeal, as opposed
         to the present Appellant herself."

4.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  that  basis  only.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dineen rejected the remaining grounds  that  "the  judge
    erred in attaching importance  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided an account, after her daughter's appeal was  dismissed,  which
    distanced herself from her daughter's case" and "the judge wrongly took
    into account the fact that the Appellant failed to  take  issue  during
    her asylum interview concerning alleged interpretation problems at  her
    screening interview."



Submissions

5.   Mr Gayle submitted that the matters referred to in [19] of the  judge's
    decision were not in fact part of the  Appellant's  daughter's  account
    and were not before  Judge  Thornton,  who  heard  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant's daughter. Accordingly, the judge's finding that  the  facts
    were not materially different was incorrect.  The  error  was  material
    because the judge could have come to a different conclusion if she  had
    considered the facts of  the  Appellant's  case  independent  of  Judge
    Thornton's decision. The judge had failed to take into account that  it
    was not the Appellant's fault that there was  a  delay  in  her  asylum
    interview and [23] of the decision was confusing in  that  it  was  not
    clear whether the judge was dealing with the whole of  the  Appellant's
    evidence, not just the explanation as to why she had not mentioned  her
    own  political  activities  in  her  screening  interview.   Mr   Gayle
    submitted that the decision should be set aside.

6.   Mr Staunton submitted that there was no  error  of  law  and  that  the
    judge was entitled to look at  the  Appellant's  daughter's  appeal  in
    assessing the Appellant's appeal.  The judge was entitled  to  rely  on
    Judge Thornton's findings of  fact,  particularly  when  the  Appellant
    claimed in her screening interview that her fear of return was based on
    her daughter's political activities.  The judge  could  not  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal on the basis that she would be  at  risk  on  return
    from her daughter's activities because Judge Thornton  had  found  that
    her daughter's claim was not credible. The Appellant's appeal therefore
    must fail on the same basis.  The judge's findings were open to her  on
    the evidence and the reasons she gave were valid.  There was  no  error
    in relation to Devaseelan.

7.   Mr Gayle submitted that the judge had  incorrectly  applied  Devaseelan
    and did not take into account AS and AA.  She had not used the decision
    of the Appellant's daughter as a starting point but as  an  end  point.
    Her treatment of the previous appeal was wrong in law as she had placed
    too much weight on the findings of Judge Thornton, which  had  infected
    her assessment of the Appellant's claimed political activities.

8.   Further, the judge had implied that some of  the  Appellant's  evidence
    was before Judge Thornton when in fact it was not.  The judge therefore
    erred in law in relying on findings that Judge Thornton had not in fact
    made. At [23] it is clear that the judge was confused  in  relation  to
    the problems with interpretation and appears to  be  referring  to  the
    asylum interview rather than the screening interview.

The Judge's Decision

9.   The judge sets out the basis of the Appellant's claim at [7]  to  [13].
    She then sets out the previous findings made in her  daughter's  appeal
    at [16], having first directed herself on the application of Devaseelan
    at [15].  The judge set  out  the  answers  given  in  the  Appellant's
    screening interview at [18]:

         "4.1.    What was the reason for coming to the UK?

             Because my daughter is doing  secret  activities  against  the
             government.

         4.2. Can you briefly explain why you cannot  return  to  your  home
             country?

             If we go back we will be killed."

10.  At [19] the judge sets out parts of the Appellant's  witness  statement
    dated 5th  December  2014.  This  witness  statement  appeared  in  the
    Respondent's bundle. The judge quotes paragraphs 13 to 19 and paragraph
    21 of the witness statement. Mr Gayle takes issue with  the  fact  that
    the matters referred to at paragraphs 15, 16  and  19  of  the  witness
    statement were not in fact before Judge  Thornton  and  criticises  the
    judge for finding at [20] of the decision that the  facts  set  out  in
    [19] are not materially different from those put before Judge Thornton.

11.  The judge then, at [21], deals with  the  Appellant's  claim.  At  [23]
    onwards the judge gives reasons for why  she  rejects  the  Appellant's
    account:

         "23. First and foremost, she did not say that  her  own  activities
             were the reason why she left Iran. In fact, in  her  screening
             interview when she was asked why she had come to the  UK,  she
             said: 'Because my daughter is doing secret activities  against
             the  government.'   She  has  since  sought  to  explain  this
             sentence in an additional statement dated 26th January 2015 by
             stating:

                  'With regard to paragraphs 34  and  35,  I  explained  why
                  there were discrepancies in [M1]'s account. In relation to
                  my screening interview, at the outset of that interview, I
                  was told to keep my answers short and I would be given  an
                  opportunity to provide a fuller account at my full  asylum
                  interview.   The  interpreter  was  from  Afghanistan.  He
                  summarised what I was  saying,  rather  than  interpreting
                  word for word. Therefore, he missed some of what  I  said.
                  I definitely made reference to my own political activities
                  when stating why we fled Iran.'

             But I do not accept the Appellant's explanation. She was given
             ample opportunity to add or clarify her statement at  the  end
             of the asylum interview (AIR  119).   I  note  that  not  once
             anywhere in the interview is issue  taken  with  the  language
             being spoken by  the  interpreter.   I  find  that  since  her
             daughter's  claim  has  been  rejected,  the   Appellant   has
             attempted to divert attention away from her daughter's alleged
             activities to those allegedly of  her  own  and  this  is  the
             reason why she initially told the interviewing officer that it
             was her  daughter's  activities.   But  when  her  account  is
             compared to that of her daughter there are of  course  glaring
             inconsistencies.

         24.  [M1] states that it was her brother who telephoned them to say
             her house had been  raided  whereas  the  Appellant  says  her
             neighbour/niece told her.  But even that evidence by [M1]  was
             so variable that it is unclear who  told  them.   Her  brother
             also apparently told her that he was to hand her in.

         25.  [M1] stated that she was told that her  brother  received  170
             lashes in response to the allegations made against her - there
             is no mention of this being because of a tattoo.

         26.  The circumstances of the Appellant's involvement  are  I  find
             impossible to accept. [M1] claimed to have  suffered  torture,
             rape  and  abuse  following  her  arrest.  According  to   her
             interview she was released following her parents' intervention
             and she was admitted to hospital for three days  and  told  to
             rest for four months.  The  Appellant  claims,  however,  that
             following her release her daughter was bitter [sic]  and  when
             she again started distributing leaflets, the Appellant  helped
             her. I find the actions of the Appellant difficult to  accept.
             A submission has been made before me that no account was taken
             to the horrific abuse and torture  that  [M1]  suffered  as  a
             result  of  her  detention,  which  may  have   affected   the
             credibility  of  her  testimony.   Yet,  according   to   this
             Appellant as soon as her daughter 'felt a bit better' she  not
             only resumed her activities but the Appellant helped her.  The
             circumstances of the alleged detention and the impact this  is
             supposed to have had on [M1]  does  not  sit  easy  with  this
             Appellant's evidence that she not only encouraged her daughter
             to carry on with her activities but actually helped her to  do
             so."

Discussion and conclusions

12.  The judge's finding at [20] that the facts  of  the  Appellant's  claim
    that she could not return to Iran because of her  daughter's  political
    activities were not materially different from those  put  before  Judge
    Thornton was open to the judge on the evidence and did not amount to an
    error of law. The main events such as her daughter's claimed activities
    and  detention,  the  wedding,  [M2]'s   arrest   and   the   fear   of
    identification were common to the Appellant's and her daughter's claim.



13.  The Appellant in her screening interview had indicated  that  she  left
    Iran because of her daughter's  political  activities.  Her  daughter's
    asylum appeal was dismissed and the judge was entitled to rely  on  the
    findings of fact made by Judge Thornton in that  respect.  The  judge's
    approach was not inconsistent with  AS  and  AA  in  that  the  earlier
    decision should be treated as a starting point.

14.  Mr Gayle submitted that the judge had  in  fact  treated  the  previous
    decision as an end point and rejected the  Appellant's  credibility  on
    the basis that Judge Thornton had rejected her  daughter's  credibility
    in an earlier appeal. I am not persuaded that this is in fact the case.
    The judge assesses the relevance of  the  previous  findings  of  Judge
    Thornton but then goes on to assess the Appellant's claim  put  forward
    in her substantive interview.

15.  The judge set out the Appellant's account at [21]. The  judge  rejected
    her account on the basis that her initial statement  in  the  screening
    interview was that she had left Iran because  her  daughter  was  doing
    secret  activities  against  the  government  but  in  her  own  asylum
    interview she was now claiming to have had some  political  involvement
    of her own in distributing  leaflets  for  the  On  Million  Signatures
    Campaign.

16.  The judge considered  the  Appellant's  explanation  for  why  she  had
    failed to mention her own activities in her screening  interview  dated
    12th July 2012. The judge gave  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  this
    explanation at [23]. There was no  confusion  in  this  paragraph.  The
    Appellant submitted a statement on 5th December  2014  and  attended  a
    substantive interview on 20th January 2015. The judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant was given ample opportunity to clarify her statement  at  the
    end of her substantive asylum interview but she made no mention at that
    point of any difficulties with the interpreter.

17.  The Appellant first mentioned problems  with  the  interpreter  at  her
    screening interview in her additional statement dated 30th April  2015.
    Paragraph 12 of that statement is set out in the  judge's  decision  at
    [23]. It is not material that the judge gives the wrong date  for  this
    statement because the relevant paragraph is actually set out and quoted
    in full. The Appellant failed to mention problems with the  interpreter
    in her initial statement and in her substantive asylum  interview.  The
    judge's reasons for rejecting the explanation were open to her  on  the
    evidence.

18.  The judge  then  considered  the  Appellant's  claim  and  assessed  it
    against her daughter's claim  and  found  that  they  were  significant
    discrepancies.  Accordingly,  the  judge   assessed   the   Appellant's
    credibility on the basis of the account she has given in her statements
    and interview. She also assessed it against the account  given  by  her
    daughter in her daughter's asylum appeal.

19.  I am not  persuaded  that  because  the  judge  set  out  the  previous
    findings in the appeal before Judge Thornton that she had in fact  made
    up her mind on the Appellant's credibility at  that  stage.  The  judge
    starts with the decision of Judge Thornton and then goes on to consider
    the  Appellant's  claim  put  forward  in  her  statements  and  asylum
    interview.  The  judge  assesses  that  claim  and   finds   that   the
    explanations given for failing to mention her own political  activities
    were not credible explanations and that they were in fact discrepancies
    between the Appellant's account and that of her daughter. On that basis
    the judge then finds that the Appellant's account  of  persecution  had
    been fabricated and was not credible.

20.  On reading the decision as a whole the approach adopted  by  the  judge
    was in fact twofold. She first considered the  Appellant's  claim  that
    she had a well founded fear of persecution on account of her daughter's
    political activities in Iran. She then considered the Appellant's claim
    that she could not return to Iran  on  account  of  her  own  political
    activities. The judge  rejected  her  claim  based  on  her  daughter's
    activities on the basis of the  findings  of  Judge  Thornton  and  the
    discrepancies in the  Appellant's  and  her  daughter's  accounts.  She
    rejected the Appellant's claim in relation to her own activities on the
    basis that it was inconsistent and her account  had  changed  from  her
    initial claim.

21.  The judge has adopted the correct approach as  set  out  in  Devaseelan
    and AS and AA in that the previous decision was a  starting  point  and
    not an end point. I am not persuaded that  the  judge  has  misdirected
    herself in law or failed to  properly  apply  relevant  case  law.  The
    judge's findings were open to her on the evidence and  were  adequately
    reasoned.

22.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision dated 7th November 2015 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


           J Frances
Signed   Date: 10th February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


           J Frances

Signed   Date: 10th February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
