




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               AA/03625/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2nd June 2016                             |On: 5th July 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     FDS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr G. Brown,   Counsel instructed by A. Seelhoff
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran  born  in
    1973. He appeals against the decisions of the Respondent to  refuse  to
    vary his leave to remain and to remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.
    Those decisions, served  on  the  19th  February  2015,  followed  from
    rejection of the Appellant's asylum and human rights claims.




 2. The decision in this appeal is being  re-made  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    because on the 1st May 2016 the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was
    set aside in its entirety. The 'decision on error of  law'  appears  at
    Appendix A but in brief summary the First-tier Tribunal  was  found  to
    have erred in a) failing to give adequate reasons b) a failure to  take
    material matters into account and c) misdirecting itself in respect  of
    Article 8 ECHR.


 3. Mr Brown asks that in re-making the  decision  in  the  appeal  I  make
    findings on three matters:

              i)  Is  the  Appellant  entitled  to  refugee  status,  having
                 established to the lower standard of proof that  he  has  a
                 well-founded fear of persecution in Iran for reasons of his
                 political opinion;


             ii) Is the Appellant entitled to further leave  in  the  United
                 Kingdom because he has now accrued over ten  years'  lawful
                 residence in this country and on a balance of probabilities
                 meets all of  the  substantive  requirements  of  paragraph
                 276B(i)-(ii) and (v) of the Immigration Rules;

            iii)  Would  the  Appellant's  removal  be  a   disproportionate
                 interference with his Article 8 rights even if  (ii)  above
                 is not established?

 4. I deal with each ground in turn.




    Asylum




    Legal Framework

 5. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant.  He must demonstrate that it
    is reasonably likely that he would face persecution for reasons of  his
    political opinion if returned to Iran today. This is a  lower  standard
    of proof than that normally applicable in civil appeals and can also be
    expressed as a 'real risk'.


    The Evidence


 6. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom as a student in 2006.  He  had
    been here for approximately  six  years  when  he  claimed  asylum.  In
    interviews conducted in December 2012 and  January  2013  he  told  the
    Respondent that he had a well-founded fear of return  to  Iran  because
    the Iranian authorities know or suspect him to have  been  involved  in
    assisting  dissidents  in  circumventing  internet  controls   and   in
    spreading propaganda against the Iranian regime online.


 7. The particulars of the claim were that the Appellant is  an  expert  in
    telecommunications and electronics. He is also politically  opposed  to
    the Iranian government.   The Applicant states that in 2009 he  started
    advising a friend called Ali, and others who knew of him  through  this
    friend, about how to disrupt  filters  used  by  the  Iranian  security
    service  to  prevent  people  within  the  country  accessing   certain
    information on the web. They  set  up  an  email  address  whereby  the
    Appellant could offer Iranians direct advice about these  issues.   Ali
    was arrested in March 2012 and  the  Appellant  stopped  operating  the
    email advice service.  During 2012 the Appellant published six articles
    in his own name which were posted on a website  called  'Kaleme'.  They
    were also reproduced on his Facebook page and other social media sites.
    These  articles  dealt  with  issues  concerning  cyber  security   and
    discussed the  means  by  which  the  State  is  able  to  use  "lawful
    interception" in order to monitor the online behaviour of its citizens.

 8. In November 2012 the Appellant learned that the authorities had  issued
    a summons for him to attend court in Shiraz. When he failed  to  attend
    the security services detained his father for one  day.  The  Appellant
    expressed fears that if returned  to  Iran  he  would  be  detained  in
    pursuance of this summons and that any investigation will  very  likely
    present a real risk of serious harm.

 9. On appeal the Appellant has provided a detailed witness statement dated
    4th July 2015 and further  documentary  evidence.  In  respect  of  the
    alleged criminal investigation, the Appellant submitted that his family
    in Iran had instructed a solicitor to act on his behalf.  This  man,  a
    [P], had acted for him until illness forced him to  withdraw  from  the
    case. Although the Appellant has managed to get another lawyer to  send
    him relevant documents, a Mr Tabatabaei, he will not conduct an appeal.
    The Appellant has been told by his father  and  the  lawyers  that  the
    following events have occurred in his absence:

              i)  In  November  2012  a  summons  was  issued  against   the
                 Appellant;


             ii) When the Appellant did not appear  the  authorities  raided
                 the family home;


            iii) The Appellant's father was subsequently summoned to court;


             iv) The Appellant's father attended court and was informed that
                 his son was wanted for "cybercrimes"  and  "crimes  against
                 national security";


              v)  [P]  was  able  to  see  from  the  court  file  that  the
                 authorities are in possession of articles  written  by  the
                 Appellant;


             vi) On the [ ] 2013 the prosecution collapsed because  a  judge
                 ruled that there was insufficient evidence;


            vii) The prosecution gathered further evidence and disputed  the
                 ruling;

           viii) A new hearing took place on the [ ] 2014. The Appellant was
                 convicted in absentia and was sentenced to eight  years  in
                 prison, and ten years in exile;

             ix) There is a live  warrant  for  the  Appellant's  arrest  in
                 place;

              x) An appeal was lodged against the sentence but it is not now
                 pursued due to [P]'s retirement on health grounds.


10. The Appellant supported  his  account  by  the  production  of  several
    documents (all accompanied by certified translations):


           a) Summons issued by the  Prosecution  Office  of  Shiraz,  22nd
              Branch, requiring the attendance of the Appellant (or someone
              with his name) within three days of issue on the [ ] 2012


           b) A 'Warning notice' issued by the Prosecution Office of Shiraz
              on the [ ] 2012 to the effect that the Appellant must  answer
              to the summons or a warrant will be issued for his arrest

           c) An email from [YT], First Grade Lawyer, sent on the [ ]  2015
              attaching a letter and a copy of the verdict  of  the  Public
              and Revolutionary Court of Shiraz. This appears to have  been
              sent in response to an email from the Appellant dated the [ ]
              2015 seeking information about the case

           d) The letter attached to email from [YT] mentioned  above.  The
              letter is  dated  [  ]  2015  and  is  on  headed  notepaper,
              indicating that his office is in Tehran. He explains that the
              Appellant's father instructed him on the 9th April  2015.  He
              was asked to "chase the file" and find out what had  happened
              in the case opened against the Appellant in  the  Public  and
              Revolutionary Court of Shiraz. He was assisted by a colleague
              who is based in the city, a [A].  [YT] reports that the  file
              was opened on the [ ] 2012.  It  is  based  on  a  series  of
              article that  the  Appellant  shared  on  the  internet.  The
              warrant is still live. On the [ ] 2012 the Appellant's father
              attended court to update the investigators  but  was  himself
              "arrested for a short period of time". The letter goes on  to
              detail how the prosecution stalled in August 2013 only to  be
              reopened once more evidence was obtained. The  Appellant  was
              convicted and sentenced to 8 years in prison plus  exile  for
              ten years. An appeal was lodged but later dropped

           e)  Copy  of  the  court  verdict  issued  by  the  Public   and
              Revolutionary Court of Shiraz on the [ ] 2014 indicating that
              the conviction was  for  violation  of  Article  505  of  the
              Islamic Penal Code and Article 18 of the Cyber Crimes Code


           f) Various articles written by the Appellant  (or  someone  with
              his name). These  appear  as  screenshots  from  the  website
              'Kaleme'


11. The Appellant relied on these documents to  submit  that  he  would  be
    arrested upon return to Iran.


12. In his oral evidence the Appellant confirmed that he had told the truth
    at his asylum  interviews  and  when  he  gave  his  statement  to  his
    solicitor. He was asked by Mr Harrison why he had come  to  the  UK  in
    2006. He explained that he was feeling uneasy about what he  was  being
    asked to do in his work in Iran. He did not want to be involved in  the
    systems that the government were trying to create, or in  hacking.  So,
    although he had studied for a long time already,  he  decided  to  come
    here in order to put some distance between himself and  this  activity.
    He came to the UK in order to study for  a  doctorate.   The  Appellant
    stressed that he had never been overtly involved in politics  in  Iran.
    When he started posting things online and publishing articles he did so
    because of his own views about the way that the government were seeking
    to control communications -  he  was  not  aligned  to  any  particular
    opposition group or figure.  That was why  he  had  set  up  the  email
    advice service.

13. The Appellant was asked about his name. He said:  "if you 'google' this
    name I am the only person you will find". It's a three  part  name  and
    the last part refers to the city where his family originate.

14. The Appellant said that he maintains regular contact with  his  family.
    He spoke to them the day before the hearing. They are elderly and  need
    his support. He has one brother left in Iran.  His  sister  obtained  a
    green card and has gone to  live  in  the  USA  with  her  husband  and
    children. He has another brother in Austria who has  his  own  problems
    with the authorities in Iran  -  he  would  never  obey  the  religious
    police.

15. The Appellant confirmed that he travelled back to Iran in 2010,  before
    he had published anything online. He did not have any  problems  during
    that trip.  His family have experienced problems because  of  the  case
    being brought against him. His father has been detained  for  one  day.
    They are worried about him.

16. The Appellant was asked about his friend Ali. He and Ali  had  been  in
    regular contact until suddenly in  March  2012  he  went  silent.   The
    Appellant was later told that he  had  been  arrested.   Ali  had  been
    sentenced to 8 years in prison. In April 2015 the authorities  let  Ali
    out of prison on temporary release because he needed  an  operation  on
    his leg. During that period he spoke on the phone to the Appellant.  he
    told the Appellant of how he had been  arrested  and  what  prison  was
    like. He did not think that the authorities had ever  found  out  about
    the email advice service. The Appellant did not know if  Ali  would  be
    able to contact him from inside prison - by writing or  calling  -  but
    since he had not heard from him again he presumed that he had gone back
    inside after his operation.  In his  evidence  the  Appellant  appeared
    emotional when he explained that Ali was a  good  friend  and  that  he
    would want to contact him if he could: the Appellant believes Ali to be
    experiencing very bad conditions.




    Discussion and Findings


17. The Respondent refused the Appellant asylum because she did not believe
    that the claims were reasonably likely to  be  true.   In  her  refusal
    letter dated 19th February  2015  the  Respondent  gave  the  following
    reasons for her conclusions:


        . The articles that the Appellant claims to  have  written  can  no
          longer be found online
        . It is not considered credible that the  Appellant  would  publish
          articles in his own name
        . It is not considered credible that the Iranian authorities  would
          be able to trace the Appellant to his family  home  just  on  the
          basis of the name used in the articles -  there  are  70  million
          Iranians


    The Respondent does not consider that the Appellant would  be  at  risk
    today since he is not politically active, nor could he be described  as
    a high profile blogger.


18. I remind myself of the lower standard of proof.  I find as follows.


19. I have read the Appellant's interview  records  and  witness  statement
    with care. I have had an opportunity to see  him  give  oral  evidence.
    Having done so I am satisfied that his evidence has been  detailed  and
    internally consistent. In closing submissions  Mr  Harrison  could  not
    point to any discrepancies of even minor  significance.    This  was  a
    lengthy and sometimes complex account and I find that it  lends  weight
    to the Appellant's case that he was able to recount it in a  consistent
    manner.

20. I find that the account is plausible, set in the context of the country
    background material.  It is the Appellant's detailed evidence  that  he
    was drawn into supporting dissent in Iran because he was  so  horrified
    at the State's  program  of  surveillance  and  interference  with  the
    ability of ordinary Iranians to access information online  and  through
    other media.  That the Iranian state have such programs, and that  they
    can mete out heavy punishment to dissidents accused of  working  online
    (particularly those based  in  Iran)  is  a  notion  supported  by  the
    background material: see for instance AB and Others (internet  activity
    - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC), and the  Respondent's
    own Country Information and Guidance  Iran:  Journalists  and  Bloggers
    published 9th October 2014.

21. I find that the account is broadly plausible, set in the context of the
    Appellant's own circumstances. The Appellant  is  a  telecommunications
    expert and as such  his  account  of  work  with  the  government,  and
    establishing  contact  with  radical  students,  is   plausible.   Less
    plausible is his claim that  he  published  in  his  own  name  matters
    implicitly critical of the Iranian government.  The  Respondent  fairly
    asks why someone with  a  working  knowledge  of  the  Iranian  state's
    efforts to monitor telecommunications of all descriptions would  expose
    himself to any risk. I have taken that point into account alongside the
    submission that none of the articles produced before me  have  actually
    been proven to have ever  appeared  online.  Although  the  Appellant's
    bundle contains what appear  to  be  screenshots  of  articles  in  the
    Appellant's name from the website 'Kaleme' these can not now be  traced
    to that source.   I have weighed that matter in the balance.

22. The Appellant has produced a good deal of documentary evidence. I  bear
    in mind that documents from Iran - indeed from any country in the world
    - may be forged. They may have  been  obtained  by  bribery  from  some
    corrupt official. I have considered the documents in the round with the
    oral and written evidence of the Appellant.

23. The paper trail indicates that the Appellant was initially summoned, in
    November 2012, to appear at the  Prosecution  Office  of  Shiraz,  22nd
    Branch, with a view to investigating the offence of "cyber  crimes  and
    acting against national security". He thereafter engaged  a  lawyer  to
    investigate what has happened in the  case.  He  emailed  that  lawyer,
    [YT], and on the 6th July 2015 he received  a  detailed  reply.  [YT]'s
    letter is on headed notepaper and full contact details are provided. He
    explains that his colleague in Shiraz has managed to establish that the
    file against the Appellant was opened on the [ ] 2012 and  that  it  is
    based on a series of articles published by the  Appellant  online.  The
    arrest warrant issued in the course of the investigation  remains  live
    and judicial officers maintain a right to arrest the Appellant  at  any
    time  within  Iranian  borders.  [YT]  provides  a   detailed   report,
    purportedly based on matters discovered from the court file, of how the
    prosecution was initially dropped for lack of evidence but then due  to
    new evidence emerging a new indictment was prepared and a  new  hearing
    date set. The hearing was attended by [P] who represented the Appellant
    but the Appellant was found guilty and sentenced in absentia  to  eight
    years in prison and ten years exile.  [YT]  appends  to  his  letter  a
    document purportedly issued by the Public and  Revolutionary  Court  of
    Shiraz 22nd Branch Shiraz which confirms the  information  provided  by
    [YT] and specifies that the Appellant has been sentenced in  accordance
    with Article 505 of the Islamic Penal Code and Article 18, Chapter 5 of
    the Cyber Crimes Code.


24. Having considered these documents in  the  round  I  find  them  to  be
    supportive of the Appellant's claims. The  documents  are  prima  facie
    genuine, that is to say there is nothing on the face of them that would
    obviously indicate them to be false. They are detailed to the point  of
    containing particulars such  as  the  fact  that  the  prosecution  was
    initially dropped for lack of evidence, a story feature one  might  not
    expect to be the work  of  a  forger.  They  are  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's  account.  They  are  also  consistent  with  the   country
    background material. The Appellant's bundle contains a translated  copy
    of the Islamic Penal Code of Iran[1] which shows Article 505 to read as
    follows:

         "Anyone who, with  the  intention  to  disrupt  national  security,
         gathers information through any means  under  the  cover  of  State
         authorities or government officials, if they intend to provide them
         to others shall be sentenced to two to ten years' imprisonment  [if
         successful] and otherwise to one to five  years'  imprisonment  [if
         unsuccessful]".

    The Articles that the Appellant claims  to  have  caused  him  problems
    could certainly attract prosecution under this Article. They were based
    on information he gleaned in his work in telecommunications in Iran and
    were aimed at informing the general public as to how the State aimed to
    control internet activity: eg [at 32 A's bundle] "the regime is  always
    finding ways to expand espionage on the internet; however with  special
    precautions people can avoid the unfair interception of the  government
    to access users' information on the internet".  Article 18 of Chapter 5
    of the Cyber Crimes Law is similarly consistent with the  account:  "it
    may  be  summarised  as  criminalising  the  use  of  a   computer   or
    telecommunications to 'disseminate lies'"[2].

25. I have considered all of the evidence in the round. This is a  detailed
    account which is both internally  and  externally  consistent,  and  is
    supported in large measure by documentary evidence. I bear in mind that
    the Appellant has not claimed to have any great political  involvement:
    he has limited his case to an almost tangential  involvement  with  the
    work of Iranian activists and I find that this goes to his credit.  For
    instance, it would have been very easy for the Appellant to claim  that
    the email account had been uncovered:  to  the  contrary  he  expressly
    asserts that Ali assured him that it was not detected. I  am  satisfied
    that the Appellant has not sought to inflate or exaggerate this  aspect
    of his account.   What he  has  done,  on  his  own  case,  is  publish
    obviously problematic articles online in his own name and  on  his  own
    Facebook page.  He has not to date given any  satisfactory  explanation
    as to why he might have done that. He may have done it  because  of  an
    editorial policy of Kaleme (an explanation I consider to  be  unlikely,
    given the content) or because he felt secure because he was in the  UK,
    or because he deliberately sought to create  problems  for  himself  in
    order to claim asylum. Whatever the truth of that matter I am satisfied
    on the lower standard of proof that those articles did appear and  that
    they  have  brought  him  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities. As the Tribunal observes in AB, it  is  trite  asylum  law
    that a refugee cannot be denied protection because he has  created  his
    own misfortune.


26. It was the Respondent's case before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    story cannot possibly be true because there is no way that the  Iranian
    authorities would be able to identify the  Appellant  simply  from  his
    name, given that there are 70 million  people  in  Iran.   Mr  Harrison
    wisely did not seek to advance this case before me. The Appellant has a
    name which identifies him, or his family,  as coming from a  relatively
    small town. That would narrow the search considerably.  Furthermore  it
    is evident from the articles themselves that the  author  is  a  person
    with some expertise in telecommunications, and  with  the  government's
    attempts to control them:  for instance one explains in detail how  the
    microwave frequencies emitted by the government  to  disrupt  satellite
    signals are damaging to human health.  Given  that  the  Appellant  was
    himself employed by the Iranian state in this very department it is not
    too great a leap to accept that they might have worked out who he  was.
    Finally as the Appellant himself observes, they might just run a simple
    internet search: "if you 'google' this name I am the  only  person  you
    will find".


27. Having taken all of those matters into account I am satisfied  that  it
    is reasonably likely that this account is true, and that the  Appellant
    has a well-founded fear of persecution in Iran today for reasons of his
    political opinion.  The appeal is allowed on human rights  (Article  3)
    and asylum grounds.





    Long Residence


    The Legal Framework

28. Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules sets out the requirements for a
    grant of indefinite leave to remain based on long residence:


         276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the United
         Kingdom are that:


       .          (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful
         residence in the United Kingdom.
       .
       .          (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no
         reasons why it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground of long residence, taking into
         account his:
       .
       .               (a) age; and
       .               (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom;
         and
            (c) personal history, including character, conduct,
associations and employment
            record; and
       .               (d) domestic circumstances; and
       .               (e) compassionate circumstances; and
       .               (f) any representations received on the person's
         behalf; and
       .
       .          (iii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the
         general grounds for refusal.
       .
       .          (iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge
         of the English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the
         United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.


         (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
         laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28  days
         or less will be disregarded, as  will  any  period  of  overstaying
         between periods of entry clearance, leave  to  enter  or  leave  to
         remain of up to 28 days and any period of overstaying  pending  the
         determination of an application made within that 28 day period.

29. For the purpose of the Rules "continuous" residence would not be broken
    for short periods of absence. "Lawful residence" means  residence  with
    either valid leave to enter  or  remain,  or  such  leave  extended  by
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.


30. Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 (as amended) provides:


         13C  Continuation of leave pending variation decision

         (1) This section applies if-


           a) person who has limited leave to enter or remain in the United
              Kingdom
              applies to the Secretary of State for variation of the leave,


           (b) the application for variation is made before the leave
         expires, and


           (c) the leave expires without the application for variation
         having been decided.


         (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
         period when-


           (a)the application for variation is neither decided nor
         withdrawn,


           b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Asylum and
              Immigration
              Act 2002 could be brought while the appellant is in the
              United Kingdom against the decision on the application for
              variation (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of time
              with permission), or


           c) an appeal under that section against that decision, brought
              while the
              appellant is in the United Kingdom, is pending (within the
              meaning of section 104 of that Act).


         (3)  Leave extended by virtue of this section shall lapse if the
         applicant leaves the United Kingdom.


         (4) A person may not make an application for variation of his leave
         to enter or remain in the United Kingdom while that leave is
         extended by virtue of this section.


31. Paragraphs 276A1  -276A2  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provide  for  an
    extension of leave where all of the requirements of 276B  (specifically
    the requirement to have passed the Life in the UK test) are not met:


         276A1.The requirement to be met by a person seeking an extension of
         stay on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom is that
         the applicant meets each of the requirements in paragraph 276B(i)-
         (ii) and (v).


         Extension of stay on the ground of long residence in the United
         Kingdom


         276A2. An extension of stay on the ground of long residence in  the
         United Kingdom may be granted for a period not  exceeding  2  years
         provided  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
         requirement in paragraph 276A1 is met (but see  paragraph  276A04),
         and a person  granted  such  an  extension  of  stay  following  an
         application made before 9 July 2012  will  remain  subject  to  the
         rules in force on 8 July 2012.




    The Evidence

32. The Appellant's passport shows that he arrived in the United Kingdom on
    the 15th April 2006 with leave to enter a student, valid until the 30th
    November 2008. The Respondent's record shows that on the  30th  October
    2006 the Appellant made an in-time application to vary his leave so  as
    to extend it. Leave was granted until the 31st March 2010. On the  10th
    March 2010 the Appellant made a further in-time application  to  extend
    his leave and this  was  granted  until  the  30th  January  2014.  The
    Appellant claimed asylum on the 23rd November 2012.  This  was  treated
    as an application to vary and since the claim was rejected on the  19th
    February 2015 the Appellant has been on '3C leave'.


33. The Appellant has left the United Kingdom on  one  occasion  since  his
    arrival. In August 2010 he returned to Iran for a period of two weeks.




    Discussion and Findings


34. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant and the standard of proof  is
    a balance of probabilities.


35. I am satisfied that the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  the
    15th April 2006. The Respondent's explanatory bundle gives his  arrival
    date as September of that year: it is  apparent  from  the  Appellant's
    passport, and his credible oral evidence, that this is  incorrect.    I
    find as fact that the Appellant has had valid leave to enter or remain,
    or leave conferred by section 3C, since that time. He has had no breaks
    in continuity of residence, nor has his leave lapsed at  any  time.  He
    accrued his ten years' residence on the 16th April 2016.

36. I am not aware that there are any reasons why it would  be  undesirable
    for the Appellant not to be given leave to remain. As  far  as  I  have
    been made aware there are no matters arising as to  his  character.  He
    has never overstayed.

37. The Appellant has not passed his "life in the UK test".

38.  The  Appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  he  meets  all  of   the
    requirements of paragraph 276B because he has not passed his  "life  in
    the UK test". I am satisfied that he meets all the  other  requirements
    of that provision and has such  would  qualify  for  limited  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276A2.

39. There was some discussion at hearing as to whether such a finding could
    lead to the appeal being allowed outright under the Immigration  Rules.
    Although Mr Harrison did not dispute the accuracy  of  my  findings  he
    pointed out that the Appellant has not made an  application.  He  could
    not have done so at any point since he  reached  the  'ten  year  mark'
    since he was on 3C leave at that time and so would  be  precluded  from
    making a further application. Mr Brown directed  my  attention  to  the
    Respondent's document "Guidance - Long residence - version 13.0":
         The applicant completes 10 years continuous lawful residence while
         awaiting a decision of an appeal

         A person may complete 10 years continuous lawful residence whilst
         they are awaiting the outcome of an appeal and submit an
         application on this basis. Under sections 3C and 3D, it is not
         possible to submit a new application while an appeal is
         outstanding. However, the applicant can submit further grounds to
         be considered at appeal.
         If the applicant has an outstanding appeal against a decision to
         refuse leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain, and submits
         an application for long residence, you must void the long residence
         application and refund the fee. You must create a file or sub-file
         and mark it 'PRIORITY'. You must send the file or sub-file to the
         presenting officers unit (POU) dealing with the appeal. You must
         send a letter to the applicant or their representative informing
         them their application has been linked with their outstanding
         appeal. You must use Doc Gen letter ICD.3207 for this purpose.
40. This is clearly published as guidance for case-owners,  as  opposed  to
    judges. Although not spelled out it would appear  that  the  Respondent
    would recognise a finding on appeal. I therefore allow the appeal  with
    reference to the Immigration Rules.



    Article 8: Family and Private Life


    The Legal Framework

41. The starting point for consideration of Article 8 is the framework  set
    out in Appendix FM and paragraphs 276B/276ADE of the Immigration Rules.




42. The Appellant has already established that he  meets  the  requirements
    for leave to remain on  'private  life'  grounds.  In  this  section  I
    consider only the question  of  his  family  life  on  the  alternative
    hypothetical basis that he failed in that claim (and indeed his  asylum
    claim).


43. Appendix FM provides for leave  to  remain  to  be  granted  where  the
    applicant has a 'partner' in the UK. A partner is  defined  at  GEN.1.2
    inter  alia  as  someone  with  whom  the  applicant  has  lived  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for two years or  more.  The  applicant's
    partner must be settled in the UK. If that 'eligibility' criteria based
    on relationship is met, the applicant must  further  show  that  he  is
    eligible because he has sufficient funds. This  means  demonstrating  a
    minimum household income  requirement  of  �18,600  with  reference  to
    'specified evidence'. The  applicant  must  have  passed  the  relevant
    English language test.  The  applicant  must  demonstrate  that  he  is
    'suitable' to be granted leave to remain, a  test  concerned  primarily
    with character.

44. If the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM I  may  go
    on to consider Article 8 'outside of the rules' if  satisfied  that  on
    the facts the article is engaged, notwithstanding the failure under FM.
     In my consideration of Article 8 outside of the rules I must apply the
    framework set out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.   In  my
    assessment of proportionality I am bound to consider  the  factors  set
    out by parliament at s117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.




    The Evidence

45. The Appellant states that he met his partner, Ms MR, in 2007 when  they
    were both studying for their doctorates at university in the UK. She is
    Russian. They moved in together in 2008 in  a  property  owned  by  the
    Appellant. In 2007 they went together to Russia and he met her parents.
    In 2009 his parents visited the UK and met with MR. They are  committed
    to each other in a loving and stable relationship. The Appellant states
    that they do intend to marry at some point in the future but wanted  to
    resolve his status first. At the moment MR sees her future in  the  UK.
    She is  reluctant  to  return  to  Russia  because  there  are  limited
    opportunities  for  someone  in  her  field  of  research  there.   The
    Appellant believes that MR would face significant difficulties in Iran.
    She is Christian and has no intention of  changing  her  religion.  She
    does not speak Farsi and would find it very difficult to adapt  to  the
    culture in Iran.


46. I heard evidence from  MR.  She  confirmed  that  she  has  been  in  a
    relationship with the Appellant since 2007  and  that  they  have  been
    living together since 2008.   MR  completed  her  doctorate  after  her
    arrival as a Tier 4 (Student) General Migrant and is now employed as  a
    Research Associate at [ ] University. Her field of  study  is  Material
    Science. Her salary is approximately �33,000 per annum.  She  describes
    her relationship with the Appellant as loving and  stable.  They  would
    like to be married but have put it off because of the uncertainty about
    his future in the UK.  MR sees her future in the UK. She  will  qualify
    for settlement in October of this year and she would like to remain  at
    Manchester University where she is working on photocatalytic materials.
     This is an area of study she would find  it  difficult  to  pursue  in
    either Russia or Iran.  The academic structure is different  in  Russia
    and she would find it very difficult to obtain funding. Russian friends
    with whom she studied are now doing random jobs back home because  they
    cannot get  jobs  in  scientific  research  -  one  is  selling  coffee
    machines, another wallpaper. Her work means a lot to her and she cannot
    contemplate giving it up.  As for Iran MR expressed serious  misgivings
    about being able to go and live there. She has no  idea  whether  as  a
    woman she would be able to lead an independent life and  carry  on  her
    work. She would not want to convert to Islam and fears that  she  would
    come under pressure to do so. She and the Appellant want  to  marry  in
    the future, but on their own terms. She  would  not  want  to  have  to
    convert to Islam in order to be married.



    Discussion and Findings


47. The Appellant cannot qualify for leave  to  remain  under  Appendix  FM
    because at present MR is not settled in the UK. There does  not  appear
    to any doubt that she will in due course be granted settlement (she  is
    eligible to apply in  October  2016)  and  that  they  would  meet  the
    financial requirements, since her salary alone far exceeds the required
    minimum. There are no suitability issues and the Appellant  is  clearly
    able to speak fluent English, having studied at doctoral level  in  the
    UK.  Whilst I am satisfied that the Appellant will very likely meet the
    requirements of Appendix FM at some point in the reasonably foreseeable
    future, he cannot do so today.


48. I therefore consider whether Article 8 is engaged outside of the rules.
      I bear in mind that the Rules have  been  framed  so  as  to  exclude
    partners of persons who are not settled in the  UK.   However,  I  find
    that in the particular circumstances of this case there is good  reason
    to go on to consider Article 8. There is no doubt  that  the  Appellant
    and his partner are in a long-term,  genuine  and  loving  relationship
    that means a good deal to both of them.  MR is not settled now  but  in
    all likelihood soon will be. Her qualification - and indeed that of the
    Appellant-  is a matter of months away. I am satisfied that there is  a
    family life and that the decision interferes with it in such a way that
    the Article is engaged.

49. The decision to refuse leave to remain to persons who  do  not  qualify
    under Appendix FM is  obviously  one  that  is  lawfully  open  to  the
    Respondent to make and I am satisfied that it is a decision  rationally
    connected to the legitimate aim of protecting the economy.

50. The question is whether the decision  is  proportionate.  In  answering
    that I must take s117B into account.  The  maintenance  of  immigration
    control is in the public interest. Although the  relationship  with  MR
    was formed at a time when  they  were  both  lawfully  in  the  UK,  as
    students their status must be considered to be "precarious" and  little
    weight can therefore be attached  to  it.  Although  the  Appellant  is
    financially independent and speaks good English these are  not  matters
    capable of positively weighing in his favour.

51. I am satisfied that there is no way that MR is going to go to Iran with
    the Appellant. She made it very clear in her evidence that  she  cannot
    see a future in that country. She fears restrictions on  her  religious
    freedom and her independence as a woman. She does  not  want  to  marry
    because of the expectations of a society or theocracy that she does not
    recognise.  She fears losing her career and the research  opportunities
    that she has been afforded in the UK.  Whether  or  not  all  of  these
    fears are well founded is besides the point. I accept  that  these  are
    views that she genuinely holds and that in the context of Iran they are
    not irrational or unreasonable.  MR  will  not  go  with  him.    I  am
    satisfied that if the Appellant were removed permanently to Iran  there
    would in effect be a severance of their relationship. There is  however
    no proposal to exclude him permanently. He has never overstayed in this
    country and in the absence of any  criticism  of  his  character  there
    would be absolutely nothing that would stand in the way of  him  making
    an application to come back to the UK as  MR's  partner  once  she  has
    obtained settlement.  Any separation would therefore  be  a  temporary,
    albeit I accept upsetting, frustrating and possibly lengthy one.  Given
    that the status of both parties is presently precarious,  I  cannot  be
    satisfied that such a limited interference with the  family  life  that
    they currently enjoy would be disproportionate.

52. In the alternative it was suggested that the two could  continue  their
    family life in Russia. Mr Harrison pointed  out  that  there  are  many
    Muslims in Russia and that  there  would  be  no  restrictions  on  the
    Appellant learning Russian or trying  to  work  there.  Both  witnesses
    averred that they could not move  to  Russia  because  of  the  funding
    structure of academia and the fact that  their  careers  would  suffer.
    Whilst I appreciate those concerns, these do not appear to  be  of  the
    same gravity as those held by MR about moving to Iran.   If the  couple
    were forced to move in order to be together they would face some degree
    of hardship and I appreciate that  it  would  damage  their  respective
    careers. It has not however been demonstrated that  a  move  to  Russia
    would have "unjustifiably harsh" consequences for them.

53. I appreciate that the man  on  the  Clapham  Omnibus  might  find  this
    decision odd. These two young people are exactly the kind  of  educated
    and motivated individuals that the UK would  like  to  attract.  It  is
    difficult to discern  how  the  public  interest  might  be  served  by
    removing the Appellant, risking their relationship and  their  careers.
    That is however the effect of a statutory scheme  which  requires  that
    "little weight" be placed on a relationship formed when the individuals
    concerned held a precarious immigration status.  That provision must be
    applied even where the individuals concerned are research scientists.

54. For those reasons I must dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


      Decisions

55. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.


56. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:


              i) The appeal is allowed on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds


             ii) The appeal is allowed with reference  to  paragraphs  276A2
                 and 276B of the Immigration Rules

            iii) The appeal is dismissed on Article 8 (family life) grounds.


57. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant  in  this  determination  identified  as  FDS.  This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              24th June 2016


                           -----------------------
[1] Translated and published by the Iran Human Rights Documentation Centre
www.iranhrdc.org
[2] Islamic Republic of Iran: Computer Crimes Law page 37, document
published by Article 19 in 2012

