
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03589/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 1 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    k n a
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  17  November
    1983.  On 30 August 2010, the appellant was granted entry clearance  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student with leave valid until 30 January 2012.  The
    appellant came to the United Kingdom.  On 13 December 2011, he  applied
    for further leave to remain as a student which  was  granted  until  15
    April 2012.  Subsequently, he applied for and was granted further leave
    as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Worker) valid until 24 March 2014.

 3. On 17 December 2013, the appellant claimed asylum.  The  basis  of  his
    claim was that he was of the Ahmadi faith  and  would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Pakistan because of his religion.

 4. On 4 April 2014, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum, for humanitarian protection and under Art 8  of  the  ECHR.
    On 4 April 2014, the Secretary of  State,  as  a  consequence,  made  a
    decision  refusing  to  vary  the  appellant's  leave  and  also   made
    directions for his removal under s.47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 14 July 2014, Judge NJ Osborne dismissed the appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.   Judge  Osborne  accepted  that  the  appellant
    belonged to the Ahmadi faith.  However, Judge Osborne  did  not  accept
    the appellant's account that he had  been  mistreated  because  of  his
    faith prior to coming to the UK.  Judge Osborne also concluded that the
    appellant would not openly practice his faith  on  return  to  Pakistan
    and, therefore, applying the country guidance case  of  MN  and  Others
    (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012]  UKUT  389  he
    had failed to establish that he was at risk of persecution on return.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal.   Permission  was  initially
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Reid) on 6 August 2014.   The
    appellant renewed his application for permission to the Upper Tribunal.
     On 10 November 2014, the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Macleman)  refused  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  However, it is clear from reading  the
    judge's reasons that he intended to grant permission and the  statement
    that permission was "refused" was a typographical error.

 7. The appellant responded to that  decision  in  two  ways.   First,  the
    appellant sought to judicially review the  refusal  on  a  Cart  basis.
    Secondly, the appellant made  an  application  under  rule  42  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended) to correct the obvious slip in the Upper  Tribunal's  decision
    so that it read permission to appeal "granted".  On  13  January  2015,
    Gilbart J granted the appellant permission  to  bring  judicial  review
    proceedings against the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  of  permission  to
    appeal.  However, on 5 January 2015 the Upper Tribunal's  decision  was
    amended to read "permission to appeal is granted".

 8. Before me, both Mr Richards, (who represented the Secretary  of  State)
    and Mr Chelvan  (who  represented  the  appellant)  accepted  that  the
    amendment to UTJ Macleman's decision made on 5 January 2015 meant  that
    permission to appeal had been granted to the Upper Tribunal and had, in
    effect, superseded the judicial review proceedings.

The Judge's Decision

 9. As I have already noted, the judge accepted that the appellant  was  of
    the Ahmadi faith.  Before Judge Osborne it  was  the  appellant's  case
    that he would openly practise his Ahmadi religion in Pakistan as he had
    done whilst living with his parents prior to 2002 and again had done so
    in the UK since 2010.  On the basis of MN and Others,  the  appellant's
    case was, therefore, by practising his religion openly he was  at  risk
    of persecution.

10. By contrast,  the  respondent's  case  was  that  the  appellant  would
    practise his religion discreetly as he had done between 2002  and  2009
    when he was at university in  Faisalabad  (2002-2007)  and  working  in
    Pakistan (2008-2009).  Consequently, the  respondent  argued  that  the
    appellant was not at risk  applying  MN  and  Others  from  persecution
    directed against those who openly practised their  Ahmadi  religion  in
    Pakistan.

11. Judge Osborne accepted that the  appellant  had  openly  practised  his
    religion prior to 2002 when  he  lived  with  his  parents  in  Rabwah.
    Further, he accepted that between  2002  and  2009  the  appellant  had
    practised his faith within the privacy of his own room.  Judge  Osborne
    also noted that the appellant had,  since  he  had  lived  in  the  UK,
    practised his faith freely and openly.  Nevertheless, at  paras  22-24,
    Judge Osborne concluded  that  the  appellant  would,  if  returned  to
    Pakistan, practise his religion discreetly.  The judge's reasons are as
    follows:

         "22. Having left his parents' home to proceed to further  education
             in Faisalabad in or about the end of 2002/beginning 2003,  the
             Appellant  suffered  discrimination  due  to  his  faith   and
             practised his faith within the privacy of his own locked room.
              He practised his faith in that way from the end  of  2002  to
             when he  left  the  university  in  Faisalabad  in  2007.   He
             therefore practised his faith privately for a period in excess
             of four and a half hears whilst he was in university.

             Second, when the Appellant  worked  for  the  Sitara  Chemical
             Industries from 3 February 2008 to 12 December 2009, a  period
             of all but two years, his oral evidence  was  that  throughout
             that period  he  practised  his  faith  within  his  room.   I
             therefore find that for a period of approximately seven  years
             from the end of  2002  to  the  end  of  2009,  the  Appellant
             practised his Ahmadi faith privately within his own  room  and
             did not practise it openly as he had  done  earlier  with  his
             parents throughout his upbringing.  In short, I find that  the
             Appellant's life had "moved on" and he had  become  accustomed
             to practising his faith not openly as  he  had  done  when  he
             lived with his parents in Rabwah, but privately  in  order  to
             fit into the Pakistani community  at  large.   In  short,  the
             Appellant  adapted  to  his  circumstances.   Having  done  it
             previously, there is no evidence or reason  to  conclude  that
             the Appellant would not be able or prepared to do  so  in  the
             future.

         23.  In oral evidence the Appellant stated that if he  now  returns
             to Pakistan he would not be able to  settle  in  Rabwah.   His
             reason for this was not the inability to practise  his  Ahmadi
             faith openly but was because there are no jobs in  Rabwah  for
             someone of his qualifications.   I  find  that  the  Appellant
             therefore has a stated intention of not living  in  Rabwah  in
             Pakistan but only because he wishes to make the  most  of  his
             qualifications in obtaining suitably remunerative  employment.
             It follows that if the Appellant is returned to  Pakistan  and
             is fortunate enough to obtain employment  (away  from  Rabwah)
             then he will continue practising his Ahmadi faith  as  he  did
             for the seven years between 2002  and  2009  when  he  was  at
             university and working for Sitara Chemical Industries.  I find
             that through his conduct over a  period  of  seven  years  the
             Appellant has demonstrated  that  he  falls  within  paragraph
             2(ii) of MN in that he has consistently over a period of years
             demonstrated that he has practised his faith on  a  restricted
             basis in private without infringing domestic Pakistan law.   I
             have heard no good  reason  or  indeed  any  reason  from  the
             Appellant, either orally or in writing, as to why he could not
             and should not upon return to Pakistan exercise his  faith  in
             the manner in which he has most recently exercised  his  faith
             in Pakistan over a relatively long period of time.

         24.  I accept entirely  that  since  the  Appellant  has  lived  in
             Swansea he has been able to exercise his Ahmadi  faith  freely
             and openly and that he has done so.  That does not  mean  that
             the Appellant should not be reasonably expected to worship his
             faith in private if and when he is returned to Pakistan."

12. Consequently, Judge Osborne accepted the respondent's  submission  that
    on the basis of MN and Others the appellant, by practising his religion
    discreetly, was not at risk of persecution on return.

The Submissions

13. Mr Chelvan submitted that the judge had  wrongly  applied  the  country
    guidance case of MN and Others and the approach set out by the  Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran) and Another v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.

14. First, Mr Chelvan submitted that the judge had been wrong in para 24 to
    reach his finding that  the  appellant  would  not  freely  and  openly
    practise his faith on the basis that he could "reasonably [be] expected
    to worship his faith in  private".   Mr  Chelvan  submitted  that  that
    amounted to 'forced modification' of the  appellant's  behaviour  which
    could not properly be expected of him.  Mr  Chelvan  also  pointed  out
    that at para 23 the judge had also said that there was "no good  reason
    ... why he could not and should not" exercise his faith discreetly,  as
    he had done in Pakistan over a relatively long period of  time,  if  he
    returned there.  He emphasised the Judge's wording  as  amounting  also
    impermissibly to 'forced modification'.

15. Secondly, Mr Chelvan  submitted  that,  even  if  the  appellant  would
    practise his religion  discreetly,  it  was  clear  from  his  previous
    conduct that he had only done so when he feared persecution.  Prior  to
    2002, Mr Chelvan submitted that the appellant was not at risk in Rabwah
    and that was also the position in the UK.  However, when the  appellant
    was in Pakistan, but not in Rabwah, between 2002 and 2009,  he  had  as
    had the judge put it for the period 2002-2007 when he was in university
    - "practised his faith within the privacy of his own locked room".   Mr
    Chelvan submitted that the judge was wrong in law to conclude that  the
    appellant was not a refugee even if  he  would  practise  his  religion
    discreetly because it was clear that he would only do so because  of  a
    fear of persecution.  Applying both MN and Others  and  HJ  (Iran)  and
    Another, Mr Chelvan submitted that the judge's decision should  be  set
    aside and reversed so as to allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

16. Mr Richards submitted that there was no material error of  law  in  the
    judge's approach.  He pointed out  that  the  judge  had  been  clearly
    invited to consider the appellant's appeal on the basis that he was  at
    risk if he practised his religion openly or he was not at  risk  if  he
    did so  discreetly.   Mr  Richards  relied  upon  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding in relation to matters which the appellant  claimed
    had occurred whilst he was in Pakistan and submitted that the judge was
    fully entitled to find that the appellant would practise  his  religion
    discreetly, as he had done so in the past, because his faith was not of
    particular importance to him.

Discussion

17. In HJ (Iran), the Supreme  Court  considered  the  legal  framework  in
    relation to gay men who claimed to be at risk because of  their  sexual
    orientation on return to their home country.  Lord Rodger  set  out  at
    [82] the approach to be  followed,  in  such  a  case,  in  determining
    whether an individual was a refugee:

         "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality. If  so,  the  tribunal  must  then  ask
         itself whether it is satisfied on the available evidence  that  gay
         people who lived openly would  be  liable  to  persecution  in  the
         applicant's country of nationality.  If so, the tribunal must go on
         to consider what the individual  applicant  would  do  if  he  were
         returned to that country.  If the  applicant  would  in  fact  live
         openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution - even if he could  avoid
         the risk by living  "discreetly".   If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
         tribunal concludes that the applicant would in fact live discreetly
         and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he  would
         do so.  If the tribunal concludes that the applicant  would  choose
         to live discreetly simply because that was  how  he  himself  would
         wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not  wanting  to
         distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application
         should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he  is  gay.
         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

18. That approach was accepted by all the Justices  in  the  Supreme  Court
    (see Lord Hope at [35]; Lord Walker at [86]; Lord Collins at [100]  and
    Lord Dyson at [108]).

19. Consequently, the decision maker must address a number of issues:

      1) is it established that the individual is a  gay  man  or  would  be
         perceived as gay in his own country?;

      2) is it established from the evidence that if a gay man lived  openly
         he would be liable to persecution in his own country?;

      3) is it established that the individual would live openly and thereby
         be exposed to a real risk of persecution  even  if  that  could  be
         avoided  by  living  "discreetly";  if  so,  the  individual  is  a
         refugee?;

      4) if the individual would live discreetly and so  avoid  persecution,
         the decision maker must ask "why" he would do so;

      5) if he would choose to live  discreetly  simply  because  of  social
         pressures or other factors not connected to  persecution  then  the
         individual will not be a refugee;

      6) if a material reason for the individual living  discreetly  is  his
         fear of persecution if he were to live openly as a  gay  man,  then
         the individual has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  and,  all
         things being equal, is a refugee.

20. In MN and Others, the  Upper  Tribunal  applied  the  approach  of  the
    Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) to the situation of Ahmadis in Pakistan.  It
    was common ground before me  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's  approach  is
    properly summarised in the italicised head note.  At  para  2  of  that
    head note, the Upper Tribunal distinguished the position of Ahmadis who
    openly practised their  faith  in  Pakistan  and  who  are  risk  as  a
    consequence and those who practise in private who are not:

         "2.  (i) The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis is legislation
             that restricts the way  in  which  they  are  able  openly  to
             practise their  faith.  The  legislation  not  only  prohibits
             preaching  and  other  forms  of  proselytising  but  also  in
             practice  restricts  other  elements  of   manifesting   one's
             religious  beliefs,  such  as  holding  open  discourse  about
             religion  with  non-Ahmadis,   although   not   amounting   to
             proselytising. The prohibitions include  openly  referring  to
             one's place of worship as a  mosque  and  to  one's  religious
             leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are not  permitted  to
             refer to the call to prayer as azan  nor  to  call  themselves
             Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions include  a
             fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found,  there  is  a
             risk of the death penalty which to date has not  been  carried
             out although there is a risk of lengthy incarceration  if  the
             penalty  is  imposed.   There  is  clear  evidence  that  this
             legislation is used by non-state actors to threaten and harass
             Ahmadis. This includes the filing of First Information Reports
             (FIRs) (the first step in any criminal proceedings) which  can
             result in detentions whilst prosecutions  are  being  pursued.
             Ahmadis are also subject to attacks by non-state  actors  from
             sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

             (ii) It is, and has long been, possible in general for Ahmadis
             to practise their  faith  on  a  restricted  basis  either  in
             private or in community with other Ahmadis, without infringing
             domestic Pakistan law."

21. Paragraph 3(i) goes on to  conclude  that  an  Ahmadi  who  engages  in
    behaviour within para 2(i) is likely to be in need of protection:

         "3.  (i) If an  Ahmadi  is  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
             particular importance to his religious  identity  to  practise
             and manifest his faith openly in Pakistan in defiance  of  the
             restrictions in the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC)  under  sections
             298B and 298C, by engaging in behaviour described in paragraph
             2(i) above, he or she is likely to be in need  of  protection,
             in the light of the  serious  nature  of  the  sanctions  that
             potentially apply as well as the  risk  of  prosecution  under
             section 295C for blasphemy."

22. It was the appellant's contention before the judge that he fell  within
    para 2(i) and the respondent's that he fell within para 2(ii).

23. However, the application of HJ (Iran) to the situation  of  Ahmadis  is
    not complete without reference to, at least, para  3(ii)  of  the  head
    note which is as follows:

         "3.  (ii) It is  no  answer  to  expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
             description  just  given  to  avoid  engaging   in   behaviour
             described in paragraph 2(i) above ("paragraph 2(i) behaviour")
             to avoid a risk of prosecution."

24. Paragraph 3(ii) of the head note encapsulates the position,  recognised
    by Lord Rodger applied  to  Ahmadis,  that  if  the  tribunal  of  fact
    concludes that the individual will practise  his  religion  discreetly,
    nevertheless he will be a refugee if a material reason for him doing so
    is the fear of persecution, recognised by the UT in relation to Ahmadis
    who openly practise their faith.

25. Paragraph 7 of the head note recognises that, unlike  the  position  on
    the  background  evidence  accepted  in  earlier  CG  cases,   internal
    relocation by living in Rabwah is not now in general reasonably open to
    an Ahmadi.

26. In para 6 of the head note, the UT  identified  that  in  assessing  an
    individual's intentions in relation to the practise of their  faith  on
    return to Pakistan there is a:

         "... need to establish whether it is of  particular  importance  to
         the religious identity of the Ahmadi concern to engage in paragraph
         2(i) behaviour".

27. The burden of proof is upon the individual that it is  their  intention
    or wish to practise and manifest aspects of their faith openly which is
    prohibited by the Pakistan Penal Code.  The UT observed that:

         "The decision maker needs to evaluate all the evidence.   Behaviour
         since arrival in the UK may also be relevant."

28. Returning to Mr Chelvan's submissions, it seems to me that the  judge's
    finding that the appellant  would  behave  discreetly  and  not,  as  a
    consequence, be at risk of persecution on return to Pakistan is  flawed
    for two reasons.

29. First, in reaching that finding it is clear that  at  para  24  of  his
    determination the judge asked himself whether it would be reasonable to
    expect the  appellant  to  worship  in  private  (i.e.  discreetly)  in
    Pakistan.  That, with  respect  to  the  judge,  runs  counter  to  the
    approach of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) that an individual cannot be
    expected to behave discreetly in order to avoid persecution.  Whilst  I
    do not accept Mr Chelvan's submission that the  judge  failed  to  take
    into account the appellant's conduct in the  UK  -  he  makes  specific
    reference to it in para 24 - he discounted  it  as  indicative  of  the
    appellant's  behaviour  on  return  to  Pakistan  by  considering   the
    impermissible, 'forced modification' rejected  by  the  Supreme  Court.
    That the judge had that in mind is further supported by  his  reference
    to there being no good reason why the appellant "should  not"  practise
    his faith discreetly in para 23 of his determination.

30. Secondly, having concluded that the appellant would behave  discreetly,
    the judge did not properly consider "why" he would do so.  Mr  Richards
    sought to argue that this was not a point raised before  the  judge  on
    the basis that the appellant's case was that he would, in fact,  behave
    openly.  Having rejected that evidence, it was  nevertheless  incumbent
    upon the judge, applying MN and Others itself applying  HJ  (Iran),  to
    make a finding on why the appellant would behave discreetly.

31. The evidence before the judge covered three periods of time.

         (1) prior to 2002 when living with his parents  in  Rabwah  he  had
         practised his religion openly.

         (2) between 2002 and 2009 when he was in Faisalabad  in  university
         and then working, he had practised his  religion,  on  the  judge's
         findings, wholly in private.

         (3) since being in the UK from 2010 he has practised  his  religion
         openly.

32. The distinction in behaviour during these periods reflects the position
    of an Ahmadi in the relevant community at that time.   Prior  to  2002,
    Rabwah was, and it was not disputed before me, recognised  as  a  place
    where Ahmadis could safely practise their  religion  openly.   However,
    that was not the position elsewhere in Pakistan during the period  2002
    and 2009 when the appellant was in Faisalabad and working.  Of  course,
    the appellant has not been at risk of  persecution  by  reason  of  his
    religion since being in the UK.

33. The judge came very close  to  recognising  that  the  reason  why  the
    appellant behaved discreetly between 2002 and 2009 was the very risk of
    persecution  which  the  appellant  claimed  to  fear  because  of  his
    religion.  At para 22, the judge  recognised  that  the  appellant  had
    "suffered discrimination" whilst in university and "therefore practises
    his faith privately".  Further, the judge recognised that since leaving
    Rabwah in 2002 the appellant's life had "moved on" and "he  had  became
    accustomed to practising his faith not openly as he had  done  when  he
    lived with his  parents  in  Rabwah"  and  then  the  judge  adds  "but
    privately in order to fit in to the Pakistani community at large".  The
    Pakistani  community  at  large  can  only  be  a  reference   to   the
    circumstances that a person of Ahmadi faith would face outside  Rabwah.
    The CG case law at the relevant time was that outside Rabwah there  was
    a risk of ill-treatment to Ahmadis if they practise their faith openly.
     Given this evidence, and given the  judge's  phraseology,  it  is  not
    clear to me why the judge did not find that the appellant had practised
    his religion openly when he could do so safely  but  had  practised  it
    privately when he was at risk.   That  latter  position  would  be  the
    circumstances on his return to Pakistan now.  Today, as MN  and  Others
    makes plain, even Rabwah is not a safe place  for  internal  relocation
    for an Ahmadi who practises his faith openly.

34. As Mr Chelvan pointed out, there was no evidence before the judge  that
    the appellant had practised his faith privately between 2002  and  2009
    because of any social or family pressure or any reason unconnected with
    the risk to him if he had done otherwise.  Mr Richards relied upon  the
    judge's adverse credibility finding in relation to the remainder of the
    appellant's account which he had found to  be  "a  fabrication".   That
    general finding did not, however, contribute  to  the  judge's  adverse
    finding, if in fact he made such a finding, as to the underlying reason
    why the appellant would behave discreetly on return to Pakistan.  As  I
    have said, the judge  came  very  close  to  making  a  finding  which,
    consistently with MN and Others, should have led to  the  appeal  being
    allowed  on  the  basis  that  a  material  reason  for  the  appellant
    practising his faith discreetly would be the  fear  of  persecution  in
    Pakistan.

35. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge  materially  erred  in
    law in dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  He wrongly
    applied a 'forced modification' test and also failed to  give  adequate
    reasons why, if the appellant behaved discreetly, he  was  nevertheless
    not a refugee because he had not established that a material reason for
    him doing so would be a fear of persecution.

36. Consequently, I set  aside  the  judge's  decision.   In  remaking  the
    decision, the burden of proof to establish that there is a real risk or
    reasonable likelihood of persecution for a Convention  reason  is  upon
    the appellant.

37. The judge accepted that the appellant was  of  the  Ahmadi  faith  from
    Pakistan.  Accepting the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  would
    practise his faith discreetly on return to Pakistan,  in  my  judgment,
    the irresistible inference from the evidence is that  he  would  do  so
    because of a fear of persecution.  He had only previously practised his
    religion openly when it was  safe  to  do  so  and  has  practised  his
    religion privately over an extended period of time when it was not safe
    to do so.  I did not understand Mr Richards to challenge  Mr  Chelvan's
    submission that outside of Rabwah during  most,  if  not  all,  of  the
    period 2002-2009 the appellant would have  been  subject  to  treatment
    amounting to persecution if he had openly practised his  religion.   He
    has not suggested that he could openly do so today as a  result  of  MN
    and Others.

38. Consequently, applying MN and Others whilst the appellant falls  within
    para 2(ii) of the head  note,  a  material  reason  for  that  discreet
    behaviour would be his fear of persecution as identified by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MN and Others at para 2(i) of the head note.  MN and Others
    recognises that internal relocation to Rabwah is no  longer  an  option
    for an Ahmadi who wishes openly to practise his faith.  The  source  of
    the persecution is the Pakistani State itself and so, therefore,  there
    can be no "sufficiency of protection" issue.

39. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant has a well-founded
    fear of persecution for a Convention reason,  namely  his  religion  on
    return to Pakistan.  His return will breach the Refugee Convention.

Decision

40. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds and under Art  3  of  the  ECHR  involved  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision is set aside.

41. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under the Refugee
    Convention and, because it follows, Art 3 of the ECHR.

42. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 8 of the ECHR stands.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
