
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03000/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 8 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    V M P
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkins, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department in respect of a determination by First-tier Judge Eban which
    was promulgated on 22 June 2015 although for convenience and  in  light
    of the fact that an anonymity direction is in place,  I  will  use  the
    term appellant to refer to the individual concerned, V  M  P,  date  of
    birth 12 June 1969 and a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo.

2.   The nature of the appeal brought by the  Home  Secretary  concerns  the
    findings which were made by  Judge  Eban  in  relation  to  the  asylum
    grounds and humanitarian considerations.

3.   The background history can be relatively shortly  stated  in  that  the
    appellant had lived for some while in DRC with John Numbi, someone well-
    known to the authorities and at one time an inspector  general  of  the
    police.  The evidence which the judge found to be proved concerned  the
    relationship of the appellant with Mr Numbi, in particular a number  of
    assaults which he perpetrated upon her and instructions which  he  gave
    to his military cohorts to indulge  in  what  was  called  "correction"
    whereby they beat her up.  She made her way to the  United  Kingdom  in
    2009 and her request for asylum arises out of that.

4.   There are three grounds of challenge.   Although  oral  argument  today
    has focused on the second of those grounds, I will deal with the  three
    grounds in the order in which they appear, noting that when  permission
    to appeal was granted it was done with  far  less  enthusiasm  for  the
    first and the third grounds.

5.   Ground 1 reads  as  follows:  "Failing  to  take  into  account  and/or
    resolve conflicts of fact or opinion on material matters".  The  ground
    quotes from paragraph 21 of the determination which reads as follows:

         "The only matter which in  my  view  undermines  [the  appellant's]
         credibility in any way is the fact that the passport she  used  for
         her visa application in 2009 was issued in 2004.  This does not fit
         with her account ..."

    The complaint is made that when Judge Eban deals with  consistency  and
    credibility, she fails to resolve this apparent conflict and  does  not
    explain why having found that this evidence undermines her  credibility
    she is then prepared to discount it.

6.   It is certainly correct that at paragraph 21 the judge draws  attention
    to that issue in relation to the passport.  However, this  is  preceded
    at  paragraph  20  by  the  following:  "I  have  considered  all   the
    respondent's criticisms of the appellant's evidence which are  said  to
    go to the appellant's credibility", and then in paragraph 22 the  judge
    says this: "Despite my concern set out above and  looking  at  all  the
    evidence   in   the   round,   medical   and    non-medical,    without
    compartmentalising one or the  other  and  considering  the  background
    evidence, I make the  following  findings."   What  follows  are  eight
    specific factual findings.

7.   I am perfectly satisfied reading  the  determination  in  its  totality
    that the learned judge took into account the discrepancy in relation to
    the dates concerning when the passport may have been  issued  and  when
    the appellant claimed to have and that was part of the background taken
    into consideration by the judge in reaching those findings.  I  do  not
    consider it necessary for the judge to have dealt in  terms  with  this
    one particular matter.  It was clearly in her mind.  It is referred  to
    on several occasions in the course of the determination and was part of
    the constellation of factual  matters  which  the  judge  brought  into
    account when coming to her conclusions  on  credibility.   I  therefore
    come to the view that there is no error of law disclosed in ground 1.

8.   Ground 2, which was advanced with  greater  force,  reads  as  follows:
    "Failing to give reasons  or  any  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
    material matters", and the alleged error of law  in  this  instance  is
    focused on paragraph 23 of the determination, in particular the section
    which reads as follows:

         "Whilst there is no evidence before  me  that  [John  Numbi]  still
         wields power officially there is  a  serious  possibility  that  he
         could still arrange to silence the appellant".

    The argument advanced on behalf of the  Home  Secretary  is  that  this
    finding is pure speculation and is not founded upon the  evidence  that
    was before the judge and that there is material in the  refusal  letter
    of 24 April 2014 quoting evidence to the contrary.

9.   The dividing  line  between  pure  speculation  on  the  one  hand  and
    legitimate inference on the other is not always an easy  one  to  draw.
    Reading  this  determination  in  context  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    conclusions which the judge came to  in  this  instance  were  properly
    based on such material as was available and were reasonable  inferences
    which could be drawn.  The only contrary material upon which  the  Home
    Secretary relies is said to be at paragraphs 26 and  following  of  the
    decision letter which refer to John Numbi no ceasing to  hold  "such  a
    prominent public role" and it is suggested that he, being out of power,
    is no longer a man to be feared.  Against that I  have  been  taken  to
    material which was before the judge in the  form  of  documentation  at
    page 256 of  the  appellant's  bundle  and  at  page  H3  of  the  Home
    Secretary's bundle dealing with matters concerning John  Numbi.   After
    ceasing to be police chief, he is reported in those documents as  still
    being  a  powerful  political  figure  and  is  referred  to  as  being
    "untouchable" within his home province.

10.  There was more than sufficient material for the judge to  come  to  the
    conclusion which she did.  Paragraph 23 read in context says this:

         "While there is no evidence before me that he  still  wields  power
         officially it is reasonably  likely  that  he  maintains  many  old
         contacts and associations with armed groups.  I find that there  is
         a serious possibility that he could still arrange for a  member  of
         one of these groups to silence the appellant."

11.  In the following paragraph (paragraph 24), the judge notes:

         "As to whether the state would  protect  the  appellant  from  John
         Numbi I find that there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that
         it would not intervene given the  net  of  John  Numbi's  political
         influence and the likely number of his supporters.  The police  and
         security  apparatus  according  to  the  background  evidence   are
         undisciplined and corrupt and act with impunity."

    That conclusion is one that was perfectly open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence which she both read and heard and I do not consider it amounts
    to an error of law for her to  have  reached  that  conclusion  on  the
    evidence.

12.  Before passing on from this matter, it is  worth  noting  that  in  the
    judge's discussion of Article 3 she considers the alternative situation
    were she to have been wrong in relation to  the  influence  which  John
    Numbi may still have.  Paragraph 28 of the determination reads:

         "Even if I am wrong and John Numbi no longer holds any influence in
         the DRC either in order to arrange for the appellant to be silenced
         or to prevent her obtaining state protection there is  nevertheless
         a reasonable likelihood that the appellant would have been put on a
         list of 'wanted' persons or suspected offenders  or  documented  as
         someone who escaped from detention following unofficial release  in
         2011."

    That express alternative finding was part of the judge's  determination
    in relation to Article 3 against which there is no appeal by  the  Home
    Secretary.  So even if, contrary to my finding, what the judge had said
    in relation to John Numbi's power was speculation  and  not  reasonable
    inference there was not a material error because the same result  would
    have come about under the Article 3 analysis in any event.

13.  That then brings me to the third ground  of  appeal  which  was  argued
    relatively shortly and it reads as follows: "Failing to give reasons or
    any adequate reasons for findings on material matters".  In this regard
    emphasis is placed upon paragraph  30  of  the  determination  and  the
    finding  as  to  the  appellant's  risk  of  suicide  which  follows  a
    substantial quotation from the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  J  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  629.   The
    complaint is made that the  finding  as  to  suicide  risk  based  upon
    medical prognosis is infected with errors which the judge may have made
    elsewhere in the determination on issues of  credibility.   As  I  have
    already rejected the ground of appeal touching on credibility I do  not
    think that there  is  anything  in  this  third  ground.   The  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's credibility was full, fair  and  balanced
    and in the light of my conclusion above, ground simply 3 falls away.

14.  Therefore, for each and all of those reasons this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  to
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill         Date 7 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 7 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
