
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03465/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued          |
|on 26th July 2016                             |On 16th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     A N
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate; Berlow Rehman, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant gives her date of birth as 27th March 1980 and claims  to
    be a national of Somalia, originally from the Bajuni Islands.

 2. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order.   Although  there
    appears to be no particular need for anonymisation, the matter was  not
    addressed in the Upper Tribunal.  I have  retained  anonymity  in  this
    decision.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim  on  11th  February
    2015.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Malik  dismissed  her  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 10th August 2015.

 4. The question was whether the appellant is a Bajuni from  Somalia.   The
    languages she speaks, and two reports, one by  Sprakab,  the  other  by
    Professor Nurse, formed part of the analysis.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    principal points in her grounds are that the judge became  "transfixed"
    on the issue of language, and on Kibajuni being a dialect of Kiswahali,
    and did not refer to the case law.

 6. A First-tier Tribunal Judge refused permission to appeal, on  the  view
    that the grounds were no  more  than  a  lengthy  disagreement  with  a
    decision which had carefully analysed all  the  information  available,
    and had not focused solely on the language issue.

 7. The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal, on grounds which  Mr
    Forrest said were substantially the same.

 8. An Upper Tribunal Judge granted  permission,  considering  it  arguable
    that the FtT failed  to  consider  the  apparently  cogent  explanation
    offered by the appellant and by Professor Nurse for the  appellant  not
    speaking Kibajuni, focussed on general credibility, and did  not  reach
    clear findings regarding the report by Professor Nurse.

 9. Mr Forrest focused his submissions on AJH  (Minority  group  -  Swahili
    speakers) Somalia CG [2003] UKIAT 00094 at paragraph 33:

         33.  What is needed therefore in cases in which claims to be Somali
             nationals of Bajuni clan identity are made is  first  of  all:
             (1) an assessment which  examines  at  least  three  different
             factors:

               a) knowledge of  Kibajuni,

               b) knowledge of Somali, varying  depending  on  the  person's
                  personal history; and

               c) knowledge of matters to do with life in Somalia for Bajuni
                  (geography, customs, occupations etc).

              But what is also needed is (2) an assessment  which  does  not
             treat any one of these three factors as decisive:  ...,  it  is
             even possible albeit unusual that a person who does  not  speak
             Kibajuni or Somali could still be a Bajuni.

10. Mr Forrest referred also to LS (Bajuni - Kibajuni speaker) [2002] UKIAT
    416 at paragraph 14 for the observation that a  young  Bajuni  who  had
    grown up in a refugee camp in Kenya speaking Kiswahili (which  is  part
    of the appellant's claimed background) might not be a Kibajuni speaker.
     He also acknowledged the observation that:

         ... judges should approach any case involving someone who claims to
         be a Bajuni resident of Somalia, but who cannot speak Kibajuni (let
         alone Somali) with great caution.

    He argued that this was a plain case of someone who spoke Kiswahili but
    not Kibajuni, yet is a Bajuni, and that the evidence  of  both  Sprakab
    and Professor Nurse showed that to be a possibility.  There has been  a
    chaotic and fast changing background in that part of the world for many
    years.  On the evidence in this case, the  judge  had  given  too  much
    weight to inability to speak Kibajuni.  The Sprakab Report looked  only
    at the language  spoken,  whereas  Professor  Nurse  reached  realistic
    conclusions based on the life history.   The  judge  had  not  properly
    explained why the Sprakab report was of any worth in  determining  this
    case.  It should be re-heard in the First-tier Tribunal.

11. Mr Matthews asked me to note an acknowledgement correctly  made  by  Mr
    Forrest during his submissions.  Paragraph 5 of the grounds  of  appeal
    (not prepared by Mr Forrest) is wrong in stating that the Supreme Court
    in MN and KY v SSHD 2014 SC (UKSC) 183 "endorsed the Court's  decision,
    ruling  that  Sprakab  analysis  could  not  be  relied  upon".    That
    misrepresented the decision of the Supreme  Court,  which  was  broadly
    favourable to the use of language analysis by Sprakab.

12. Mr Matthews submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
    decided the case based on the Sprakab Report, and in no  way  preferred
    it over the evidence of Professor Nurse.  The criticisms of Sprakab  of
    a broad nature made by Professor Nurse were resolved by  MN  and  KY  v
    SSHD.  Professor Nurse's comments on  other  matters  were  taken  into
    account by the First-tier Tribunal in  this  case  (in  particular,  at
    paragraphs 10, 11, 14 and 15).  They were not ignored but were  at  the
    forefront of the mind of the judge.  Both expert  sources  agreed  that
    the appellant did not speak Kibajuni.  The judge did not think that was
    decisive.   Other  factors  were  examined  including  the  appellant's
    knowledge, or lack of knowledge, of Somali and her claimed  account  of
    her life within Somalia.  Professor Nurse agreed that her knowledge  of
    her claimed home island of  Chula  was  not  consistent  with  actually
    having lived there.  All the matters referred to in AJH were taken into
    account.  There  was  a  misunderstanding  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    (although this was also not a point  taken  by  Mr  Forrest)  that  the
    Sprakab report had not been before the First-tier Tribunal.   In  fact,
    the report itself, not just a  statement  of  its  conclusions  in  the
    refusal decision, was before the judge.  There was no criticism  to  be
    made of the judge's findings in so  far  as  they  were  based  on  the
    language reports.  In any event the crucial  conclusion  was  based  on
    other factors, in which no error of law was alleged.

13. I reserved my decision.

14. In my opinion, Judge Malik properly considers  the  reports  both  from
    Sprakab and from Professor Nurse.  The reports agree that the appellant
    is a native Kiswahili speaker, and not a Kibajuni  speaker.   Professor
    Nurse thinks that it would be unwise to  use  the  conclusions  of  the
    Sprakab Report as a basis for deciding that the appellant is  not  from
    Somalia, a point which the judge notes before  moving  on  to  consider
    other aspects of the appellant's claim to be from Chula.  The judge  at
    15(i) discounts the appellant's claimed ability to  speak  Kibajuni,  a
    point on which she was not supported by either report.  The rest of the
    reasoning, points (ii) to (viii), is not based on  inability  to  speak
    Kibajuni.  Points (ii) and (iii) reasonably identify  failings  in  the
    appellant's evidence about her date of birth and her age at the time of
    claimed significant moves from place to place.  Point  (iv)  notes  the
    appellant's failure to mention as a problem in  Chula  the  devastating
    tsunami in December 2004, a time when by her  account  she  would  have
    been residing in the island.  As  Mr  Matthews  submitted,  that  is  a
    particularly telling omission.  Points (v), (vi) and (vii) are  further
    credibility matters, of which no criticism  has  been  raised.   At  15
    (viii), the judge applies the citation above  from  LS  and  reaches  a
    conclusion in the round.

15. I do not find that the  judge  gave  either  too  much  or  too  little
    consideration to the  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  linguistic
    background.  Due weight was given to the reports both from Sprakab  and
    from Professor Nurse.  They agreed that the appellant is not a Kibajuni
    speaker.  The best she could derive from Professor  Nurse's  report  is
    that her claim to have spent time both in the Bajuni islands in Somalia
    and in refugee camps in Kenya was a possibility on linguistic evidence,
    but he was against her assertion that she came from Chula.

16. Having fully examined the grounds and submissions, they resolve into no
    more than a disagreement with conclusions which were properly  open  to
    the judge, who gave a number of sensible reasons  for  concluding  that
    the appellant was not a witness of credit even to the lower standard.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           5 August 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
