
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03138/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th November 2014                        |On 2nd December 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

                              MISS RITA MOKOBIA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 28th  November  1979  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria. On 20th August 2014 she was granted permission  by  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J M  Lewis  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the following reasons:

               1) The appellant seeks permission in time to appeal against a
                  decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  McLachlan)
                  promulgated on 1 August  2014  dismissing  her  appeal  on
                  political asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights
                  grounds.

               2) It is arguable at this stage that the judge was influenced
                  in   assessing   credibility   and   thus   risk   by    a
                  misunderstanding of a material fact which was the date  of
                  the appellant's asylum interview; that although saying  at
                  paragraph 59 that she had carefully considered the  expert
                  report and referring to it at several points she  did  not
                  take into account material aspects of it; that she did not
                  pay sufficient regard to the background  evidence  ;  that
                  she did not consider country guidance authority; and  that
                  at  paragraphs  31  and  32  she  did  not   reflect   the
                  explanations of the appellant.  Oral argument will  enable
                  the Tribunal to assess whether any of these strictures has
                  merit.

               3) Permission to appeal is granted.

 2. The matter was accordingly listed before me for an initial  hearing  to
    determine whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
    making of an error of law.

 3. The appellant's immigration history is recorded by  the  respondent  to
    show her entry to the United Kingdom as a visitor with valid  leave  on
    15th April 2007. She made no applications to extend her stay until June
    2010 when she made an unsuccessful application for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as the family member of an EEA  national;  this  was
    refused in November 2010 with no right of appeal.

 4. The appellant claimed asylum at Croydon on 11th  June  2013.  This  was
    refused on 29th April 2014 and a further decision was  made  to  remove
    the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  She  exercised  her
    notified right of  appeal  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. During the course of submissions to me on behalf of  the  appellant  Mr
    Lay sought to rely on Article 8 grounds on the basis that although  not
    explicitly pleaded the points are Robinson obvious. He also referred to
    a  grant  of  leave  to  the  appellant  until  April  2015  in   which
    circumstances Mr Duffy questioned on behalf of the  respondent  whether
    the appellant's right of appeal should be under section 83 of the  2002
    Act and therefore limited to refugee grounds;  there  is,  however,  no
    reflection of the leave granted to the appellant in the refusal  letter
    raising doubts about the basis of  the  decision.  The  respondent  has
    accepted that the appellant has been a victim  of  trafficking  and  if
    leave had been granted on this basis Mr  Duffy  expressed  his  concern
    that the section 10 removal decision is not in accordance with the law.



 6. Mr Duffy's view on  behalf  of  the  respondent  was  that  the  entire
    proceedings appear to be on the wrong footing and the legality  of  the
    respondent's decision-making  is  doubtful.   He  considered  that  the
    matter should be remitted to the Secretary of State for reconsideration
    on the basis of material  errors  which  have  become  evident  at  the
    hearing.  Mr Duffy withdrew the opposition  to  the  appeal  previously
    indicated under Rule 24 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

 7. The parties agreed that, with  their  consent  under  Rule  39  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and remade in  terms  that  the
    decisions of the respondent are not in accordance with the law so  that
    the  appellant  awaits  lawful  decisions.  I  considered  this  to  be
    appropriate and accordingly make the order requested to dispose of  the
    proceedings.

Notice of Decision

 8. With the consent of  both  parties,  under  Rule  39  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside and is remade in terms that the decisions of  the
    respondent are not in accordance with the law  so  that  the  appellant
    awaits lawful decisions.


Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 2nd December 2014


Fee Award

No fee has been paid and there can accordingly be no award.

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 2nd December 2014

