
                                    [pic]
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/03618/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th November 2016                  |On 30th November 2016                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     sa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Burns, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  formal
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant  or
members of his family in this  determination.   This  direction  applies  to
amongst others all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal who, in a decision promulgated on 6th  August  2015
    dismissed  the  Appellant's  claim  for  asylum   and/or   humanitarian
    protection.  Permission was granted to appeal  the  decision  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 29th January 2016.

 2. The Appellant's background can be briefly summarised.  The Appellant is
    a citizen of Iraq and was educated there and  also  completed  national
    service in that country.  He worked as part of an engineering unit  and
    as a result of that employment travelled to Jordan and  remained  there
    until 1995 when he returned to Baghdad.  He was arrested upon return as
    he had no permission to  leave  the  country  and  was  imprisoned  for
    approximately one year and was released.

 3. It was asserted on the Appellant's behalf that members of his  extended
    family were members of the Ba'ath Party and that as a result they  were
    subjected to reprisals.

 4. In 1997 the Appellant travelled to Libya and remained there until  2004
    when he travelled to Amman and he has resided there  until  2014  along
    with his family members.  Since living  in  Amman,  the  Appellant  has
    returned to Iraq on five occasions.

 5. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom with his family on visit visas
    on 26th August 2014 and claimed asylum at the port of  entry.   He  was
    interviewed on the same  day  and  had  an  asylum  interview  on  12th
    November 2014.

 6. In a decision letter of 13th  February  2015  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused his claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  for  the
    reasons set out therein, having taken into account the basis upon which
    it was asserted that he would be at risk of harm upon return.

 7.  The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 28th May 2015 and in
    a determination promulgated on 6th August 2015, the Appellant's  claims
    for asylum and/or humanitarian protection were dismissed by the  judge.
    The judge in his  findings  of  fact  reached  the  conclusion  on  the
    evidence that the Appellant and his family members would not be at risk
    on return to Iraq as a result of any perceived links  with  the  former
    Saddam regime or as a collaborator with that regime.  Nor did  he  find
    that the Appellant would be at  risk  of  reprisals  arising  from  any
    former employment held in Iraq.  As to humanitarian protection, it  was
    conceded on behalf of the Appellant that there was no  evidence  before
    the Tribunal that established a degree of  indiscriminate  violence  at
    such a high level as to reach the threshold necessary for a  breach  of
    Article 15(c) and the judge also found that there  were  no  particular
    circumstances that would specifically  affect  the  Appellant  and  his
    family members to demonstrate any breach of Article 15(c).   The  judge
    considered the medical evidence relating to  the  Appellant's  son  but
    reached the conclusion at paragraphs [36] to [38] that that  would  not
    lead to any breach of his human rights upon return.  At paragraphs [39]
    to [43] the judge considered the claim based on Article 8.  The grounds
    advanced  before  the  Appellant  do  not  challenge  any  findings  or
    conclusions made in relation to Article 8.

 8. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Burns appeared on behalf of the  Appellant
    and  Mr  McVeety  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State.   I  heard
    submissions from each of the parties which are recorded in my Record of
    Proceedings and gave additional time for Mr Burns to take  instructions
    from his client who was present during the hearing.  I confirm  that  I
    have considered those submissions  and  reached  a  conclusion  on  the
    grounds advanced on behalf of the Appellant.  I  shall  set  out  their
    submissions when dealing with each ground specifically.

Ground 1

 9. Dealing with Ground 1, it is submitted that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of credibility by placing too much weight on  the  screening
    interview as a piece of evidence (see determination paragraphs [27]  to
    [33]).  Mr Burns on behalf of the  Appellant  submits  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account the guidance given in the  decision  of  YL
    (rely on SEF) China [2004] UKAIT 00145 at [19].

10. In this regard, he points to the screening interview at  questions  4.1
    and 4.2 in which the Appellant sets out his reasons as to why  he  came
    to the UK and that the reasons given at 4.1 and 4.2,  he  submits,  are
    not inconsistent with the later claim made by him.  He submits that  he
    had made a claim as a risk of being considered a collaborator under the
    old Ba'athist regime and this flowed from the history that he had given
    at questions 4.1 and 4.2.

11. Furthermore Mr Burns submitted that there was  insufficient  space  for
    giving any further answers to be given (see question 4.2) and also that
    the Appellant was told not to go into detail (see the preamble at  page
    1 of the form).  He submitted that at 5.1 the Appellant alluded to  the
    Ba'athist regime and that he had been arrested and that there had  been
    no substantial contradiction between the asylum  interview  which  took
    place later and the screening interview.  He reminded the Tribunal that
    the screening interview was only a small part of the evidence and  that
    the judge was wrong to place too much  weight  on  that  one  piece  of
    evidence in reaching his conclusions.

12. In any event, he submitted that even  when  looking  at  the  screening
    interview in isolation, the Appellant's  answers  were  reasonable  and
    that the only inconsistency relates to paragraph 5.1 when he was  asked
    if he had been arrested, charged or convicted of  any  offence  in  any
    country and the Appellant referred to "Oman  -  never".    He  accepted
    that this was  inconsistent  with  the  later  account  in  the  asylum
    interview but that the Appellant had  given  a  reasonable  explanation
    concerning the interpretation of  the  screening  interview  which  had
    later  been  referred  to  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  [17]  of  the
    determination.   Thus  he  submitted  that  the  findings  relating  to
    credibility were unsafe for those reasons.

13. Mr McVeety on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that the judge
    was entitled to take into account the screening interview and  that  it
    provided no link between the claim that he was later  to  make  in  his
    asylum interview.  He submitted that if the claim  for  protection  was
    based on a risk due to perceived  collaboration  or  to  any  Ba'athist
    connections, the Appellant might be reasonably  expected  to  say  this
    rather than set out his concerns relating to his son.  In any event, he
    submitted the judge did not only rely on the  screening  interview  but
    considered the Appellant's answers in  the  asylum  interview  and  the
    evidence as a whole and gave valid reasons for  reaching  the  decision
    that he did.

Discussion:

14. The judge's assessment of the evidence and findings on credibility  are
    set out at paragraphs [24]-[38] of the determination.  At [28] and [29]
    the judge makes  reference  to  the  replies  given  in  the  screening
    interview observing that "some significant weight" should be  given  to
    the credibility of the answers given in the  screening  interview.   He
    accurately  records  the  screening  interview  and  the  responses  at
    paragraphs 4.1, 4.2 and 5.1.  At paragraph [29] he  also  set  out  the
    screening interview of the  Appellant's  wife.   There  is  no  dispute
    between the parties that the judge accurately set out the  contents  of
    each parties' respective screening interview.

15. Mr Burns has referred me to the decision of YL (China).  YL (China)  is
    not  authority  for  the  proposition  that  evidence  in  a  screening
    interview can never be taken into account or afforded weight in  making
    an assessment of credibility or  the  consistency  of  the  Appellant's
    account.  The Tribunal gave guidance  to  judges  concerning  screening
    interviews and the general assessment of evidence  contained  in  those
    documents at paragraph [19] to which Mr Burns has referred me to.

16. The purpose of the screening interview is described as follows:-

         "To establish the general nature of the claimant's case so that the
         Home Office can decide how best to process  it.   It  is  concerned
         with the country of  origin,  means  of  travel,  circumstances  of
         arrival in the UK, preferred language and other matters that  might
         help the Secretary of State understand the case."

17. It is also clear from paragraph [19] that:-

         "Asylum seekers are still expected to tell the  truth  and  answers
         given in screening interviews can be compared fairly  with  answers
         given later.  However, it has to be  remembered  that  a  screening
         interview is not done to establish in detail the reasons  a  person
         gives to support their claim for asylum.  It would not normally  be
         appropriate  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  ask  supplementary
         questions as to elaborate answers and an inaccurate summary  by  an
         Immigration Officer at that stage would be  excusable.  Furthermore
         the screening interview may  well  be  conducted  when  the  asylum
         seeker is tired after a long  journey.  These  things  have  to  be
         considered when any inconsistencies between the screening interview
         and the later case are evaluated."

18. Thus judges are asked to consider and evaluate those matters as set out
    by the Tribunal.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  answers  given  in  the
    screening interview as recorded by the judge  at  paragraphs  [28]  and
    [29], the reasons the Appellant later gave for claiming asylum,  namely
    that he was at risk as a perceived collaborator and that members of his
    family have been targeted, were wholly absent.   I  cannot  accept  the
    submission made by Mr Burns that the answers given to paragraph 4.1 and
    4.2 did reflect his case of being at risk as a collaborator.  There  is
    no reference whatsoever to any risk in that regard but related  to  the
    circumstances of his son.  Nor do I  accept  his  submission  that  the
    judge unreasonably relied on the screening  interview  and  gave  undue
    weight to only one piece of evidence failing to apply the  guidance  in
    YL (China) as set out above.  I shall set out my reasons  for  reaching
    this conclusion.

19. The judge at paragraphs [30] to [33] considered the answers given,  not
    only in the screening interview but  also  from  the  contents  of  the
    asylum interview and the  oral  evidence  heard  at  the  hearing.   At
    paragraph [30] the judge considered the evidence  as  to  the  risk  on
    return in Iraq and the nature of the claimed threat based  on  being  a
    collaborator, supported  by  attacks  on  family  members.   The  judge
    records the Appellant's evidence in his  asylum  interview  that  "Even
    then the Appellant states he is unsure whether his wife  felt  that  he
    was killed in 1997 in suspicious circumstances or was killed because he
    was Shia or because of his connections  to  the  Saddam  regime".   The
    judge went on to consider the  circumstances  and  found  that  on  the
    evidence "things were relatively stable for  the  wife's  family  until
    2012" and contrasted that with the country materials which demonstrated
    that 2012 was many years after the fall of the Saddam regime  and  that
    if they had been targeted as a result of a  perception  of  them  being
    collaborators it would have happened long before 2012.  The judge found
    that whether or not the incidents took place that there was no evidence
    to suggest that they were targeted  as  a  result  of  a  Ba'ath  Party
    connection.

20. The judge at [30]did make a finding that if the  Appellant  had  really
    thought that the incidents involving the wife's family in Iraq was as a
    result of any Ba'ath Party connection that this would be  something  he
    would have put forward in the screening interview.  As set  out  in  YL
    (China) the judge took into account that the Appellant was not asked to
    expand on his reasons for not wishing to go back to Iraq and was  asked
    to give brief reasons.  However it was open to the judge to  take  into
    account that he had failed in any regard to mention the problems  faced
    by the family and as a collaborator in the context that this  was  "the
    primary reason" why he could not return to Iraq.

21. However as can be seen by reading the  judge's  findings  cumulatively,
    the judge did not reject his account solely for the reason that he  had
    failed to mention the real reasons behind the claim for asylum  in  the
    screening interview.  The judge's findings when read cumulatively  were
    as follows.  The Appellant was unable to give  details  in  his  asylum
    interview as to the reasons for his wife's father's killing in 1997 and
    he was unsure whether it was because he was a Shia or  because  of  any
    connections to the Saddam regime.  The  judge  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's evidence that the family had been living  peacefully  until
    2012.  The judge found that this was many years after the fall  of  the
    Saddam regime and that had they  been  targeted  as  a  result  of  the
    perception of them as collaborators, it would have happened long before
    2012.  The judge found that he was not on a "watch list" as a result of
    any role of an engineer in the draining  of  the  marshes  because  the
    activities took place twenty years  ago  and  there  was  no  objective
    evidence or country materials  that  had  been  identified  before  the
    Tribunal to demonstrate that engineers  working  for  the  regime  that
    length of time ago were at risk; even less so that  there  was  such  a
    list of such engineers as asserted by the Appellant.  The  judge  found
    that even if there were such Arabs who did feel ill-feeling, there  was
    no  evidence  of  any  organised   targeting   by   such   individuals.
    Consequently  the  judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  account  and  his
    evidence that his name would  have  been  found  on  data  looted  from
    government  offices  and  found  that  to  be  "entirely  speculative".
    Furthermore the judge found that even if there were any  (in  a  highly
    unlikely event) that if they did find out, he would be able to point to
    the fact that he himself had been persecuted by the Saddam  regime  for
    defection at the time that he had been involved.

22. At paragraph [32] the judge made further findings (which have not  been
    a subject of challenge in the grounds).  Those findings considered  the
    Appellant's conduct namely, that the  judge  found  the  Appellant  had
    returned to Iraq on a number of occasions as a visitor in  2005,  2008,
    2011 and 2013 and that as a result of that, the  judge  found  that  it
    undermined  any  claim  that  he  would  be  at   risk   of   violence.
    Furthermore, it was open to the judge to find  that  he  had  not  only
    visited Iraq himself but that he had taken his family members on one or
    more of the visits.

23. It was therefore open to the judge to find on the  evidence  that  this
    was inconsistent with  his  claim  that  he  was  fearful  of  violence
    targeting him and his family members as a result of  any  Ba'ath  Party
    connections or work as an engineer.

24. At paragraph [33], the judge also gave reasons as to why he reached the
    conclusion that he would not be at risk on return by reference  to  the
    extended family members that continued to live in Iraq safely.

25. When looking at the findings and reading the determination as a  whole,
    it is plain that the judge gave a number of evidence-based reasons  for
    rejecting the core of the Appellant's account and  did  not  do  so  by
    placing undue weight on the  screening  interview  or  any  failure  to
    mention the core reason for his claim in the screening interview.   The
    judge, in fact, considered the evidence as a whole and not just that of
    the screening interview when reaching  his  overall  assessment.   Thus
    Ground 1 is not made out.

Ground 2:

26. I now turn to Ground 2.  This relates  to  the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection and the assessment of Article 15(c).  It is asserted in  the
    written grounds that  the  judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  Counsel's
    submission that his particular circumstances and combination of factors
    affecting the Appellant and his members meant that  they  would  be  at
    risk of indiscriminate violence which  reached  the  level  that  would
    breach Article 15(c) (see paragraph [34]).  In his oral submissions  Mr
    Burns submitted that  the  particular  circumstances  relating  to  the
    Appellant which would make him more specifically affected were that  he
    would be perceived as a collaborator and that being so, he would not be
    able to relocate.  He submitted that in the  light  of  his  particular
    circumstances of being perceived in  such  a  way  that  he  could  not
    relocate and would have no support from any tribal links and  he  would
    be exposed to a level of  treatment  which  would  meet  the  threshold
    necessary for a breach of Article 15(c).  Mr Burns confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's case  was  not  being  advanced  on  any  other  particular
    circumstances.

27. The judge at [34] set out the evidence that had been placed before him.
     In terms of  country  information  and  objective  material,  he  made
    reference to the Appellant's reliance on the Iraq Bulletin update  2013
    and that he had also considered the OGN for August  2014.   Looking  at
    the Appellant's bundle, the  only  evidence  contained  in  it  was  an
    article relating to the Marsh Arab  rebellion  (2008)  and  an  article
    relating to medical health care in Iraq.  No  other  country  materials
    were placed before the Tribunal.  Thus where the written grounds assert
    at paragraph 11 that the submission made to  the  judge  was  that  the
    situation in Baghdad had deteriorated since that material, there was no
    country material evidence provided to  the  judge  to  support  such  a
    submission.  As the judge found at [34] on the evidence that  had  been
    placed before him, Baghdad was not a "contested area" compared with the
    other areas in Iraq and that there was no evidence, advanced on  behalf
    of the Appellant, that  would  establish  a  degree  of  indiscriminate
    violence characterising the conflict in Baghdad at such a high level as
    to breach Article 15(c).  Based on the evidence before him that  was  a
    finding plainly open to the judge even if the Appellant's  Counsel  had
    not conceded that, there was no evidence to establish that there was  a
    degree of indiscriminate violence to reach the threshold of a breach of
    Article 15(c).

28. Whilst the grounds  rely  upon  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant which would make him  and  his  family  members  specifically
    affected, Mr Burns confirmed that they are advanced on the basis of his
    perceived profile as a collaborator.  However, this risk  was  rejected
    by the judge for the reasons given earlier  in  the  determination  and
    therefore could not give rise to any breach of Article 15(c)  based  on
    the same facts.  No further circumstances have been advanced on  behalf
    of the Appellant.  Consequently on the  evidence  provided  before  the
    judge, it was open to him to reach the conclusion  that  there  was  no
    evidence to demonstrate that the circumstances  on  return  to  Baghdad
    would be in breach of Article 15(c).  The grounds do not challenge  the
    judge's findings paragraphs [36] to [37] where the judge considered the
    evidence relating to the Appellant's son and his medical circumstances.
     He reached the conclusions that he had care needs rather than  medical
    needs but in any event that there was  a  sufficient  level  of  health
    provision, having addressed that question by reference to  the  country
    materials that were placed before him.  Thus the judge  had  considered
    other circumstances of the family.

29. The judge promulgated the decision on 6th August 2015  which  was  well
    before the country guidance decision in AA  (Article  15(c)  (Iraq)  CG
    2015 544 (IAC) which was not promulgated until October  2015.   I  have
    heard no submissions from either party relating to this decision  which
    was made after the judge's  determination.   Nonetheless  the  findings
    made are broadly consistent with that decision noting that Baghdad city
    was not a "contested area" and at [132] the panel did not find that the
    level of  indiscriminate  violence  in  Baghdad  city  or  the  Baghdad
    governorate as a whole came "even close  to  crossing  the  Article  15
    threshold".  Nor does the Appellant fall within  any  of  the  enhanced
    risk  categories  and  the  judge  properly  considered   the   medical
    circumstances, to which there has been no challenge..

30.  In summary, the judge made a decision on the evidence  that  had  been
    placed before him and on the country materials that  he  was  asked  to
    consider by  the  parties  and  reached  sustainable  findings  on  the
    totality of the evidence.

31. The grounds do not demonstrate any error of law in the consideration of
    the issues for the reasons set out above.  Consequently the  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of  law.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
upheld.


Signed                              Date: 29/11/2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
