
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03923/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th June 2014                               |On 24th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   MR B.a
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Raggi Kotak (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Freer promulgated on 17th October 2013, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 7th October 2013.   In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who applied  for,  and
    was subsequently granted, permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Ghana,  who  was  born  on  12th
    January 1994.  He appeals  against  the  refusal  of  asylum,  and  the
    refusal of humanitarian protection in accordance with paragraph 339C of
    HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant came to the UK as a minor in 2005, with a man who claimed
    to be his uncle, and was subsequently made to work  in  a  brothel  for
    many years.  It  is  accepted  by  the  Respondent  that  he  has  been
    trafficked into the UK.  He is a  victim  of  human  trafficking.   His
    claim is that as a "young vulnerable person with no family support"  he
    will be rendered vulnerable and destitute in Ghana were he to be forced
    to return  there.   Further,  in  Ghana  there  would  be  insufficient
    protection for him as a person who was formerly  trafficked  for  child
    labour.

The task before the Judge

 4. The judge had regard to the "qualifying regulations" as set out in  the
    Minimum Standards Directive 2004/83/EC which was transposed into UK law
    through the Qualification Regulations 2006 (S1 number 2525).  The judge
    also had regard to the guidelines for  the  UN  High  Commissioner  for
    Refugees for particular social groups.  He held that  the  "core  issue
    arises from the apparent tension between the  test  in  the  qualifying
    Regulations and the UNHCR guidelines.  I  have  to  decide  whether  to
    apply a two-step test or an alternatives test"  (para  32).   What  the
    judge was referring to here was whether he could confine his  attention
    to the "protected characteristics" approach, or whether he should  also
    consider the "social perception approach."  Either he could  allow  the
    appeal if  only  the  Appellant  could  show  existence  of  "protected
    characteristics," or he could allow the appeal only  if  the  Appellant
    could  also  additionally  show  evidence  of  "the  social  perception
    approach."  The latter involved a two-stage approach.   The  judge  set
    out the respective claims of the Appellant and the Respondent Secretary
    of State.

 5. First, as far as the Appellant was concerned, the following submissions
    were made.  It was unnecessary for  the  Appellant  to  show  that  the
    society in Ghana would perceive the Appellant differently as  a  former
    victim of trafficking (see para  22).   It  was  enough  to  note  that
    insufficiency of protection from harm existed on account of the  simple
    fact that the Appellant was formerly trafficked for child  labour  from
    Ghana to the UK.  As such, he was a member of a particular social group
    (PSG).

 6. In applying a two-stage requirement,  the  Respondent  had  accordingly
    applied the wrong test to the Appellant's situation. What she ought  to
    have done was to have applied the two aspects of a single test, but  as
    alternatives.  The first  aspect  was  the  'protected  characteristics
    approach',  flowing   on   account   of   the   Appellant's   immutable
    characteristic, as a PSG.  The second aspect was the "social perception
    approach," flowing from the fact that society in Ghana  would  set  the
    Appellant apart from the community as a group.  Both aspects  were  set
    out in the Minimum Standards Directive  2004/83/EC  and  again  in  the
    transposed UK law of the Qualifications  Regulations  2006  (S1  number
    2525).

 7. If the two aspects were treated as two limbs of a  single  requirement,
    then they would be seen as alternatives to a single test, and this  has
    been  recognised  as  being  the  correct  approach  by  the  UN   High
    Commissioner for Refugees in the 2002 guidelines on  particular  social
    groups.

 8. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Fornah [2006]  UKHL  46
    Lord Bingham recognised that there was a single test with two  separate
    limbs to be treated as alternatives.  This judgment is binding  on  the
    Respondent and the courts.  It was followed in MK (Lesbians) Albania CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00036 (at page 350) where it was said that,

         "If as it appears lesbianism is a comprehensive cultural  taboo  in
         Albania, then it would appear that lesbian women in  Albania  would
         be regarded as sharing a  common  characteristic  and/or  would  be
         perceived as a group by  society  and  so  satisfy  the  definition
         provided in the UNHCR guidelines .. approved by the House of  Lords
         in Fornah."

 9. The Appellant recognised that the Tribunal had not taken this  position
    in the case of SB (PSG/Protection Regulations - Regulation  6)  Moldova
    CG [2008] UKAIT 00002 when it observed that, "the observations of their
    Lordships were obiter, although very persuasive, because  it  is  clear
    that their Lordships did not decide the case under  Regulation  6(1)(d)
    ."

10. However, in Ms Kotak's submissions before me, the House  of  Lords  had
    considered the definition of the PSG and therefore their  reasoning  on
    the definition was part of the ratio of the case.  In the  alternative,
    if this was not the case, then the findings of the House of Lords  were
    highly persuasive,  and  therefore  applicable,  when  determining  the
    appeal, which it had done after hearing full legal argument.

11. In the jurisprudence of the Tribunal, it had already been accepted that
    "former victims of trafficking" could comprise  a  PSG,  and  this  was
    clear from SB (Moldova) and from  AZ  (Trafficked  Women)  Thailand  CG
    [2010] UKUT 118.

12. But what was now being argued was that the Appellant was also a PSG  on
    account of his membership of a "young and  vulnerable  people  with  no
    family support."  As such, he would be able to meet both limbs  of  the
    test set out in Article 6(1) of the Qualification Regulations 2006.

13. If the Appellant had very little in the way of problem  solving  skills
    then he would find it very hard to survive upon return  to  Ghana.   He
    would be highly visible and exposed to risk on the  streets  in  Ghana.
    He would be perceived differently in society and would be set apart.

14. Second, as far as the Respondent's submissions  were  concerned,  these
    were that the Appellant could not be defined as a  member  of  a  group
    based upon being a group of "young and vulnerable people with no family
    support" because to do so was to use persecution to define the group as
    such.  This was not permitted.  He  was  not,  as  such,  possessed  of
    immutable characteristics until after he  had  been  trafficked.   Only
    then was he a victim of human trafficking.   Membership  of  the  group
    could not crystalize until after the persecution occurred.  The  social
    context required consideration.  Former victims would need to establish
    a distinct identity within society.  The evidence did not  support  the
    view  that  society  would  recognise  victims  of  trafficking  as   a
    particular social group which would cause them to be targeted any  more
    than any other person.  A real risk of re-trafficking and reprisals had
    not been substantiated.   Therefore,  state  protection  in  Ghana  was
    sufficient.  It was not shown to be inadequate.  The test in Horvath  v
    SSHD [2001] AC 489 was met.

The Judge's Findings

15. The judge in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  jurisprudence
    carefully.  He noted that, as far as the  judgments  in  Fornah  [2006]
    UKHL 46, were concerned, two of their Lordships, namely,  Lord  Bingham
    and Lord Brown, had accepted explicitly the UNHCR guidelines.  In fact,
    Lord Brown was highly critical  (at  paragraph  120)  of  the  circular
    argument that any group solely defined by persecutory treatment must be
    excluded  from  protection  by  the  Refugee  Convention.   The  court,
    however, was composed of five  Law  Lords,  and  this  was  a  minority
    judgment.  These dicta could not form  part  of  the  ratio  decidendi.
    They were of persuasive authority only.

16. The judge was more influenced by the recent Tribunal  determination  of
    AZ (Trafficked Women) Thailand CG [2010] UKUT 118, which had the status
    of a country guidance case, but where paragraphs 128 to 143 involved  a
    wide-ranging analysis of all the previous case law that was material.

17. At paragraph 131, the Tribunal paid attention to the  UNHCR  guidelines
    (HCR/GIP/06/07) of 7th April 2006  and  observed  that,  "it  is  quite
    rightly acknowledged that not  all  victims  or  potential  victims  of
    trafficking fall within the scope of the refugee definition."   In  the
    same paragraph, the Tribunal also considered the difference between the
    Directive and the Regulations, and it concluded, as  was  noted  in  SB
    (Moldova), that the only difference  between  the  two  was  that,  "in
    particular," in Article 10(1)(d) of the Directive had been replaced  by
    "for example" in Regulation 6(1)(d).

18. Consideration was given by the Tribunal in that  case  to  the  UNHCR's
    comments  that  states  ought  to  permit  alternative,   rather   than
    cumulative application of  the  two  concepts,  but  at  the  start  of
    paragraph 124, the Tribunal stated that, "although we are urged by Miss
    Brewer to find that the two sub-sections should be read as  alternative
    concepts, we are unable to accept that."

19. Clearly, therefore, the Tribunal had rejected the submission  that  the
    two concepts should be treated as alternatives.  It  had  rejected  the
    UNHCR position.

20. In fact, at the end of paragraph 134, the Tribunal stated that:

         "It is possible that  former  victims  of  trafficking  for  sexual
         exploitation may be members of a particular  social  group  in  one
         country, but not in another (paragraphs 71 and 72)."

    [These numbers are a reference to SB (Moldova) [2008]  UKAIT  0002  and
    the sentence I quote is found at the middle of paragraph 72 thereof].

21. The Upper Tribunal had consistently,  therefore,  found,  following  an
    exhaustive analysis of the cases at a country guidance level, that  the
    House of Lord's decision on this issue  was  obiter  and  therefore  of
    interest but not one  that  could  be  regarded  as  binding.   It  had
    rejected the UNHCR alternatives test.  It had  preferred  the  two-limb
    test.

22. On this basis, the First-tier Tribunal applied  the  jurisprudence  set
    out in the relevant cases, to the facts before it.  It  concluded  that
    the  majority  of  cases  concerned  women  when  it  came   to   human
    trafficking.  The Tribunal, however, was prepared to take  a  different
    view of a young male Appellant.  It referred to the relevant section in
    "the refugee and international law" (by Goodwin-Gill  and  McAdam,  3rd
    Edition, Oxford, 2007) where it was stated (at page 84)  that  "clearly
    gender is used by  societies  to  organise  or  distribute  rights  and
    benefits; where it is also used to deny rights  or  inflict  harm,  the
    identification of a gender-defined social group has  the  advantage  of
    external confirmation."  The judge went on to hold that  the  Appellant
    met the  first  limb  of  the  test  of  having  a  relevant  immutable
    characteristic.  He had also to then show, in a two-stage test, that he
    met the second limb and this he failed to do, because he could not show
    that he would be socially perceived as part of a different group.   The
    Appellant had to show who was a "perceiver."  He was only known in that
    way to his lawyers, to experts, and to  the  two  traffickers  who  had
    brought him to the UK.  He was not known in that way to  anybody  else.
    He had gone overseas as a young minor many years ago and "he has  grown
    very much and has considerably changed  appearance  by  reason  of  his
    changing age characteristic, since he went to the United Kingdom" (para
    46).  He could not succeed in his appeal.

23. The First-tier Tribunal  also  gave  consideration  to  an  alternative
    argument that the Appellant was a  "young  vulnerable  person  with  no
    family support" and held that there was no doubt that the Appellant was
    young and vulnerable.  However, the  Appellant,  whilst  potentially  a
    member of a social group, could not  show  that  it  was  an  immutable
    characteristic to  be  young.   The  judge  held  that,  "an  immutable
    characteristic has to be shown and age ... is always  mutable,  due  to
    all Appellants being time bound" (para 47).

Grounds of Application

24. The grounds of application stated that the judge had erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the Appellant was not at risk of persecution by  virtue
    of being a member of a particular social group.  There were two grounds
    in particular.

25. First, it was argued that the courts have on different  occasions  made
    different findings on the issues raised.  In Fornah [2006] UKHL 46, the
    House of Lords held that only one limb of the test was required.   This
    was followed by the Tribunal in MK (Lesbians) Albania CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00036.  However, in two other cases the Tribunal found that both  limbs
    were required.  These were SB  (Moldova)  [2008]  UKAIT  00002  and  AZ
    (Trafficked Women) Thailand [2010] UKUT 118.  It was argued that it was
    plainly unsatisfactory to have two different  positions  taken  by  the
    courts on such a key question as the protection to  be  accorded  to  a
    member of a particular social group.  Clearly the dicta in the House of
    Lord's judgments  were  more  persuasive.   It  was  true  that  in  SB
    (Moldova) their Lordships decided that the dicta in Fornah were obiter,
    but this was incorrect because in Fornah  their  Lordships  heard  full
    argument from the parties on the  issues  before  them  and  then  only
    decided that one limb of the test was required.  This was not the  case
    in SB (Moldova).  Here, whereas both parties before  the  Tribunal  had
    agreed that only one limb of  the  test  was  required,  the  Tribunal,
    without informing the parties of its intentions, determined  that  both
    limbs were required, and did not invite any argument on this  question.
    A conflict between judicial decisions thereby arose.  SB  was  followed
    by  AZ,  whereas  Fornah  was  followed  by  MK.   The  result  is   an
    unsatisfactory state of  affairs.   It  is  inappropriate  for  binding
    country guidance case law, not to be based upon  the  House  of  Lord's
    findings, in circumstances where that Tribunal has heard  no  argument,
    because both parties had already agreed that the  House  of  Lords  had
    correctly determined the issue on this question.

26. Second, the Appellant in any event in this case already  met  the  two-
    limb test because, it was argued before the Tribunal that the Appellant
    was in the  alternative  a  "young  vulnerable  person  without  family
    support."  Yet, the First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected  the  appeal  on
    the basis that age was not an immutable  characteristic  and  this  was
    plainly wrong in  the  light  of  LQ  (Age:  Immutable  Characteristic)
    Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005.

27. On 30th  December  2013,  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  the  Appellant
    permission to appeal on the basis that, whereas the judge had  properly
    considered and applied AZ (Trafficked Women) Thailand [2010] UKUT  118,
    it was arguable that the judge failed  to  deal  with  the  alternative
    particular social group ground  that  was  claimed,  namely,  that  the
    Appellant was a "young vulnerable person with no family support."

Submissions

28. At the hearing before on 13th June 2014, Miss Raggi Kotak, of  Counsel,
    appearing on behalf of the Appellant, adopted her  submissions  in  her
    detailed Grounds of Appeal.  Broadly speaking, she submitted that there
    were  two  grounds.   First,  EC  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC   (the
    Qualification  Directive)  sets  out  the  "minimum  standards"  to  be
    guaranteed.  Article 10(1)(d) deals with  membership  of  a  particular
    social group in terms that:

         "A group shall be considered to  form  a  particular  social  group
         where in particular

         (1)  Members of that group share an innate characteristic or common
             background that cannot be changed, or share  a  characteristic
             or  belief  that  is  so  fundamental  to  their  identity  or
             conscious that a person should not be forced to  renounce  it;
             and

         (2)  that group has a distinct identity in  the  relevant  country,
             because it is perceived as being different by the  surrounding
             society."



29. The EU Qualification Directive was transposed into UK law  through  The
    Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006 (S1 number 2525) which provides that:

         "Reasons for persecution

         6(1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee:

             (d)  a group shall be considered to form a  particular  social
                  group where for example:

                  (i)  members of that group share an innate characteristic,
                      or a common background that  cannot  be  changed,  or
                      share  a  characteristic  or  belief   that   is   so
                      fundamental to identity or conscience that the person
                      should not be forced to renounce it, and

                  (ii) that group has a distinct identity  in  the  relevant
                      country, because it is perceived as  being  different
                      by surrounding society."

30. The claim raises the question as to whether both  limbs  of  the  tests
    above have to be met in order to form a PSG or just one limb.   In  the
    UNHCR guidelines on membership of  a  particular  social  group  it  is
    argued that only one limb of the test had to be met.

31. Accordingly, the judge in the first  instance  Tribunal  erred  in  his
    application of the definition of PSG when considering the group "former
    victim of trafficking," and failing to follow the test as  set  out  by
    the House of Lords in Fornah.

32. In Fornah [2006] UKHL 46, their Lordships  concluded  that,  "the  only
    issue in each case is whether the Appellant's well-founded fear  is  of
    being persecuted 'for reasons  of  .....  membership  of  a  particular
    social group.'" (para 1).

33. In the consideration, their Lordships fully  considered  the  different
    elements of the definition of PSG and determined the  relevant  issues,
    including the test as set out above in the Qualification Directive  and
    Qualification Regulations, and in particular whether it  was  necessary
    to meet both limbs of the test.

34. It is therefore argued that any principles established relating to  the
    definition are part of the ratio  of  the  determination  and  are  not
    obiter as suggested by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

35. In Fornah their Lordships stated (emphasis added):

         "When assessing a claim based  upon  membership  of  a  [PSG]  ....
         national authorities should certainly take that as listed  [in  the
         Qualification Directive] into account.  I do not doubt that a group
         should be considered to form a [PSG] ... where, in particular,  the
         criteria in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii)  are  both  satisfied  ....
         If, however, this Article were interpreted as meaning that a social
         group should only be recognised as a [PSG] ... for the purposes  of
         the Convention if it satisfies the criteria in both  sub-paragraphs
         (i) and (ii), then in my opinion it propounds a test more stringent
         than is warranted by  international  authority."   [16]  (per  Lord
         Bingham).

36. The UNHCR position is that the criteria in sub-paragraphs (i) and  (ii)
    should be treated as alternatives [16] (per Lord Bingham).

37. Lord Bingham had stated that when considering if a person has become  a
    PSG that,

         "Since it is common ground that a family may be a particular social
         group ... the  questions  here  are  whether  the  Adjudicator  was
         entitled to conclude that on the facts  the  family  of  the  First
         Appellant's husband was such a group ..... when applying the  UNHCR
         definition  .....  or  Article  10(d)(i)  and   (ii)   jointly   or
         alternatively, of the EU Directive, I am of the opinion that he was
         clearly so entitled ..." [24].

38. Lord Hope adopted the definition (at para 38) of the PSG as set out  by
    Lord Bingham, and went onto accept that both parts of the test were met
    (at paragraphs 44 to 45).  His Lordship then went on  to  consider  the
    requirements of the test and considered the question of whether it  was
    necessary to demonstrate, "recognition within the society  subjectively
    that the collection of individuals is a group that is  set  apart  from
    the rest of the community" before declaring that:

         "My own preference is .... that it would be  a  mistake  to  insist
         that such recognition is always necessary.  I agree with  him  that
         it is sufficient that the asylum seeker can be seen objectively  to
         have been singled out by the persecutor or persecutors for  reasons
         of his or  her  membership  of  a  particular  social  group  whose
         defining characteristics  exist  independently  of  the  words  and
         actions of the persecuted." [46]

39. For his part, Lord Rodger did not consider  the  specific  question  of
    whether a PSG had to meet both limbs of  the  test  in  Article  10(d).
    However, Baroness Hale adopted the UNHCR guidelines [at 100]  based  on
    the argument that only one limb of the test had to  be  met.   Baroness
    Hale stated that the guidelines indicated that a PSG  is  a  group  who
    share a common characteristic other than the risk of being  persecuted,
    or who are perceived as a group by society [103].  The suggestion  that
    only one limb of the test had to be met was also adopted by Lord Brown,
    who  also  followed  the  UNHCR  guidelines,   and   found   that   the
    Qualification Directive had to be interpreted  consistently  with  this
    [118].

40. It is clear  from  this  that  three  judges  in  the  House  of  Lords
    explicitly  considered  the  question  whether  both   limbs   of   the
    Qualification Directive (Article 10(d) of the Regulations)  had  to  be
    met.  Three judges found that they did not in the form of Lord Bingham,
    Lord Hope and Lord Brown.  The definition of the UNHCR was  adopted  by
    Baroness Hale who argued that only  one  limb  had  to  be  met.   She,
    therefore, implicitly accepted the test of one limb.  Of the  remaining
    judges, Lord Rodger did not consider the issue.  Most importantly, none
    of their Lordships found that both limbs had to be met.

41. It is in these circumstances, that the Tribunal decisions  have  to  be
    assessed.  The case of SB  (PSG  -  Protection  Regulations  -  Reg  6)
    Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 00002 saw the Tribunal consider the application
    of Fornah when it went on to rule that [69]:

         ".... however, the observations of  their  Lordships  were  obiter,
         although very persuasive, because it is clear that their  Lordships
         did not decide the cases under Regulation 6(1)(d) or  Article  1(d)
         of the Qualification Directive .... it seems to us that to conclude
         that it is not necessary to satisfy sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii)  of
         Regulation 6(1)(d) would not be consistent with the fact  that  the
         House of Lords has also insisted, in Fornah and K  as  well  as  in
         Shah and Islam, that  the  determination  of  the  question  as  to
         whether a particular social group exists in society must always  be
         considered within the context of society in question."

42. On behalf of the Appellant, it is argued that the Tribunal  in  SB  was
    wrong because the House of Lords in  Fornah  had  clearly  decided  the
    cases under all the issues, including  the  Directive/Regulations,  and
    had consistently and constantly referred to these.  SB was followed  by
    AZ (Trafficked Women) Thailand CG [2010] UKUT 118, which also  required
    both limbs to be satisfied.   However,  it  was  not  followed  by  the
    Tribunal in  MK  (Lesbians)  Albania  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  000036,  which
    stipulated that only one requirement should be  satisfied.   It  is  on
    this basis that the  Appellant  argues  that  the  authorities  are  in
    disarray.  An authoritative decision is required.  The Appellant argues
    that (1) the test in Fornah is not obiter and is  binding;  (2)  it  is
    only necessary to meet one  limb  of  the  test  because  it  has  been
    accepted by the judge  that  the  Appellant  was  a  former  victim  of
    trafficking, and he therefore met the first limb of the  test,  because
    he was part of a group that had an innate characteristic  or  a  shared
    background; (3) that on this basis it should have  been  accepted  that
    the PSG test was satisfied.

43. Second, it was said that the judge was wrong to have said that [47],

         "An immutable characteristic has to be shown and age ... is  always
         mutable, due to all Appellants being time  bound.   The  definition
         cannot go so far as to meet the first of the  two  limbs  for  that
         reason.  Therefore it too fails to pass the two-limb test."

    I find that this is an error of law.  I  now  proceed  to  re-make  the
decision.

Error Law

44. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007] such that I should set  aside  that  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision (see Section 12(2) of TCEA [2007].)  My reasons  are  that  it
    has been well established that age is an  immutable  characteristic  in
    LQ (Age: Immutable Characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005.  The
    judge accordingly erred in concluding that for the Appellant  to  be  a
    "young vulnerable person without family  support"   was  not  to  be  a
    'member of a particular social group'.  That being so, I now proceed to
    re-make the decision (see Section 12(1)(ii) of TCEA [2007]).

Re-Making the Decision

45. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  Notwithstanding  Miss  Kotak's  valiant  efforts  to
    persuade me otherwise, in submissions which were made in a measured and
    thoughtful way, I am not satisfied that on  the  established  case-law,
    which I have recounted above, it is enough to say that a finding that a
    person is 'young and vulnerable with  no  family  support',  inevitably
    leads to the conclusion he will also then be at  risk  of  persecution.
    The evidence must show this.  The evidence here does not.  Second,  the
    Upper Tribunal has considered the position  and  the  preponderance  of
    opinion in the majority of cases, as reflected in SB (Moldova)  and  in
    AZ (Trafficked Women) Thailand CG [2010] UKUT 118 is that there are two
    separate tests and both must be satisfied. It has been established that
    under Regulation 10(1)(d) the 'group' must have a distinct identity  in
    the relevant country, because it is perceived as being different by the
    surrounding society.  It is not enough to say that group has an  innate
    characteristic or common background that cannot  be  changed.  The  two
    requirements are separate.  Separate evidence is called for in order to
    prove both requirements. The failure of the appellant in this  case  to
    do so means that he cannot succeed.

Decision

46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    allowed.

47.                 Anonymity                  order                  made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th July 2014





