
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03389/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24th November 2016                      |On 29th November 2016            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant identified as MS.  This  direction  applies  to,
    amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction
    could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran and left his country of  nationality
    by lorry via Turkey.  It is said that he arrived in the United  Kingdom
    some time in or about December 2013 and made a claim for asylum on 16th
    January 2014.  The claim for asylum was advanced on the  basis  of  his
    conversion  from  Islam  to  Christianity  and  as  a  result  of   the
    authorities' interests in him  due  to  his  sexual  orientation.   The
    account made reference to arrests in his history as a result  of  anti-
    Islamic conduct.

 3. In a decision letter dated 12th February 2015 the  Secretary  of  State
    considered the claim advanced by the Appellant but rejected it for  the
    reasons set out in that document.  The Secretary  of  State  considered
    the risk on return as a result of his sexual orientation but considered
    that his was an account that was lacking in detail and  was  internally
    inconsistent [see paragraph 20] and  the  same  reason  was  given  for
    rejecting his account of conversion to Christianity at [28] although it
    had been noted that he had been able to provide some detail  concerning
    Christianity  itself.   Thus  the  claim  was  rejected.   It   is   of
    significance to the time of the decision, no medical evidence had  been
    provided to the Secretary of State concerning the  Appellant's  medical
    history and any vulnerability that he may have in  answering  questions
    or providing a consistent account.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal and  it
    came before the First-tier on 5th November 2015.  At that  hearing  the
    Secretary of State was not present or represented  [see  paragraph  1].
    It is also clear that at that hearing the judge had  been  served  with
    medical notes which had not been served on the Secretary of State.   It
    does not appear that the Appellant gave formal  evidence.   It  is  not
    clear whether this was a decision based on the medical notes  that  had
    been disclosed or because the Respondent  was  unrepresented.   However
    the judge, on the basis of the medical evidence, took into account  the
    Presidential Guidance for the reasons set  out  at  [34].   However  it
    appears in the determination that the judge did ask some questions  for
    clarification purposes of the Appellant [see paragraph 46].

 5. The judge set out the  concessions  made  in  the  decision  letter  at
    paragraph [36] and in relation to the Appellant's sexuality he set  out
    his findings at  paragraphs  [37  to  40]  in  which  he  rejected  the
    Appellant's account.  At paragraphs  [41  to  49],  he  considered  the
    evidence relating to his conversion to Christianity  and  applying  the
    decision of Dorodian, observed that there was no one from the church in
    attendance.  Consequently  he  found  that  whilst  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated some interest in Christianity, there was no evidence  from
    the church as to  his  attendance  (although  there  had  been  written
    evidence provided at [45]) and that it had not been established that he
    would follow a religious practice which would expose him to a real risk
    of persecution [49].  Thus he dismissed the appeal.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  and  permission
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Astle) on  17th  December
    2015.  At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Karnik appeared  on
    behalf of the Appellant and Mr McVeety on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It became clear that some of the evidence before  the  Tribunal
    had not been received by the Respondent and in particular  the  medical
    notes disclosed at the hearing leading to the  judge's  observation  at
    [34].  Time was given to Mr McVeety to consider those notes. Mr  Karnik
    took the Tribunal through those notes in the  context  of  the  written
    grounds and the relevance to the decision under challenge.

 7. At the conclusion of the submissions,  it  became  clear  that  it  was
    common ground that the decision disclosed an error of law and that  due
    to the nature  of  that  error,  further  evidence  would  be  required
    (including medical evidence)  and  therefore  both  advocates  were  in
    agreement that the decision should be set aside and  that  the  correct
    course would be for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In those circumstances it is not necessary for me to set out
    in detail the reasons for reaching that view.

 8. The core error relates to the issue of consideration of risk on return.
     It was conceded by Mr McVeety that the judge  did  not  consider  what
    would happen at what is now described as the "pinch  point"  on  return
    and that by reason of the medical  evidence  such  consideration  would
    have to be viewed through the prism of his condition.

 9. The skeleton  argument  before  the  Tribunal  did  make  reference  at
    paragraph [18] to his diagnosis and how that diagnosis would impact  on
    his  behaviour,  credibility  and  importantly  upon  risk  on  return.
    Similarly at paragraph [41] the  skeleton  argument  gave   submissions
    concerning further risk on return and that the fact that the  Appellant
    wore publicly outward manifestations of his faith  in  the  form  of  a
    crucifix tattoo on his arm and the wearing of a Christian necklace  and
    that by reason of his medical condition, it would make him difficult to
    conceal the same thereby leading to risk on return.  The  determination
    at [42] makes reference to that submission and  also  to  a  photograph
    relating to another individual which had been mistakenly placed in  the
    bundle and the appellant's tattoo.  However there  is  no  analysis  of
    risk on return by reference to the outward manifestations of his  faith
    whether it be by a tattoo or the wearing a crucifix necklace (both  are
    referred to in the medical notes).  The OGN at  3.8.12  makes  specific
    reference to the wearing of visible crucifixes and the risk  on  return
    (Ground 2 of the written grounds).

10. There are also other findings that are absent when reaching an  overall
    holistic view on what the risk on return would  be  for  the  Appellant
    which relate  also  to  previous  anti-Islamic  conduct,  and  findings
    relating to previous arrests at the hands of  the  authorities  in  the
    form of the Basij.  There are no findings in relation to that.

11. Having found an error of law it is not necessary for me  to  reach  any
    further conclusions on the other grounds advanced.   Those  related  to
    the extent of the anti-Islamic conduct and the risk on return and  also
    whether  there  had  been  a  proper  consideration   to   his   sexual
    orientation.  As the advocates have agreed, the nature of the error  is
    such that the decision should be  set  aside  and  no  findings  to  be
    preserved.  Thus the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing on all issues.  Mr Karnik referred to a  medical
    report (as opposed to medical  notes)  being  made  available  to  that
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law; the decision is set aside; it is remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal for a further hearing.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

