
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03172/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th October, 2015                |On 13th November 2015                |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Brighton
                    Housing Trust Immigration Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Sudanese citizen who was  born  on  19th  September,
    1968.  He sought asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  respondent
    decided by letter of 11th February, 2015 to refuse  his  claim  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom.

2.   The notice of removal is dated 19th December, 2013 and  it  is  against
    that notice that the appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Quinn at a hearing on 3rd July, 2015.   In  it  the
    judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  refugee  appeal  and   humanitarian
    protection appeal and dismissed his appeal under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of
    the European Convention.  Dissatisfied with that decision the appellant
    sought permission  to  appeal  and  on  20th  August,  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission to appeal.

3.   Before me today Mr  Spurling  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    instructed by Brighton  Housing  Trust  and  Mr  Jarvis,  a  Presenting
    Officer, have agreed that the determination is so flawed that it cannot
    be permitted to stand.  I set aside the determination.

4.   Amongst other things, there are errors  of  fact  which  appear  to  be
    widespread in the determination.  Contrary  to  the  assertion  by  the
    judge there was medical evidence before him of the  appellant's  wife's
    injuries and,  contrary  to  what  he  says  at  paragraph  55  of  the
    determination, there was evidence  which  the  judge  appears  to  have
    ignored at page 35 of the appellant's bundle  with  as  translation  in
    English at page 36.

Notice of Decision

5.   I am satisfied that the appellant has been denied  a  fair  hearing  in
    all the circumstances and have concluded that I must remit this  appeal
    for hearing afresh before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  Judge
    Quinn.  Two hours will be allowed for the hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
