
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03084/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision issued              |
|On 24 September, 5 November and 11 December   |On 22 January 2015           |
|2014 and on 20 January 2015                   |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                XIAO FANG CHEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) The appellant is a citizen of China.  Her husband and their  two  minor
    daughters  are  dependants  on  her  claim.   She  appeals  against   a
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio, promulgated on 2
    December 2013, dismissing her appeal on all available grounds.



Error of law (24 September 2014 hearing).

 2) Mr Winter's submissions on 24 September were based upon the grounds  of
    the first permission application; the grounds of the second  permission
    application; and the written argument in the appellant's  supplementary
    bundle 2.

 3) The main points in respect of the credibility assessment were these:

         (i) error in placing reliance upon absence  of  evidence  from  the
         appellant's parents (paragraphs 38 - 40 of the determination).


         (ii) finding it unlikely the police  would  seek  to  redetain  the
         appellant, being inconsistent with background  evidence  (paragraph
         38);


         (iii) use of the word "likely", being the wrong standard  of  proof
         (paragraphs 39 - 40); and


         (iv) looking at matters through western  eyes,  overlooking  police
         deference to the Communist Party in China.


 4) The submission was that these errors vitiated the adverse findings.

 5) Although the grounds and the  written  argument  (not  prepared  by  Mr
    Winter) criticise the findings on internal flight, that point  was  not
    pursued, because at paragraph 60 the judge said that  as  no  risk  was
    established in her home area, it was unnecessary to consider it.

 6) Apart from credibility, submissions were directed  mainly  against  the
    judge's  findings  under  the  heading  "the  enforced   abortion   and
    sterilisation issues" at page 10 of the determination.  There was  said
    to be  evidence  about  family  planning  enforcement  post-dating  and
    requiring conclusions other than those reached in AX  (family  planning
    scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 97.  The judge referred at paragraph 56 to
    item P of  the  appellant's  supplementary  bundle  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is a background paper by the Refugee Review Tribunal of
    the Government of Australia of 8 March 2013.  The judge says that  this
    "mentions  only  one  2012  enforced  abortion  in  Fujian   Province".
    However, Mr Winter argued that read fairly the source  is  evidence  of
    such practice on a  wider  scale.   He  said  that  there  was  further
    evidence before the judge of a  significant  increase  in  the  use  of
    coercive birth control measures:

         first FtT bundle, item AE, Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada,
         report of 1 October 2012, at pp. 3, 5 and 7;


         supplementary FtT bundle item M, report by  China  Aid  Association
         (USA), 9 June 2013; and


         supplementary  FtT  bundle  item  R,   US   Congressional-Executive
         Commission on China, 9 October 2013.


 7) There were other grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT,  but  they  were  not
    pressed.  I found them to be of no substance, and did not need to  hear
    from the respondent in reply.

 8) Mrs O'Brien said that she accepted that the findings  on  the  risk  of
    forcible use of an IUD and on an increased  rate  of  enforcement  were
    inadequately supported, and that in absence  of  findings  on  internal
    relocation the determination would have to be revisited.

 9) I indicated that I was not persuaded that there is any error of law  in
    the credibility findings.  Read  fairly  and  as  a  whole,  the  judge
    applied  the  correct  standard  of  proof  overall,   did   not   take
    corroboration to be a legal requirement, and gave adequate reasons  for
    reaching his conclusions.  Those grounds of appeal amount  to  no  more
    than insistence and disagreement on the facts.

10)  It should in principle have been possible to complete the hearing, but
    both parties  sought  more  time  to  address  whether  the  background
    evidence goes substantially beyond that which was before  the  Tribunal
    in AX, and the internal relocation issue.  There was also a question of
    time available on 24 September 2014, there  being  other  cases  to  be
    heard.  The case was adjourned until 5 November.

Submissions for appellant on remaking the decision (5 November hearing).

11) The birth certificate having been accepted, it was common  ground  that
    the appellant has a third child born on 5 February 2014.

12) Mr Winter said that Appendix A to AX listed the  documents  before  the
    Tribunal in chronological order up to November 2011.   The  appellant's
    primary case was based on risk on her return to her home  area,  Fujian
    Province.  AX at paragraphs 62-64 set out  the  regulations  in  Fujian
    Province, which showed that citizens returning from overseas were  also
    governed by the regulations.  The appellant did not fall into any class
    where she would be entitled to have further children.    Both  she  and
    her husband have siblings.  This  raised  an  issue  of  the  appellant
    already having had a third child, which would not  be  permitted  under
    the regulations.

13) An expert country opinion by Christoph Bluth dated 21 October  2014  is
    item 3, pages 5-24 of the appellant's  supplementary  index  bundle  4.
    Paragraph 5.3.5 confirms that regulations apply  to  Chinese  nationals
    where children overseas and then return.

14) Paragraph 5.3.6 of the report states that enforcement of the policy may
    include regular pregnancy checks,  insertion  of  IUDs,  sterilisation,
    signing  of  contracts  and  fines  for  failing  to  submit  to   such
    procedures.

15) The next reference was to Item 19 of the appellant's  index  bundle  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent's  Operational  Guidance  Note
    for China issued on 29 August 2012 at 3.10.9 which lists Fujian as  one
    of 10 provinces which "require unspecified remedial  measures  to  deal
    with out of plan pregnancies."  It was acknowledged that the  appellant
    is not now pregnant, but this was said to give a flavour of the  strict
    approach adopted in Fujian.  It was acknowledged that the source  cited
    in turn is a COIS report predating AX.

16) Item 31 of  the  same  bundle,  pages  AE  1-11  is  a  report  by  the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of China of 1  October  2012.   This  was
    said to cover dates going beyond the material  in  AX.   Attention  was
    drawn to the overview at page 1 for  the  opinion,  the  lack  of  firm
    statistics on enforcement of family planning policy in Fujian  is  "due
    in  parts  to  treatment  of  the  issue  as  a  state  secret  by  the
    authorities, as well as the lack of free press ... and the imprisonment
    of activists ..."  This was said to be a point not given any prominence
    in AX.  Paragraph 2.2.2 of the report states that  social  compensation
    fees for additional children in Fujian are  up  to  4-6  times  average
    local annual income for a second additional child and much  more  heavy
    for subsequent children.

17) In index supplementary bundle Item M is the report from the  China  Aid
    Association (USA) dated 9 June 2013.  This relates mainly to Guang Dong
    rather than Fujian Province but there are  indications  that  campaigns
    for fitting of IUDs or sterilisation are in place also  in  Fujian.  (I
    noticed one feature of this  report  which  does  not  seem  to  appear
    elsewhere or to have been mentioned in AX, namely that  such  campaigns
    rely not only upon threats and  punishments  but  also  upon  financial
    rewards for compliance.)

18) Item R of the same bundle as a US Congressional Executive Commission on
    China report dated 9 October 2013 which states on the first  page  that
    officials  continue  to  coerce  compliance  with  population  planning
    targets using methods  including  heavy  fines,  forced  abortions  and
    forced sterilisations.  Fujian is one of the  provinces  mentioned  for
    the use of harsh and invasive measures.  Supplementary index bundle  4,
    Item 7 is another report by the US Congressional  Executive  Commission
    on China dated  8  October  2014.   It  contains  the  same  paragraphs
    regarding Fujian.

19) Mr Winter here referred to the expert report at 5.3.6 mentioned  above,
    which he said amounted to new information not before  the  Tribunal  in
    AX.

20) The report at 5.3.8 refers to a decision of the US Court of Appeals for
    the Seventh Circuit dated 9 May 2013 accepting  evidence  that  "forced
    sterilisation is mandatory for violators of the  One  Child  Policy  in
    Fujian Province, except for general exceptions that are not  applicable
    to the appellant" and on which  the  court  pointed  out  that  despite
    China's repeated assertions to the contrary, there is an  abundance  of
    evidence that local officials particularly in Fujian routinely  violate
    the  policy  against  sterilisation.   At  5.3.13  the  report   states
    "subjective evidence shows continued efforts to enforce  abortions  and
    sterilisations in many areas ... including the appellant's  Hukou  area
    in Fujian ... to which she would be returned."

21) Mr Winter submitted that the above evidence was of a nature  which  had
    not been before the Tribunal in AX, or at least was not assessed in AX,
    and it was all to the effect that the province from which the appellant
    originates is one of  particular  risk.   If  that  was  accepted,  the
    question became whether there was an internal  relocation  alternative.
    As to general principles on internal relocation Mr Winter  referred  to
    AH and Others (Sudan) v SSHD [2008] 1 AC and to the general  discussion
    in MacDonald's Immigration Law and Practice 8th ed., paragraphs 1245 to
    1246.  He said  that  there  were  2  matters  which  established  that
    internal relocation would be unreasonable in this case.

22) The first derived from index bundle 4, item 5, a  report  from  Freedom
    House dated 13 January 2014:

         In some locales, family planning officials take  advantage  of  the
         "neighbourhood crime watch"  mechanism  encouraging  neighbours  to
         snitch on each other to ensure that birth permit applicants are not
         secretly hiding unregistered children in violation of the rules ...




         In addition, local family planning  authorities  impose  collective
         responsibility on work units at  government  affiliated  places  of
         employment ...


23) Mr Winter said that this was information of a nature not considered  in
    AX.  (I observed that the point  did  not  go  so  much  to  the  undue
    harshness of relocation as to whether risk extended nationwide.)

24) The second point on which Mr Winter relies  derives  from  evidence  of
    Professor Fu Hualing recorded at paragraph 107 of AX:

         Returning asylum seekers would be  investigated  to  establish  how
         they had left China.  That would involve  establishing  where  they
         held their Hukou and checking whether there  were  any  outstanding
         criminal charges against them.  A one way travel document would  be
         issued only when these checks were complete.  On return, the person
         would be briefly detained and questioned at the border,  to  verify
         their identity, then fined and their travel documents  confiscated,
         barring them from further travel for 3 years.  If  there  were  any
         outstanding criminal charges against them, they would  be  escorted
         back to that local authority;  otherwise,  the  returnee  would  be
         allowed to proceed  unless  there  was  an  instruction  from  high
         ranking officials or they were involved in a significant  case,  in
         which circumstances they would be escorted back to the  area  where
         the Hukou was held.


25) Mr Winter submitted that although this evidence was narrated in AX  the
    issues to which it gave rise were not resolved.  The evidence  in  this
    case suggested that the appellant would be  questioned  on  return  and
    would be flagged up as not having left  with  a  valid  exit  visa.   I
    queried whether she might not reasonably be expected to return  on  her
    own passport rather than on an emergency document.  Mr Winter said that
    even if she did so she would be flagged up on return as not having held
    an  exit  visa.   This  prompted  reference  to  the  evidence  on  the
    circumstances under which the appellant left China.  It transpires that
    according to her screening interview at 2.4 she left China  legally  in
    the first place for Bolivia.

26) There was no time for further submissions on 5 November.  It was agreed
    that the Secretary of State would provide submissions in writing within
    14 days and  that  if  any  further  response  was  required  from  the
    appellant that would be made within a  further  14  days.   No  written
    directions were to be issued, the parties having  noted  the  position.
    The case would then be listed for a  further  hearing  on  11  December
    2014, although the parties did not require  to  be  represented  unless
    they thought necessary.

27) The 11 December hearing did not take place because I was not available,
    and the case was relisted for 20 January 2015, when neither side wished
    to add anything orally.

Submissions for respondent on remaking the decision (written).

28) The expert report is no foundation for displacing the findings  in  AX.
    The expert goes beyond the proper sphere of expertise by assessing  the
    credibility of the wider account, whereas her  claimed  involvement  in
    Falun  Gong  has  not  been  accepted.   The  report  speculates  about
    involuntary  return  and  its  consequences.   The  section  on  forced
    contraception at 5.3 rehearses evidence which was before the  panel  in
    AX.  The post AX evidence is of limited instances  of  abuse  or  rogue
    actions.  The mainstay of the report is  an  American  court  judgement
    which seems to contradict AX but with little detail of what information
    was taken into account or why it  might  apply  to  other  cases.   The
    expert report takes the appellant no further.

29) The "updating"  evidence  for  the  appellant  flags  up  instances  of
    coercive measures in the appellant's claimed province of origin but  is
    insufficient to undo AX.  It does not suggest  wholesale  change  since
    2011.  The panel in  AX  was  aware  of  similar  instances  of  forced
    abortions and sterilisations.  Evidence of a carrot and stick  approach
    of financial sanctions and rewards is not evidence of breach of Article
    3.

30) Even if the appellant did show risk of fitting of  an  IUD  or  similar
    outcome in her home province internal relocation is available, applying
    AX at paragraph 191.  There  is  no  reason  in  this  case  to  expect
    targeted pursuit outside the Hukou area.

Further submissions for appellant (written).

31) Paragraphs 3 to 14 deal again with risk in the home area.  The evidence
    on the need for certification of insertion of an IUD is emphasised.  It
    is submitted that AX was generalised in its guidance and did  not  look
    specifically at separate provinces in detail.

32) Paragraphs 15 to 18 submit again that internal flight would  be  unduly
    harsh.  On identification as  a  failed  asylum  seeker,  paragraph  18
    submits that a one way travel document would  be  issued  and  internal
    relocation would be made redundant as she would be returned to her home
    area in terms of the country information.

33)  In  response  to  the  respondent's  submissions,  the  appellant   at
    paragraphs 19 to 26 focuses her case on a  worsening  situation  and  a
    general risk in Fujian,  and  relies  upon  the  argument  on  internal
    relocation as one which was not before the panel in AX.

Conclusions.

34)  AX at paragraph 191(14) and headnote 14:

         Internal relocation

         (14) Where a real risk exists  in  the  'hukou'  area,  it  may  be
         possible to avoid the risk by moving to a city. Millions of Chinese
         internal migrants, male and female, live and work in  cities  where
         they do not hold an 'urban  hukou'.   Internal  migrant  women  are
         required to stay in touch with their 'hukou' area and either return
         for tri-monthly pregnancy tests or else  send  back  test  results.
         The country evidence does not indicate a  real  risk  of  effective
         pursuit of  internal  migrant  women  leading  to  forcible  family
         planning actions, sterilisation or  termination,  taking  place  in
         their city of migration.  Therefore, internal relocation  will,  in
         almost all cases, avert the  risk  in  the  hukou  area.   However,
         internal relocation  may  not  be  safe  where  there  is  credible
         evidence of individual pursuit  of  the  returnee  or  her  family,
         outside the 'hukou' area. Whether it is unduly harsh to  expect  an
         individual returnee and her family to relocate in this way will  be
         a question of fact in each case.


35) Mr Winter relied on two points on internal relocation.  The  first  was
    the Freedom House report.  That is a single source, without evidence of
    how widespread snitching is.  It does not show that away from her  home
    area the appellant  would  be  generally  vulnerable  as  a  result  of
    snitching, even if there is anything about  her  which  might  interest
    neighbourhood  authorities.   Nor  is  there  anything  to  show   that
    collective responsibility of work units  might  come  to  bear  on  her
    situation.  The second point was the evidence at paragraph  107  of  AX
    said to have been overlooked in its conclusions.  However, in this case
    it is the appellant's evidence (rather overlooked in the submissions on
    her  behalf)  that  she  left  China  legally,  on  her  own  passport,
    travelling firstly to Bolivia.  There is no reason to  think  that  she
    cannot return to China on her own passport if and when she chooses,  or
    to  think  that  she  might  encounter  difficulties  for  having  left
    illegally without proper documentation or without an exit visa.    (The
    same appears to apply to her husband.)  This case does  not  justify  a
    finding of a real risk of being forcibly returned  to  the  appellant's
    hukou area.  There is no evidence of a real risk of  effective  pursuit
    elsewhere.  There is no undue harshness in the appellant and her family
    relocating in China as millions of others have done.  On  the  internal
    relocation issue alone, the appeal must fail.

36) The FtT Judge directed himself about the law on internal relocation  at
    paragraphs 29 -31 but at paragraph 60 found that as no  real  risk  was
    proved in her home area it was unnecessary to consider the  matter.   A
    conclusion on  the  alternative  would  have  avoided  lengthy  further
    procedure.

37) Inhumane enforcement of family planning policy continues to happen, and
    to be under-reported.  The risk varies from place to place and time  to
    time, and may be  more  common  in  Fujian  than  in  other  provinces.
    However, it has not been shown that the  evidence  from  2012  to  2014
    demonstrates differences of a nature and scale from the evidence  which
    was before the panel in AX so as to displace the general conclusions in
    that case.  I do not find it established that there is a  general  risk
    of persecution for  violation  of  family  planning  policy  in  Fujian
    Province.  In any event, for  the  reasons  above  the  case  fails  on
    internal relocation.

38) In summary: the findings in the First-tier  Tribunal  determination  on
    credibility and on Article 8 have not been shown to err in law, and are
    to stand.  The determination in so far as it dismissed  the  appeal  on
    Refugee Convention grounds is set aside.  In remaking the decision, the
    appellant fails to establish risk on return to her home area,  and  her
    claim in any event fails because internal relocation is  available  and
    would not  be  unduly  harsh.   The  effect  is  that  the  appeal,  as
    originally brought to the First-tier  Tribunal,  is  dismissed  on  all
    available grounds.

39) No anonymity order has been requested or made.






                               [pic]


                               21 January 2015
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
