
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03600/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th October 2014 and  2nd December 2014   |On 30th December 2014        |
|Signed 16th December, 2014                    |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                          khalid mohamad al-mobarek
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl of Counsel instructed by Binas, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on  1st  January,  1979  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Liberia.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  16th  July,  2004,  in
    possession of his own Libyan passport with leave to enter as a  visitor
    for six months.  Following the expiry of his  visa  on  26th  November,
    2004, he remained in the United  Kingdom  as  an  overstayer.   On  8th
    March, 2013, the appellant claimed asylum after having been apprehended
    working illegally in a restaurant in  Manchester.   On  11th  February,
    2013, the day following his arrest, he was issued with a "notice  to  a
    person liable to removal".

First-tier Appeal Hearing

3.   On 5th April, 2013, the respondent decided to remove the  appellant  as
    an illegal entrant and the appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shanahan.

4.   The appellant maintained that having been born in Nalut  and  being  of
    the Amazigh race he would be at risk on return to  Libya.   He  claimed
    that in September 2003, he was detained  by  a  military  patrol  while
    travelling home from the town of Wazzan where he had been with friends.
     His friends were released, but when his ethnicity  was  revealed,  the
    appellant was taken to the town of Teeji where he was detained in  what
    he believed to be a military establishment  and  repeatedly  threatened
    and tortured.  He was  released  after  having  agreed  to  act  as  an
    informer  and  provide  information  about  Amazigh  people.   He   was
    instructed to identify "easy" girls who could be brought to  these  men
    for sex.

5.   The appellant  asserts  that  he  was  alienated  from  his  community,
    because they believed that he was an informer.  He could not return  to
    his home area because he would be killed as a Gaddafi informer  and  he
    cannot return to Tripoli because Amazigh people  who  live  there  will
    recognise him and he could be targeted.

6.   Having considered the appellant's asylum claim, the  judge  noted  that
    the appellant had not claimed asylum on arrival in the  United  Kingdom
    and did not claim asylum at the time of the overthrow  of  the  Gaddafi
    regime.  The fact that he did not make a claim until he was encountered
    working illegally and served with overstayer notice led  the  judge  to
    have serious doubts about his credibility.  Further  doubts  about  his
    credibility were caused by him having obtained a  passport  in  January
    2002, whilst he was unemployed and having no plans for such travel.

7.   The judge considered that  having  obtained  a  passport  as  early  as
    January 2002 and made a Visit Visa Application using false information,
    rather than to seek asylum, gave the judge further reasons  to  believe
    that he was not a credible witness and was in fact an economic migrant.

8.   Having considered the country evidence the judge noted that  under  the
    Gaddafi regime, the Amazigh faced discrimination and  were  persecuted.
    She also noted that the Amazigh played a large  role  in  the  uprising
    which resulted in the overthrow of the  Gaddafi  regime  and  concluded
    that she could  not  be  satisfied  to  the  lower  standard  that  the
    appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution and believed  that  he
    was  an  economic  migrant.   She  dismissed  his  asylum   claim   and
    humanitarian protection and Article 2 and 3 human rights  claims  since
    they were based on the same factual matrix.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

9.   The appellant, dissatisfied with  the  decision  made  application  for
    permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   His  grounds  did  not
    challenge the judge's findings, but suggested that the  Tribunal  erred
    in its approach to the question of humanitarian  protection  and  that,
    given the appellant's specific characteristics, his ethnicity  and  his
    long absence from Libya, even if not specifically targeted, he would be
    at greater risk of indiscriminate violence.   He  suggested  also  that
    being from a minority ethnic group there was significant evidence  that
    the appellant had characteristics that enhanced the risk  to  him  from
    indiscriminate violence such that it was necessary  for  the  judge  to
    consider that evidence in that light, rather than just in  relation  to
    the  question  of  credibility  and  persecution  under   the   Refugee
    Convention.  The second challenge suggested that the judge erred in her
    approach to Article 8 whilst the appellant may have been in the  United
    Kingdom without leave and the respondent is not enforcing  removals  to
    Libya and in those circumstances there has to be a real  question  over
    the public end being  sought.   The  appellant,  it  was  alleged,  has
    demonstrated that he can be a valuable member of  society  and  it  was
    necessary for the judge to consider the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    public end so as to ensure the principle of minimal interference  would
    be followed.

10.  At the hearing before me Counsel told me that the appellant was  likely
    to suffer a risk of indiscriminate harm because of his ethnicity.   She
    drew my attention to paragraph 17 of the  determination  where  it  was
    accepted that the appellant was a Libyan national and a member  of  the
    Amazigh ethnicity.  She suggested that that would cause him  to  be  at
    risk and that risk would be heightened because the appellant  had  been
    out of the  country  for  so  long.   Responding  briefly,  Ms  Johnson
    submitted that the appellant was not at  any  risk  on  return.   AT  &
    Others (Article 15C risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 makes  it
    clear that the general population is  not  at  risk.   The  airport  is
    currently not under siege although it was in August.

11.  I enquired as to information about flights into and out  of  Libya  and
    granted  a  brief  adjournment  while  Ms  Johnson   obtained   further
    information.  She reported that there were flights to Tripoli today and
    that the appellant would be flown to Maitaga from  where  he  would  be
    able to travel to Nulat, to his home.

12.   Counsel  drew  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  the   Foreign   and
    Commonwealth Office advice was that Tripoli  Airport  has  been  closed
    since July.

13.  In the circumstances I adjourned  until  2nd  December  to  enable  the
    Presenting  Officer  to  obtain  up-to-date  information  as   to   the
    availability of flights and their destination in Libya.

14.  On 2nd December, when resuming the hearing, Ms Johnson handed to  me  a
    response to country of information request.  This  indicated  that  the
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office advised against all travel to Libya due
    to the ongoing fighting and greater instability throughout the country.
     British nationals in Libya were strongly urged to leave immediately by
    commercial means.

15.  The report said:-

         "Limited commercial departure options are still available.  Flights
         are leaving Misrata  and  Maitega.   Al  Abraq  Airport  (currently
         serving Benghazi) and  Tobruk  but  availability  may  be  limited.
         Airports have been  subject  to  recent  bomb  attacks  and  remain
         vulnerable.  Flights to Egypt and Tunisia from Misrata and  Maitega
         Airports have been suspended.  Tripoli  International  Airport  has
         been closed since 13 July 2014.


         The schedule  of  some  flights  are  published  on  the  Afriqiyah
         facebook page.  However, as flight  schedules  may  change  without
         notice, you should contact your airline or travel company  for  the
         latest information before travelling.


         BBC News reported on 25 November 2014 that:


             'A Libyan Air Force jet has carried out two attacks on  Mitiga
             air base in Tripoli, the  Libyan  capital's  last  functioning
             airport.  The strikes hit an  area  near  the  runway  without
             damaging it, but causing some damage to nearby civilian homes.
              The coalition of militias that controls Tripoli called  it  a
             "provocative" move  by  foreign-backed  forces.   Local  media
             reports said flights were initially redirected to the city  of
             Misrata but later resumed at Mitiga.  Airlines have been using
             Mitiga, a military air base, since July when  fighting  caused
             severe damage to Tripoli's main airport'.


         The website of Misrata International Airport  accessed  1  December
         provided live updates for arrivals and departures, including to and
         from Istanbul and Alexandria.


         The security consulting service, Mozayix, reported on 22  September
         2014 that:-


                . A new passenger lounge has been opened at Mitiga  Airport,
                  Tripoli's  only  functioning  air   link   since   Tripoli
                  International was destroyed last month


                . Zawara Airport in western Libya to  operate  international
                  flights within a month, head of the airport  has  recently
                  said.


                . Air Malta announced today that it had added a third weekly
                  flight from Malta to Djerba.


                . Both Tobruk and Labraq Airports  were  reported  open  and
                  operational.


                . Tripoli's Mitiga Airport  is  open  and  operational  with
                  Libyan Airlines or Afriqiyah  providing  connections  from
                  Tunis, Istanbul and Alexandria.


         Accessed via the website FlightStats on 1 December 2014, Labraq (La
         Braq) Airport  appeared  to  be  operational  with  departures  and
         arrivals scheduled to and  from  Alexandria  and  Mitiga.   Flights
         arriving  and  departing  to/from  Amman  and  Tunis  from   Benina
         International Airport, serving  Benghazi,  were  also  listed.   No
         flights were listed for Tobruk Airport."


16.  Ms Johnson indicated that  the  appellant  would  be  flown  to  Mitiga
    Airport either via Tunis, Istanbul or Alexandria.  AT  makes  it  clear
    that he would not be at heightened risk as a failed asylum  seeker  and
    that it was still possible to  travel  overland  within  Libya  without
    giving rise to a risk of harm that requires  recognition  in  terms  of
    international protection.  AT made it clear that the evidence  did  not
    reveal such a level of arbitrary or irrational conduct on the  part  of
    militia at checkpoints such as to put the ordinary  traveller  at  real
    risk.

17.  I reminded Counsel that she had addressed me briefly on  28th  October,
    and asked her if she would like to address me further.  She declined to
    make  further  submissions  indicating  that  return  was  simply   not
    possible.  She told me that she had nothing further to add.  I reserved
    my determination.

18.  No challenge has been made to the judge's findings  of  fact  that  the
    appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution if  returned
    to Libya and  is  an  economic  migrant.   The  issue  now  is  whether
    returning him will  cause  him  difficulties  because  of  his  Amazigh
    ethnicity and long absence from the country.  Counsel did  not  address
    me in relation to the second challenge to  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim.

19.  AT, promulgated in July 2014 makes it clear that there is  not  such  a
    high level of indiscriminate violence in Libya within  the  meaning  of
    Article 15(c) of Council Directive  2004/83/EC,  so  as  to  mean  that
    substantial grounds exist  for  believing  that  an  individual  would,
    solely by being present there, face a real risk which threatens his  or
    her life or person.   But there is no suggestion that the appellant was
    ever a former high-ranking official within the intelligence service  of
    the Gaddafi regime or indeed that  he  was  ever  associated  with  the
    Gaddafi regime.  Amazighs are unlike Tawurga who are  perceived  to  be
    Libyans who have been mercenaries on the side of the Gaddafi regime and
    to have committed human rights abuses during the revolution.  They  are
    also unlike Tuareg who are perceived to have  been  supporters  of  the
    former regime.

20.  AT also makes it clear that failed asylum seekers  are  not,  for  that
    reason alone, at risk on return and that notwithstanding the prevalence
    of checkpoints manned by militias, it is possible to travel overland to
    other destinations without real risk of persecution,  serious  harm  or
    Article 3 ill-treatment.

21.  There are said to  be  flights  to  Mitiga  Airport  and  there  is  no
    evidence before me to suggest that on his arrival he will not  be  able
    to pass through the airport militia checkpoints and return to his  home
    area.

22.  Although I was not addressed by Counsel in respect of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim I have considered it and considered what the judge said
    in relation to it.  She accepted that the appellant had  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom since July 2004 and that he had established friends  and
    worked during that time.  She was satisfied  that  he  had  established
    some form of private life.  She concluded however that the decision  to
    remove him was proportionate to the legitimate public aim of protecting
    the economic wellbeing of the country and the rights  and  freedoms  of
    others.  I believe  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  such  a
    conclusion on the evidence before her.

23.  I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Shanahan did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point  of
    law.   Her  determination  shall  stand.   The  appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.



Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
