
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03803/2013
                                                               AA/03805/2013
                                                               AA/03806/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Date Sent                    |
|On 10th December, 2013                        |On 5th February, 2014        |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                     MG
                                      M
                                     SG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Timpson of Counsel, instructed by Amjad Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison


The First-tier Tribunal judge having made an anonymity order, I direct that
it shall continue.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are all citizens of Pakistan  and  are  sisters.   Their
    dates of birth are 3rd December, 1993; 12th December,  1995;  and  11th
    February, 1997 respectively.

2.   All three appellants left Pakistan in December 2007 with their  mother,
    who claimed asylum on 10th December, 2007, with the appellants  as  her
    dependent minor  children.   The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    mother's claim for asylum on 19th July, 2010.

3.   The mother appealed that decision and her appeal  was  dismissed  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal judge sitting at Manchester on 24th  August,  2010.
    At that point, the appellant's mother's appeal rights  were  exhausted.
    The three appellants then made application for asylum on 11th November,
    2012.

4.   The respondent refused that application and on 8th  April,  2013,  gave
    directions for their removal from the United Kingdom.   The  appellants
    all appealed and their appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lever in Manchester on 5th June, 2013.

5.   First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lever  dismissed  their  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, dismissed their appeal on humanitarian protection grounds  and
    dismissed their human rights appeals.  An  anonymity  direction  having
    previously been made, it was  retained  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lever.

6.   The appellants challenge the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    at a hearing before me on 2nd October, 2013, when Mr  Timpson  appeared
    on behalf of the appellants and Mr Harrison again appeared on behalf of
    the respondent, Counsel submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    had erred  by  seeking  to  apply  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  v  D  (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT  00702*  (formerly  known   as
    Devaseelan), because the appellants' mother's  asylum  claim  had  been
    dismissed and that claim was based on the same facts.  That,  suggested
    Counsel, was wrong.

7.    For  the  respondent  Mr  Harrison  urged  me   to   find   that   the
    representative who appeared before the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  on
    behalf of the appellants had actually agreed with the judge's  approach
    in relying on and applying D.  He told me that the  appellant's  claims
    and their mother's claims were the same.

8.   I set aside the determination.  Nothing in  the  decision  in  D  means
    that because one appellant has been found not to be credible, a  second
    appellant making a similar claim  based  on  their  shared  experiences
    cannot be credible.  The evidence in the two appeals is not  the  same.
    In these appellants' appeals, all three appellants gave  oral  evidence
    and their evidence should have been carefully  considered.   The  judge
    erred in failing to consider their evidence because it was, as  he  put
    it, "entirely in line with the evidence that had been presented by  the
    mother".  The fact that  Counsel  may  have  agreed  with  the  judge's
    approach  is,  with  very  great  respect,  immaterial.   Counsel  are,
    occasionally, liable to make mistakes.  No findings were preserved.

Adjourned hearing before me on 10th December, 2013

9.   Mr Timpson again appeared to represent the appellants and  Mr  Harrison
    to represent the respondent.

10.  Counsel told me that he would like to call the first appellant.

Oral evidence of MG

11.  MG was called and told me that she had read a statement  made  for  her
    by her solicitors in English.  She told me that she understood  English
    and that she understood the statement.  She confirmed her  full  names,
    her date of birth, her address and nationality.

12.  Counsel referred her to her statement and she identified her  signature
    at the end of it.  She again confirmed that she had read and understood
    it and told me that it had actually been read back to her in Urdu.  She
    told me that it was true and accurate and that she wished to  adopt  it
    as part of her evidence.

13.  Counsel indicated to me that  he  did  not  wish  to  ask  any  further
    questions.  He suggested that while all three appellants  had  made  an
    asylum claim to the respondent, they were  actually  relying  on  their
    Article 8 human rights appeal, but he was not  instructed  to  withdraw
    their asylum appeals.

Cross-examination

14.  Mr Harrison referred the appellant to paragraph  16  of  her  statement
    and told me that after suffering an injury she  was  treated  at  home.
    Her toenail fell off.  She was referred to paragraph 20 and agreed that
    her mother had told her that she had to get out of the marriage.

15.  For completeness, the witness statement of MG is reproduced in  part  1
    of the Appendix to this determination.

Oral evidence of SG

16.  I then heard oral evidence from SG.  She identified  her  signature  at
    page 20 of the appellant's bundle.  She confirmed that it was  read  to
    her in Urdu and that she has read it in English since.  She is studying
    English AS level and has English GCSE.  Everything in the statement  is
    true and accurate.

Cross-examination

17.  In answer to questions  put  to  the  appellant  by  Mr  Harrison,  she
    confirmed that she moved into her uncle's home which was a few  streets
    away from her own home.  She remained there for  over  two  years  and,
    during that time, she never saw her father.  She did not attend  school
    during that period and only ever went out of the house occasionally.

Questions put by me in order to clarify her evidence

18.  The witness agreed that she had never  at  any  stage  gone  to  school
    because her father never allowed her to go to school.  When  she  lived
    at the home with her father she was not allowed to  attend  school  and
    when she was living at her uncle's she did not  attend  school  because
    she was frightened that her father would see her,  take  her  home  and
    beat her.

Re-examination

19.  The witness confirmed that she remained afraid of her father even  when
    she lived with her uncle.

20.  For completeness a copy of the witness statement of  SG  is  reproduced
    at part 2 of the Appendix to this determination.

Oral evidence of M

21.  The witness identified her signature at the  end  of  page  24  of  the
    bundle and told me that her statement was true and  accurate  and  that
    she had read it.  She also confirmed that it had been read  to  her  in
    Urdu before she signed it and that she had GCSE English and was able to
    read English.  She again confirmed that  the  statement  was  true  and
    accurate.

Cross-examination

22.  The witness confirmed to Mr Harrison that she left  Pakistan  with  her
    mother and two sisters.  Her uncle helped them to leave.  She  has  not
    spoken to him since and does not know where he is.  She does  not  know
    where her brother is and does not really remember him.

Oral evidence of Julie Collins

23.  I then heard oral evidence  from  Julie  Collins,  who  had  written  a
    letter which was reproduced at page 60 of the appellant's bundle.   She
    confirmed that the letter was true and accurate.

Cross-examination

24.  The witness said that she had known the family since they  had  arrived
    in her town three or four years ago.  She had attended  their  mother's
    appeal hearing.  She was aware that the judge had found that the mother
    was not to be believed.   She  told  me  that  she  had  supported  the
    appellants.  She has a particular interest in safeguarding children and
    had previously worked as a teacher.  Over the years she has watched the
    girls develop and has nothing but the greatest respect for the way they
    have coped both at school and now at college.  They  have  matured  and
    changed dramatically.  The girls have also helped  at  the  charity  at
    which Ms Collins is the chair.  They are part of the volunteers.   They
    have good relations with their neighbours.

Submissions

25.  Mr Harrison told me that he relied on the reasons  for  refusal  letter
    and pointed out to me that the oral evidence today was  based  entirely
    on Article 8 private life.  The first appellant, MG, is over the age of
    18.  If I were to find that she had no ties (including social, cultural
    or family) with Pakistan then it would be possible for me to allow  her
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

26.  Mr Timpson accepted that the appellant MG did have  family  members  in
    Pakistan but suggested that she had no ties.   He  asked  that  further
    evidence should be given by her in relation to her ties  with  Pakistan
    in the light of what Mr Harrison had submitted.

Further oral evidence of MG

27.  The witness MG was recalled.  She told me in answer  to  questions  put
    to her by her Counsel that she did have  family  members  in  Pakistan.
    Her father, her brother and her  older  sister  all  live  in  Pakistan
    together with her uncle.  However, since coming to the  United  Kingdom
    she has had no contact with her father or uncle.  Her  brother  is  now
    aged 22 and she last had contact with him some eight or nine years  ago
    before she came to the United Kingdom.  She does not know where he  is.
    Neither does she know where her uncle is now or where  her  sister  is.
    She last had contact with her uncle  before  she  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  She has not heard from her sister since being in the UK.

Further cross-examination

28.  The witness explained that since she had come  to  the  United  Kingdom
    she tries to avoid having contact with people she knows  who  are  from
    Pakistan.  She has no friends in Pakistan and does  not  now  have  any
    contact with anybody in Pakistan since she came to the United  Kingdom.
    She said that she does not read books relating to Pakistan or Pakistani
    culture because of what happened to her.

Questions put by me in order to clarify her evidence

29.  The witness confirmed that at home she and  her  sister  speak  Punjabi
    but she said that they had always spoken  Punjabi  to  her  mother  and
    sisters and simply continued to do so.

Submissions

30.  I invited Mr Harrison to make any further submissions he wished to.

31.  He told me that the appellant MG has demonstrated  that  she  does  not
    immerse herself in Pakistani culture or eat with and befriend people of
    Pakistani origin in the United Kingdom.

32.  With typical frankness and fairness, Mr Harrison told me that it  would
    be difficult for him to argue that MG did not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), but that he could not concede the appeal.

33.  At that stage both representatives told me that they were  agreed  that
    in the event that MG was found to qualify for recognition as a  refugee
    under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Statement   of   Changes   in
    Immigration Rules HC 395, as amended, then, under Section 55 of the  UK
    Borders Act it would be necessary to allow the appeals  of  SG  and  M,
    because the three appellants together form a close family unit  with  a
    shared history, each drawing support from the family unit and cannot be
    separated.

34.  Mr Harrison made it clear that he was not conceding the appeals but  in
    relation to MG he was in some difficulty arguing that she did not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

Determination

35.  It is unfortunate that the solicitors taking  the  appellants'  witness
    statements did not prepare  them  with  greater  care.   Unfortunately,
    large amounts of all three witness statements depend to some extent  on
    what the author has been told by her mother.  There seems little  doubt
    that the appellant's father did impose a harsh regime at home and  only
    rarely allowed his daughters outside.  I accept that  he  forbade  them
    from attending school, as a result of which it was not until after they
    had arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  that  they  received  any  formal
    education, although they did  receive  some  from  a  friend  of  their
    mothers who taught them in secret.  Each of  the  children  appears  to
    have suffered regular beatings and appeared to have witnessed arguments
    between their parents as a result of which her mother was assaulted.  I
    accept that for the last two years and three months of  their  time  in
    Pakistan they lived with their uncle in his house in the same  village,
    but that they remained indoors fearing their  father  would  take  them
    home and beat them.

36.  The appellants also lived with their mother who appears  to  have  done
    nothing to see protection from the authorities in Pakistan.

37.  The appellants' mother did not give  any  evidence  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants, and the appellants' bundle contains no  objective  material
    relating to Pakistan.  However,  Mr  Timpson  did  not  address  me  in
    respect of the appellants' asylum claims, but given what  the  Tribunal
    said in AA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC), particularly at paragraphs 193, 194 and  196,  I
    am not prepared to  accept,  in  the  absence  of  any  submissions  or
    evidence on the  point,  that  Pakistani  authorities  are  necessarily
    unwilling or unable to ensure that children  who  are  the  subject  of
    physical abuse from their fathers would not be protected

38.  Neither  was  it  argued  before  me  that  the  question  of  internal
    relocation would not be available to  the  children.   They  live  with
    their mother who decided to remove them from Pakistan and bring them to
    the United Kingdom, several thousand miles away to a  strange  country.
    I have heard no argument or  evidence  which  would  suggest  that  the
    appellants' mother could not  alternatively  have  relocated  with  the
    children within Pakistan.  There is no  evidence  to  suggest  that  it
    would have been unreasonable to expect the appellants and their  mother
    to relocate.

39.  I have concluded, therefore, that  there  is  no  real  risk  that  the
    appellants' removal from the United Kingdom to Pakistan would result in
    the United Kingdom being in breach of its obligations under the Refugee
    Convention.  For the same reasons I find that the  appellants  are  not
    entitled to humanitarian protection.

Article 8

40.  Paragraph 276ADE provides as follows:-

         "276ADE (1)   The requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
                    to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK  are
                    that at the date of application, the applicant:


                    (i)    does not  fall  for  refusal  under  any  of  the
                        grounds in Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3.  and  S-
                        LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and


                    (ii)   has made a valid application for leave to  remain
                        on the grounds of private life in the UK; and


                    (iii)  has lived continuously in the UK for at least  20
                        years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


                    (iv)   is under the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
                        continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least  7  years
                        (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)  and  it
                        would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to
                        leave the UK; or


                    (v)    is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years  and
                        has  spent  at  least  half  of  his  life   living
                        continuously in the UK (discounting any  period  of
                        imprisonment); or


                    (vi)   subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or
                        above, has lived continuously in the  UK  for  less
                        than  20   years   (discounting   any   period   of
                        imprisonment) but has no  ties  (including  social,
                        cultural or family) with the country  to  which  he
                        would have to go if required to leave the UK.


         276ADE (2)    Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and may not  be
                    relied upon, in circumstances in which it is proposed to
                    return a person to a third country pursuant to  Schedule
                    3 to the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,
                    etc) Act 2004."

41.  In respect of the appellant MG,  I  find  as  a  fact  that  since  her
    arrival in the United Kingdom she has avoided contact with  people  who
    have a Pakistani background.   I  find  that  she  has  no  friends  in
    Pakistan and has no contact with anybody in that country.  She told  me
    that she does not read books relating to Pakistan or read  anything  to
    do with Pakistani culture.  Not unnaturally, to do so causes her to  be
    upset.  I find that she has not had contact  with  her  father  or  her
    uncle since coming to the United Kingdom.  She last  had  contact  with
    her older brother some eight or nine years ago before she came  to  the
    United Kingdom and has no contact with him and does not know  where  he
    is.  She now no longer knows where her uncle is or where her sister is.
     She has not heard from her older sister since she came to  the  United
    Kingdom.

42.  The appellant does speak Punjabi with her sisters  and  her  mother  at
    home because she has always spoken in Punjabi to her sisters and to her
    mother and they have always spoken in Punjabi to her.

43.  Bearing in mind the advice given by the Tribunal at paragraphs 123  and
    124 of Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new  Rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  00060
    (IAC).  I have concluded that the appellant MG has no  ties  (including
    social, cultural or family) with Pakistan.  As with  the  appellant  in
    Ogundimu, she is now a stranger to the country, its people and  way  of
    life.

44.  MG is 20 years of age.  I have concluded  that  she  does  qualify  for
    recognition  as  a  refugee  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  I allow her appeal under the Immigration Rules.

45.  The second and third appellants are under the age of  18  years.   They
    do not qualify for recognition as refugees under the Immigration Rules.
      I  therefore  consider  their  appeals   under   normal   Article   8
    jurisprudence.

The Law

46.  Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides for  respect  for  a  person's
    private and family life, their home and correspondence.  The  appellant
    has to show that the subject matter of the Article 8 subsists and  that
    the decision of the respondent will interfere with it.  If he does  so,
    it is for the respondent to show that the  decision  is  in  accordance
    with the law, that it is one of the  legitimate  purposes  set  out  in
    Article 8(2) in this case for the economic well-being of  the  country,
    for the prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others, and that it is necessary in a democratic
    society, which means that it must be proportionate.

47.  At paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham of Cornhill said this:
         "17.  In considering whether  a  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision to remove a person  must  clearly  fail,  the
             reviewing court must, as it  seems  to  me,  consider  how  an
             appeal would be likely to fare before an adjudicator,  as  the
             tribunal responsible for deciding the appeal if there were  an
             appeal. This means that the reviewing court  must  ask  itself
             essentially the questions which would have to be  answered  by
             an adjudicator.  In  a  case  where  removal  is  resisted  in
             reliance on article 8, these questions are likely to be:
             (1)      Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a
                  public authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's
                  right to respect for his private or (as the case may  be)
                  family life?
             (2)      If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                  such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of
                  article 8?
             (3)      If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
                  law?
             (4)      If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                  society in the interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
                  prevention of disorder or crime, for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
                  freedoms of others?
             (5)      If so, is such interference proportionate to the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"
48.  I am satisfied that the appellants M and SG  do  enjoy  a  family  life
    with each other and with their sister MG and with their mother.   I  am
    also satisfied that they each  enjoy  a  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The respondent's decision  will  have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as to potentially  engage  the  operation  of  Article  8,  the
    threshold for which is not especially high (see  paragraph  28  of  the
    judgment of Sedley LJ in AG (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ.

49.  I remind myself that the appellants are still children.

50.  The interference is in accordance with the law and is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society for the economic wellbeing of the country,  for  the
    prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the  rights
    and  freedoms  of  others.   The  question  is  whether  or  not   such
    interference is proportionate.

51.  Not only do I have to bear in mind that it is necessary to look at  the
    family as a whole (see Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 37) but I must,  of  course,  bear  in  mind  in
    considering each of these appellants' Article 8 appeals that  they  are
    both minors and that I must have regard to the best  interests  of  the
    children.  In doing so, I bear in mind paragraph 29 of the  opinion  in
    ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.  There are  no  considerations  inherently
    more significant than the interests of children.

52.  I have allowed the appeal on MG under  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  am
    satisfied that each of these appellants form part of a family unit with
    a shared history of abuse at the hands of their family and that each of
    them have drawn support from the family unit.  I am satisfied  that  it
    cannot be said to be in the best interests of these two appellants  for
    them to be separated from MG.

53.  Both appellants have, like their  older  sister,  taken  serious  steps
    towards their integration and assimilation of both British culture  and
    its  way  of  life.   They  have  made  remarkable  progress  in  their
    education, bearing in mind that during the early  part  of  their  life
    they did not attend any formal schooling.  I do not believe that  these
    appellants could or should be separated from their sister MG  and  find
    that it would be wholly disproportionate for the Secretary of State  to
    do so.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



















                                THE APPENDIX
                             ABOVE REFERRED TO.

                                   PART 1
                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]

                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]






                                   PART 2
                                    [pic]

                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]






                                   PART 3
                                    [pic]
                                    [pic]




[pic]

