
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03334/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AF
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr  J  Collins  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Sentinel
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is  a  national
    of Albania born in 1989.  On 9 April 2012 she arrived clandestinely and
    on 6 December 2012 formally claimed asylum at Croydon.  On 12  February
    2015 the Respondent refused her application for asylum or  humanitarian
    protection and granted her discretionary leave outside the  Immigration
    Rules expiring on 12 August 2017.

 2. Shortly after arrival she met her partner who had  left  Kosovo  during
    the civil strife in the former Republic of Yugoslavia.   He  is  now  a
    naturalised British citizen.  Within three months of  arrival  she  was
    pregnant by him and they now have two children  who  are  both  British
    citizens born in 2013 and 2015.

 3. The Appellant (the SSHD) in the decision letter of 12 February 2015 did
    not challenge the Appellant's account of what had happened  to  her  in
    Albania and why she had fled.  The SSHD refused the  claim  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds and granted the Applicant Discretionary Leave  until
    12 August 2017. The details are  set  out  at  paragraphs  3-7  of  the
    decision of Judge M J Gillespie promulgated on 17 July 2015,  by  which
    he allowed the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.

Appeal from the First-tier Tribunal Decision

 4. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    misdirected himself in relation to  the  determination  in  AM  and  BM
    (trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) and  had  failed  to
    have regard to the determination in DM (sufficiency of protection - PSG
    - women - domestic violence) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00059.   The  SSHD
    submitted that if the Judge had had regard to  DM  he  could  not  have
    found there was not a sufficiency of protection for  the  Applicant  in
    Albania.

 5. On 11 August 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Robertson  granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable the position  of
    the Applicant was on all fours with the Appellant  in  DM  because  the
    Applicant had not been trafficked.   Additionally  the  Judge  had  not
    given reasons for going behind DM and had not  considered  whether  the
    treatment the  Applicant  had  suffered  in  Albania  was  sufficiently
    serious to cross the threshold to amount to persecution.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 6. Mr Collins informed me that the Appellant was outside the hearing  room
    with her children but she would not attend the hearing.   This  was  an
    appeal brought under Section 83 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended.

Submissions for the SSHD

 7. Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied on the grounds  for  permission  to  appeal.
    The  Judge  had  approached  the  Applicant's  case  as  one  akin   to
    trafficking but had found at paragraph 13  of  his  decision  that  the
    Applicant was not a victim of trafficking.  Having made  that  finding,
    he had erred in failing to consider the determination in DM.  Paragraph
    18 of DM and paragraph 182 of AM and BM both concluded that there is  a
    sufficiency  of  protection  for  individuals  like  the  Applicant  in
    Albania, even if the treatment the  Applicant  had  suffered  or  might
    expect  to  suffer  crossed  the  threshold  necessary  to  amount   to
    persecution.  She submitted that what the  Applicant  had  suffered  or
    feared to suffer at the hands of her father was very  similar  to  that
    which the Appellant in DM had suffered at the hands of her boyfriend.

 8. There was insufficient evidence before the  Judge  to  entitle  him  to
    depart from the country guidance given in DM and AM and BM despite  the
    fact that they  are  both  determinations  of  some  age.   There  were
    shelters available for battered women in Albania.  The Applicant  would
    also be able to turn to her partner's family.  If the Judge  wished  to
    depart from country guidance then he would have  needed  to  deal  with
    this expressly and he had erred in failing to do so.

 9. Even if the Applicant were to return to Albania with her children as  a
    single parent, her circumstances were covered by what the Tribunal  had
    said at paragraphs 172 and 173 of AM and BM.  The  Tribunal  had  found
    that discrimination against each of these appellants as a lone woman or
    an unmarried mother would not amount to persecution and  that  although
    there were only limited facilities by way of accommodation and day care
    there were programmes to  assist  such  women  back  to  work  and  the
    situation on return would not be sufficiently severe as to  engage  the
    receiving state's obligations under  of the European Convention and all
    the more so would not amount to persecution for purposes of the Refugee
    Convention.  The decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the Applicant

10. Mr Collins referred to his skeleton argument submitted to the Judge  in
    which he had argued that given the accepted narrative of the Applicant,
    particularly now she had two young children, it would be  difficult  to
    consider that there would be a sufficiency of protection available  for
    her in Albania or that  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  her  to
    relocate: see paragraphs 7-10 of the skeleton argument.   Further,  the
    Judge had made an express finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    trafficked.  The Judge had considered the individual  circumstances  of
    the Appellant whose situation on return to Albania he had rightly found
    would  bear  some  similarity  to  that  of  a  returning   victim   of
    trafficking.

11. The Judge had adopted the correct approach in looking at the individual
    circumstances of the Applicant.  The  characteristics  flagged  by  the
    Tribunal in AM and BM, for instance at paragraph 158, remained relevant
    to the risk assessment which the Judge was required to make.

12. The Judge had relied on the background information before him which was
    much later than the determinations in DM and AM  and  BM.   The  SSHD's
    Operational Guidance Note: Albania  of  19  September  2014  (the  OGN)
    referred to domestic violence remaining widespread in Albania and  that
    according to the Special Rapporteur (to which organisation  he  reports
    is not stated) a change in  attitude  to  domestic  violence  is  still
    required among prosecutors and judges although the attitude  of  police
    officers is changing possibly partly due to the  training  received  by
    special police units in charge of  domestic  violence.   The  OGN  gave
    ample evidence entitling the Judge to depart from the  findings  in  DM
    dating from 2004.

13. Turning to whether there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    Applicant on return Mr Collins referred again to his skeleton  argument
    which addressed this and the possibility of internal relocation and  to
    which I have already referred.

14. At paragraphs 163 and 164, the Tribunal in AM and BM  had  referred  to
    the finding in Hoxha v SSHD [2005] UKHL 19 that domestic violence could
    form part of a refugee claim.

15. I noted that at paragraph 163 of AM and BM citing paragraph 37 of Hoxha
    that victims of sexual violence in the past are linked by an  immutable
    characteristic.  Even if the Applicant had, fortunately,  not  actually
    been a victim, the accepted narrative was that this is what she  feared
    on return to Albania. There had been no challenge  to  the  Applicant's
    narrative, the Judge had properly directed himself at paragraph  12  of
    his  decision.   In  the  following  paragraph  he  had  outlined   the
    background evidence.  At paragraph  14  he  had  dealt  with  the  risk
    factors identified in section 3 of the OGN and gone on in the following
    paragraph to find that the background evidence reflected the OGN and at
    paragraph 16 had reached sustainable conclusions.  The decision  should
    be upheld.

Further Submissions for the SSHD

16. Ms Willocks-Briscoe referred to paragraph 163 of AM and BM noting  that
    unlike those appellants the Applicant had not been the victim of sexual
    violence.  Unlike the Applicant,  the  appellant  in  DM  had  given  a
    narrative involving violent acts committed against her  by  her  former
    boyfriend  which  the  Tribunal  considered   had   not   amounted   to
    persecution.

Findings and consideration

17. The SSHD had not challenged the Applicant's narrative. For the  reasons
    given below I do not accept the Respondent's submissions in relation to
    DM and AM and BM.

18. The appellant in DM complained of violent conduct by a former boyfriend
    after she had met the man she subsequently married.  The claim appeared
    to be based on a number of undifferentiated incidents of harassment and
    an incident when she was knocked off her bike by a car  driven  by  her
    former boyfriend who then approached her and  threatened  to  kill  her
    next time.  The  matter  had  been  reported  by  the  police  who  for
    understandable reasons had declined to take the matter any further: see
    paragraphs 4, 5 and 7 of DM.

19. The appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  was  based  on  the
    submission that the Immigration Adjudicator had misapplied the learning
    in R (ex p Shah) v Immigration Appeal Tribunal [1999] 2 AC 629.  I find
    the passage from DM relied upon by the SSHD in the instant  application
    for permission to appeal  was  insufficient  to  support  what  is  now
    claimed to be a challenge the Judge's findings that the  Applicant  was
    at real risk of persecution on return to Albania.  In  any  event,  the
    factual background of the claims of DM and the Applicant are not on all
    fours despite the SSHD's claim to that  effect.   The  Applicant  comes
    from a rural settlement which we know because her family  are  farmers,
    in the north  of  Albania.   DM  also  came  from  the  north  but  the
    indication in the determination in DM is that  she  came  from  a  city
    having regard to comments in paragraph 7 and the  alacrity  with  which
    matters moved described in paragraph 5.

20. There is nothing in the determination to suggest that DM  was  at  risk
    from her family and at all material times she had the  support  of  her
    new boyfriend whom she subsequently married.  In addition to any  state
    protection, she was in a position to avail herself of  protection  from
    her family and her husband.

21. The Applicant has been disowned by her family and  credibly  threatened
    by a man to whom her family betrothed her.  The essential matter is not
    the narrative account of the past but  the  risk  which  the  Applicant
    faces on return to Albania.

22. The Judge assessed  the  individual  circumstances  of  the  Appellant,
    noting that in terms of likely risk, there were elements not dissimilar
    from those which a trafficked woman on return would face.  He  assessed
    the  Applicant's  case  by  way  of   reference   to   her   particular
    circumstances and on its own merit.  In such a situation, it was not  a
    material error of law for him to conclude that although  the  Applicant
    had not been trafficked, her circumstances  had  sufficiently  material
    similarities to those of a trafficked woman on return.

23. The Judge gave  sustainable  reasons  for  his  conclusions.  The  SSHD
    evidently disagrees with the Judge  but  has  not  shown  he  made  any
    material error of law such that his decision should  be  set  aside  in
    whole or in part.  The decision shall therefore stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    and shall stand.

    An anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Originally sent for promulgation on 6. ix. 2015
     Date: 04. ii. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

