
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03414/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 17th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                               mr nderim visha
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Heller of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Albania  born  on  5th  March  1996.   He
    appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Abebrese sitting at Taylor House on 30th October 2015 who dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  12th
    May 2014.  That decision was to refuse to grant further leave to remain
    and to refuse to vary leave and to  remove  the  Appellant  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    2006.

2.   The Appellant attended the Asylum Screening Unit  on  27th  March  2013
    where he stated he had entered the United Kingdom concealed in a lorry.
     He was served with a document as an illegal entrant and claimed asylum
    on the same day.  His application was refused in a  letter  dated  15th
    May 2013 without a right of appeal.  However due to his age, he was  17
    at the time, he was granted discretionary  leave  until  5th  September
    2013 by which time he would be 17�.  On 5th September 2013 he submitted
    an in-time application for further leave to remain which was refused on
    12th May 2014 giving rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

3.   The Appellant claimed that he was  a  member  of  a  particular  social
    group as someone involved in a blood feud.  His family had  been  in  a
    blood feud with the Dara family since 1996 when a man called Arben  who
    was the cousin of the Appellant's father together  with  a  man  called
    Agim Visha had killed one Fitim Dara.  The Appellant's father had  fled
    to Greece.  In 2002 Agim and Arben's father (whose name was Hamdi) were
    wounded by a member  of  the  Dara  family  Mentor  Dara.   Mentor  was
    arrested, charged and sent to prison.  In 2009 Arben Visha  was  killed
    by Bajram Dara who then handed himself in  and  was  charged  with  the
    crime and also sent to prison.  In October 2012 the Daras came  to  the
    Appellant's  house  and  threatened  the  Appellant's  mother  and  the
    Appellant demanding to know the whereabouts of the Appellant's  father,
    brother and Agim Visha.  The Appellant was  told  that  he  was  now  a
    target in the blood feud. The Appellant feared to return in case he too
    was harmed.

Explanation for Refusal

4.   The Respondent rejected the credibility of the Appellant  but  even  if
    the account was correct there was a sufficiency of protection available
    to the Horvath standard in  Albania.   The  Respondent  relied  on  the
    country guidance case of EH [2012] UKUT 00348 that while there remained
    a number of active blood feuds in Albania they were few in  number  and
    declining.  There were a small number of deaths annually  arising  from
    those feuds and a small number of adults and children living  in  self-
    confinement for protection.  Government  programmes  to  educate  self-
    confined children existed but very few children were involved in  them.
    The existence of a "modern blood  feud"  was  not  established.   Kanun
    blood feuds had always  allowed  for  the  possibility  of  pre-emptive
    killing by a dominant clan.

The Decision at First Instance

5.    After  hearing  evidence  from  the  Appellant  the  Judge  found  the
    Appellant not to  be  a  credible  witness.   The  Judge  set  out  his
    credibility findings at paragraphs 10 to 16 of the  determination.   At
    paragraph 10 the Judge dealt with  the  Appellant's  claim  that  after
    receiving the threat from the Dara family in 2012 the Appellant did not
    go out and thus did not attend school.   The  Judge  did  not  find  it
    credible that the Appellant's school would  not  have  sought  to  make
    contact  with  the  Appellant  in  such  a  situation  with  just   the
    Appellant's friends being asked by the school to make enquiries for the
    school.

6.   At paragraph 11 the Judge  noted  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's father and three brothers who resided in Greece  and  Italy
    still visited Albania "during the course of the night so as not  to  be
    seen by the members of the Dara family".  The Judge  did  not  find  it
    credible that the Appellant's family would continue  to  visit  Albania
    while there was an ongoing feud.  They would only do so if there was no
    threat to their lives.  In any event the claim  that  the  visits  only
    occurred at night was somewhat incredible, the Judge writing:
         "It is unlikely that [the Appellant's family] would stay within the
         confines of their house during the day time and also at night.  The
         visits of the  Appellant's  family  do  not  appear  to  be  for  a
         particularly  short  period  of  time  and  in  the  case  of   the
         Appellant's sister he gave evidence that she and her family tend to
         stay in Tirana in their own property for a period of three months".

7.   At paragraph 12 it was taken against the  Appellant  that  he  did  not
    know the name of the reconciliation union in Albania when he  had  also
    claimed in evidence that the Dara family were not willing to  agree  to
    reconciliation "after numerous communications had been  made  in  order
    for there to be an agreement reached".  If that were the case the Judge
    found that the Appellant  would  have  been  able  to  give  much  more
    specific details in relation  to  who  was  actually  involved  in  the
    reconciliation but he had failed to provide such details.

8.   At paragraph 13 the Judge found  it  incredible  that  members  of  the
    Appellant's family could not  assist  him  to  relocate  to  Tirana  or
    elsewhere in Albania.  The Appellant's family still  had  strong  links
    with Albania.  The Appellant's mother was living there and it would  be
    reasonable for the Appellant to reside with  her.   The  Appellant  was
    vague in relation to where the Dara family were at present so he  could
    not give any further information beyond  claiming  that  they  were  in
    Tirana.  He had not asked  his  mother  the  whereabouts  of  the  Dara
    family.   The  Appellant  had  managed  to  reside  in  Albania  for  a
    significant period of time before deciding to flee  the  country  which
    added further substance to the view that the threat he claimed did  not
    exist.

9.   The Appellant had not reported the threat to the police because he  did
    not trust them.  However the  police  were  capable  of  providing  the
    family with protection.  On the Appellant's own  case  members  of  the
    Dara family had been convicted  and  sentenced  to  prison.   The  feud
    itself had taken place when the Appellant was extremely young  and  his
    knowledge about it would have been minimal.  It was  not  credible  the
    Appellant would have  self-confined  himself  given  that  he  had  not
    approached the police.  It was not  sufficient  evidence  even  on  the
    lower standard of proof to bring what the  Appellant  described  within
    the definition of a blood feud as per EH.  The Appellant had not  shown
    he was the target of a blood feud.  The names of the Appellant's father
    and brothers had appeared on the registry.  That was not as a result of
    a rolling programme.  There were no submissions in relation to  Article
    8 and the Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

10.  In lengthy grounds of onward appeal Counsel  who  had  appeared  before
    the Judge argued that the Judge had made a number of  errors.   It  was
    pure supposition that the school would not have behaved in the way that
    the Appellant described.  The arrival  of  the  Appellant's  family  at
    night when they visited Albania "denotes stealth and an  intention  not
    to be seen".  The negative inference drawn from  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's sister ignored the fact that the Kanun designated the  male
    members of the victim in direct line as potential victims of the  blood
    feud.  It did not encompass women or their husbands.  The Appellant was
    able to reside in Albania for a  period  of  time  before  leaving  the
    country because he was self-isolated  and  thus  the  aggressor  family
    could not harm him  according  to  the  dictates  of  the  Kanun.   The
    Appellant did not know the name of the reconciliation union because  he
    was not personally involved in the attempts at  reconciliation  it  was
    the adults of the family.

11.  It was not reasonable for the Appellant to go and live with his  mother
    as she would surely be the first port of call for the aggressor family.
     The Judge's finding that it would be  reasonable  for  him  to  reside
    there because there was no feud was an example of the Judge putting the
    cart before the horse.  The  vagueness  of  the  Appellant  as  to  the
    whereabouts of the Dara family was feasibly the answer of a  young  man
    currently living safely in the United Kingdom and hoping he  would  not
    be returned to Albania.  It was enough for him to know  that  the  Dara
    family  was  still  there.   It  was  the  Appellant's  case  that  the
    authorities were unable rather than unwilling to  offer  protection  to
    him.  "Background evidence" (not cited  in  the  grounds)  showed  that
    corruption within the authorities resulted  in  indictments  for  blood
    feud murders being categorised as "something  different"  and  also  in
    reduced sentences.  Police at local  level  were  unwilling  to  become
    involved in case they got sucked into the blood feud.

12.  The Judge had failed to address any of the EH categories save  for  the
    ability of the members of the aggressor clan to locate  the  Appellant.
    The Judge had failed to address any of the country materials  contained
    in the Appellant's bundle or referred to in the  Respondent's  refusal.
    The Appellant had produced not only newspaper reports but also a  court
    decision.  These were not referred to by the Judge.  It  was  an  error
    for the Judge to dismiss the Appellant's documents or evidence as self-
    serving.  The Judge's finding that the Appellant's father  and  brother
    were still on the registry due to the fact that they have kept in touch
    with Albania and were regular visitors was equally valid  to  Counsel's
    submission that it might be the  result  of  a  rolling  programme  and
    therefore where matters were evenly balanced the  Appellant  should  be
    given the benefit of the doubt.  In relation to Article 8, although the
    Judge had not  heard  submissions  from  the  Appellant's  Counsel  his
    treatment of Article 8 was itself flawed.

13.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  on  1st  May  2015.   In  granting
    permission to appeal she wrote:
         "The grounds are lengthy but in  essence  they  complain  that  the
         Judge failed to apply correctly the country  guidance  case  or  to
         properly consider the documentary evidence.  I do not have anything
         before me other than the grounds and the decision.  I have not  had
         the opportunity to consider the bundle submitted.  However  on  the
         face of it it would appear that the Judge has  not  considered  any
         country information and has not considered all of  the  documentary
         evidence.  Further there is a lack of reasoning  for  the  findings
         made by him.  Accordingly I am satisfied that there is an  arguable
         error of law in the decision."

14.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  18th
    May 2005 stating that the Judge had carried out a comprehensive  review
    of the Appellant's claim and reached clear findings why he rejected the
    Appellant's credibility.  The Tribunal rejected the  existence  of  the
    feud and threat to the Appellant.  It was not accepted that members  of
    the family would visit Albania without incident if there was an ongoing
    feud.  No material errors in law were identified by the application for
    permission.

The Hearing before Me

15.  In opening Counsel who had appeared  for  the  Appellant  below  argued
    that she intended to stay clear  of  the  attacks  on  the  credibility
    findings and instead concentrate on omissions from  the  determination.
    There had only been one reference made by the Judge to the authority of
    EH.  There was a failure to refer to background materials  for  example
    the documents in the Appellant's two bundles.  There were  no  findings
    on the documentary evidence despite being dismissed  by  the  Judge  as
    self-serving.  The  documents  included  a  decision  of  the  Criminal
    Chamber of the Supreme Court of Albania.  The  Judge  had  displayed  a
    lack of understanding of the principles of Kanun and that  the  victims
    self-isolate.

16.  In reply the Presenting Officer stated that the Judge had rejected  the
    credibility of the Appellant and therefore the guidance in EH  did  not
    arise.  In any event the Judge  had  dealt  with  EH  see  for  example
    paragraph 15 of  the  determination  where  the  Judge  had  noted  the
    proposition in EH that blood  feuds  were  few  and  far  between.  The
    Appellant was vague about the whereabouts of the Dara family who  could
    not be so influential as to be able to exercise  power  across  Albania
    given their history of arrests and imprisonment.   Although  there  had
    been a blood feud the Judge  had  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    involved in it.   There  was  nothing  in  the  court  documents  which
    undermined the Judge's core findings on credibility.

17.  The Judge was making a broader point why  should  the  family  escalate
    matters by returning to Albania at all.   Women  could  be  subject  to
    violence under a blood feud, see the expert evidence preferred  in  EH.
    It was not perverse for the Judge to conclude  that  if  the  Appellant
    knew about the reconciliation he ought to have known more than  he  was
    saying  about  who  arranged  it.   Even  if  the   findings   in   the
    determination were said to be jumbled that did not undermine  the  core
    finding that the Appellant was not credible.

18.  In reply Counsel stated the Appellant  had  only  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a year and therefore was not arguing  private  life.  There
    was no claim that he had established a  family  life.   The  Judge  was
    factually inaccurate about the visits to  Albania.   The  targeting  of
    women was the exception rather than the rule.

Findings

19.  For the Appellant to be able to establish that  he  was  at  risk  upon
    return to Albania from an ongoing blood feud, he had  to  show  to  the
    lower standard both that there was a blood feud  and  that  he  was  or
    would be involved in some way in it.  The Judge  did  not  believe  the
    Appellant.  He  found  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be  lacking   in
    credibility and whatever had happened in the past, did not accept  that
    the Appellant would be at risk in the future.

20.  In a detailed assessment of the evidence the Judge  made  a  number  of
    telling findings against the Appellant.  The Appellant claimed to  have
    been self-isolated but could give  no  reasonable  explanation  why  in
    those circumstances (e was still of school age) the  school  would  not
    have made some form of direct enquiry to see where the  Appellant  was.
    I do not agree with Counsel for  the  Appellant's  characterisation  of
    this as a peripheral point.  What it demonstrated was that  there  were
    gaps in the Appellant's account which he was unable to adequately  deal
    with when pointed out.

21.  Similarly the  Appellant's  claim  that  members  of  his  family  were
    returning to Albania but by night bears no scrutiny  at  all.   As  the
    Judge pointed out even if the Appellant's family had travelled by night
    from Italy to Greece (which would either involve air or sea travel  for
    some hours) or across the border from Greece into  Albania  they  would
    have to stay in Albania during the day time at some point.   The  Judge
    was entitled to express a sceptical view that having travelled back  to
    Albania in this way the  Appellant's  family  would  then  self-isolate
    themselves for lengthy periods of time before  returning  to  Italy  or
    Greece as the case may be.  The concept was so implausible that it  was
    certainly open to the Judge to reject it.

22.  The Appellant was vague on a number  of  important  matters  which  the
    Judge was entitled to say it was reasonable to expect the Appellant  to
    have more knowledge than he in fact showed.  If the  Appellant  was  to
    claim that attempts at reconciliation had taken place it was reasonable
    to expect him to provide rather more detail of what those efforts  were
    even if they involved adult members of the family.

23.  The grant of permission to appeal appears to have  been  on  the  basis
    that the Judge had not considered the country information or considered
    all of the documentary evidence.  That however assumes that the country
    background material contained within it some point  of  importance  for
    the Appellant's case or that the documentary evidence itself would make
    a difference to  the  decision  of  the  Judge.   Certainly  the  Judge
    granting permission  to  appeal  stated  that  she  had  not  seen  the
    documentary evidence she had merely read the claim in the grounds  that
    the Judge had not considered that documentary evidence.  In fact as was
    pointed out to me in submissions by the  Respondent  the  documentation
    did not assist the Appellant's case since what it showed was  that  the
    Albanian police were quite active in arresting and  sending  for  trial
    people involved in crimes of  violence.   That  also  contradicted  the
    claim made in the grounds of appeal that  the  local  police  were  not
    willing to be involved in blood feuds in case they were sucked into the
    feuds themselves.  If that was the case then members of the Dara family
    would not have been sent to prison as they in fact were.

24.  Further the Judge was well aware of the country  guidance  case  of  EH
    and was quite entitled to rely on the conclusions  made  in  that  case
    relating to blood feuds.  On the facts as found by the Judge this  case
    did not get to the stage where the Appellant could  show  that  he  was
    involved in a blood feud and would be at risk as a result.   The  issue
    was not whether there had been a blood feud and therefore  whether  the
    circumstances of the quarrel between the  Appellant's  family  and  the
    Dara family came within the requirements set out in EH.  The issue  was
    whether the Appellant had been involved  in  it  or  would  be  in  the
    future.  The Judge rejected the Appellant's evidence  on  both  points.
    There was no risk to the Appellant.  The  grounds  of  appeal  for  all
    their length are a mere disagreement with cogent findings made  by  the
    Judge open to him on the evidence.  It was not an error for  the  Judge
    to fail to refer to material  that  was  irrelevant.   The  Appellant's
    family were continuing to return to Albania and  it  was  open  to  the
    Judge to draw an  inference  from  that  that  they  did  not  consider
    themselves to be at risk.  The Appellant's  attempts  to  explain  this
    development by claiming that his family only  returned  to  Albania  at
    night merely served to produce more implausibilities in the Appellant's
    account not fewer.  I do not find there was any error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's  dismissal  of  this  appeal  and  I  therefore   dismiss   the
    Appellant's onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 12th day of February 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee has been payable and the appeal has been dismissed  there  can  be
no fee award.


Signed this 12th day of February 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

