

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03524/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Date Sent                    |
|On : 10th October 2013                        |On : 29th October 2013       |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                         thurairajah s/o nagalingam

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F. Allen, instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant and his wife are an elderly couple from Sri Lanka,  frail
    and in poor health.  They arrived here with visitors' visas, ostensibly
    to visit their daughter, but shortly afterwards  they  claimed  asylum.
    The claim was rejected,  and  an  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 24th June 2013.  Judge Morris dismissed the appeal, and for
    detailed and cogent  reasons  Judge  Hemingway  refused  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The same grounds of appeal, with a small
    addition, were then put to the Upper Tribunal in a renewed application.
     Judge Freeman, in his customarily compressed style,  considered  three
    of the grounds, and gave permission on only  one  of  them.   When  the
    appeal came before me, I thought there was  some  difficulty  with  the
    second  and  third  of  those  grounds,  which  I  discussed  with  the
    representatives.

2.     The  first  ground  (labelled  (i))  presents  no  difficulty.   Miss
    Jegarajah, who settled the grounds, had complained  that  Judge  Morris
    ignored the Joint Presidential Guidance.  Judge  Freeman  roundly  sees
    off this ground.  At (ii),  however,  Judge  Freeman  refers  to  "this
    point", which at first blush might appear to mean the point  about  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance.  But the (ii) is doing double service.  It
    marks the second ground which the judge is considering, but it is  also
    the (ii) at 3(ii) of Miss Jegarajah's grounds, which is about increased
    militarism and the rehabilitation process.  This  ground  concerns  the
    appellant's son, and it  too  is  found  not  to  be  arguable.   Judge
    Freeman's (iii) corresponds to  3(iii)  of  Miss  Jegarajah's  grounds,
    which is the only ground on which Judge Freeman granted permission.

3.    This  ground  refers  to  paragraph  20(ii)(d)   of   the   First-tier
    determination, i.e.
             "even if it were accepted that the  Appellant's  daughter  was
         arrested in 2007, notwithstanding the discrepancy of some ten years
         in the dates given by the Appellant and his daughter, I  find  that
         it is not reasonably likely that this would have an impact  on  her
         elderly parents some four years after she left Sri Lanka;"

4.   Clearly, what Judge Morris means is that the  appellant  and  his  wife
    are somewhat old to be of interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities,  and
    although their daughter was of interest, that was in 2007, and she left
    Sri Lanka four years ago.  So the appellant and his wife  are  unlikely
    to be of adverse interest to the authorities now, on account  of  their
    daughter.   But  Miss  Jegarajah  puts  a  different  gloss   on   this
    subparagraph :
             "This finding implies that the Panel (sic : there was only one
         judge) had not appreciated the  impact  of  multiple  rape  of  the
         Applicants'  daughter  upon  the  Applicants   and   is   therefore
         perverse."

5.   That is not, it seems to me, what Judge Morris meant by "impact".   She
    was not wondering  (or  failing  to  wonder)  about  the  emotional  or
    psychological impact that the revelation  of  what  happened  to  their
    daughter would have had on her  parents.   On  the  contrary,  she  was
    rejecting the notion that what had happened to the daughter some  years
    ago would make the authorities take any interest in the parents at  the
    present time.  Judge Freeman, however, appears to take "impact" to mean
    what Miss Jegarajah takes it to mean, and wonders what difference  this
    could make to the outcome of the appeal.   "But",  he  ends,  "on  this
    point only, permission is given."

6.   Miss Allen did not seek  to  dissuade  me  that  my  interpretation  of
    paragraph 20(ii)(d) is wrong and, with great respect to my  brother,  I
    think Miss Jegarajah did misunderstand what Judge  Morris  was  getting
    at.  Ground (iii) essentially falls away once that is accepted, so Miss
    Allen strove valiantly to persuade me  that  the  grant  of  permission
    entitled her to argue all the grounds, or at least to  seek  permission
    to argue all the grounds.  Mr Bramble commented  that  two  judges  had
    already rejected those other grounds, and it does seem to me  that  the
    filtering mechanism of the permission stage would be undermined if  the
    grant of permission on one ground meant that all the grounds  could  be
    argued before the Upper  Tribunal,  regardless  of  their  having  been
    explicitly rejected.  As Mr Bramble also  commented,  notice  of  Judge
    Freeman's decision on the application was sent to the  parties  on  9th
    August, and in the two months since then there has been no  attempt  by
    the solicitors to enlarge the basis on which  permission  was  granted.
    It cannot be enlarged at this stage.

7.   The plain fact is, this frail and elderly Tamil couple are not at  risk
    of persecution by the Singhalese authorities.   They  would  very  much
    like to live in this country with their daughter, and there would  have
    been an opportunity, after they arrived in this country and before  the
    Rules changed on 9th July 2012, to apply to  'switch'  under  paragraph
    317.  Perhaps the  evidence  adduced  in  support  of  the  visit  visa
    applications and appeals meant that the couple could not show that they
    were mainly dependent financially on their sponsor here.  Be that as it
    may, a valid claim for asylum cannot be established either.



     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           11th October 2013



