
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03307/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Oral decision given following hearing |                               |
|On 28 April 2017                      |On 13 June 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                ms ayot ongom
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Uganda who was born in 1972.
     She applied for asylum but the respondent refused her application  and
    made a decision to remove her from the UK.  She appealed  against  this
    decision and her appeal was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Howard sitting at Harmondsworth on 28 July 2016.   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated some four months later on 21  November  2016  Judge
    Howard dismissed her appeal.

 2. The appellant now appeals  to  this  Tribunal  permission  having  been
    granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes on 14 March 2017.

 3. At the hearing today on behalf of the respondent Mr Wilding very fairly
    accepted that it was very difficult for the respondent to  defend  this
    decision.  While Mr Wilding contended that contrary to what Judge Symes
    had considered at paragraph 1 of his  reasons,  Judge  Howard  had  not
    actually found that the appellant had been  detained  and  ill-treated,
    nonetheless he  accepted  that  he  had  made  no  findings  whatsoever
    rejecting the documents which  the  appellant  had  provided  from  her
    lawyer in Uganda or documents which are contained elsewhere within  the
    bundle.  These documents are contained from pages 137 through to 149 of
    the appellant's bundle.  The judge notes this but  does  not  make  any
    findings regarding these documents.

 4. The only reference made by the judge to the documents  after  paragraph
    28 is at paragraph 33 when he says that "when  weighing  these  matters
    against the evidence of the appellant and the documents she produces  I
    do not find the appellant to have been  a  credible  witness".   As  Mr
    Wilding very fairly noted that the  judge  did  not  even  mention  the
    leading case of Tanveer Ahmed, let alone apply it  and  accordingly  he
    had made no finding as to how these documents should  be  treated.   Mr
    Wilding accepted that this case required these documents to be properly
    scrutinised  and  considered  amongst  all  the  evidence  before   any
    credibility findings are made.

 5. This fed into the point made by Judge Symes when  granting  permission,
    that is relating  to  the  appellant's  evidence  which  had  not  been
    considered with regard to what her husband's position currently was  in
    Uganda.  For these reasons Mr Wilding accepted that there was an  error
    of law in Judge Howard's determination and that  this  was  a  material
    error.

 6. I agree.  It follows that the appeal will have to be reheard and in all
    the circumstances there will have to be a complete rehearing and I will
    remit the appeal to Hatton Cross for this purpose.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard is set aside as  containing
a material error of law.  This appeal  will  be  remitted  to  Hatton  Cross
where it will be reheard by any judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Howard.  No findings of fact will be retained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                      Dated:   9 June 2017
