
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No:  AA/03575/2015
                                                   Appeal No:  AA/03578/2015
                                                   Appeal No:  AA/03581/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 March 2016                      |On 15 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                  (SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

                                   MR LWP
                                 And Others
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Ahmad; Nag Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The first appellant (the appellant)  is  the  husband  of  the  second
      appellant and father of the third appellant.  They are citizens of Sri
      Lanka.  The appellant appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal promulgated 28  July  2015  dismissing  an  appeal  from  the
      decision of the respondent  refusing  him  asylum  as  a  refugee  and
      humanitarian protection.  The decision of the respondent is  dated  13
      February 2015.

2.    The appellant was born on [ ] 1979 in  Galli,  Sri  Lanka.   He  is  a
      Sinhalese.  He first arrived in the UK on 24 October 2010 on a student
      visa and completed a degree  in  project  management  at  Bedfordshire
      University.  Although the dates are not  entirely  consistent  in  the
      decision letter and  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it
      appears that he left the UK for Sri Lanka in March 2012  for  about  2
      weeks and again in June 2012 in order to return to  Sri  Lanka  to  be
      married to the second appellant.  He appears to have  left  Sri  Lanka
      for the last time in June 2012 arriving in the UK on 24 July 2012.

3.    He claims to have encountered problems in Sri Lanka from  August  2009
      when he was stopped by the police at  a  checkpoint  and  taken  to  a
      police station for further enquiries.  This was because he had  helped
      disabled people some of whom were Tamil and ex LTTE members.   He  was
      questioned for two days.  On 5 August 2009 he was again  arrested  and
      taken to an Army camp for questioning.  He was detained for  two  days
      during which he was beaten.

4.    He left Sri Lanka in October 2010.  After  completing  his  degree  at
      Bedford University he returned to Sri Lanka  in  about  June  2012  in
      order to get  married.   Whilst  on  honeymoon  he  claimed  that  the
      Terrorist  Investigation  Division  (TID)  discovered  that   he   had
      returned.  At paragraph 18 the First-tier Tribunal  narrates  that  he
      was instructed to report to the TID on 17 June 2012  and  did  so  two
      days later.  He was arrested for failing to comply with conditions  on
      which he was released from detention in August  2009,  questioned  and
      beaten.  He was taken to court and released on bail on  22  June  2012
      after paying 100,000 rupees and upon a condition that he signed on  at
      the TID offices every week.  However, he fled Sri  Lanka  on  23  June
      2012 arriving in the UK on 24 July 2012.

5.    His claim for asylum was based on his fear of returning to Sri  Lanka.
       He claimed that the authorities were looking for him and  that  since
      his departure his brother-in-law has been arrested.

6.    The appellant first claimed asylum on 18 January 2014.   He  underwent
      a screening interview on 18 February 2014.   His  solicitors  proposed
      certain amendments to that interview in a  letter  dated  27  February
      2014.  He was interviewed again on 9 February 2015.   On  13  February
      2015 his claim for asylum and international protection were refused by
      the letter referred to.

7.    In that letter certain inconsistencies were noted in  respect  of  the
      appellant's claims regarding  his  arrests  and  detentions.   At  the
      screening interview of 18 February 2014 he  is  recorded  as  claiming
      that he had first been arrested on 3 August 2009 for  three  days  and
      thereafter again  arrested  on  5  August  2009  for  two  days.   The
      solicitor's letter of 27 February 2014 sought to correct these  dates.
      It was claimed in that letter that his first arrest was on 4 August as
      opposed of 3 August 2009  and  that  after  three  days  he  had  been
      released on  7  August  2009  but  arrested  the  next  day.   Further
      inconsistencies were highlighted in respect of his answers in  respect
      of these matters in his interview of 9 February 2015.  At answer 91 in
      that interview he had again claimed to have been arrested on 3  August
      and 48 hours later.

8.    In respect of his final detention in June of 2012 he  had  claimed  in
      the interview of February 2015 that the TID had discovered he  was  in
      Sri Lanka because of his wedding.  The  respondent  did  not  find  it
      credible that the authorities would have found out about his return in
      that way.  His claims to have been arrested in both in 2009  and  2012
      were found to be inconsistent with background information since he  or
      his family had never been involved with the LTTE and  had  never  been
      involved in anti Sri Lankan Government activity.

 9.   In his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  and  his  wife
      gave evidence.  In his grounds of appeal he accepted that  there  were
      inconsistencies in respect of the dates  of  arrest  and  release  but
      claimed that he was a torture victim and had been traumatised by  that
      torture.  The tribunal found that his attempts in his statement  dated
      14 July 2015 to respond to  criticisms  of  credibility  made  by  the
      respondent were inadequate and contained  further  embellishments  and
      contradictory evidence.  The appellant  was  found  to  be  vague  and
      evasive. At paragraph 41 it is narrated  that  the  appellant  claimed
      that the inconsistencies between his accounts of  being  arrested  and
      released were the fault of his solicitor and that he,  the  appellant,
      had not read the solicitor's  letter  dated  27  February  2014.   The
      tribunal found that he was seeking to  amend  the  recorded  screening
      interview and that his attempts to change the dates of his arrest were
      due to the fact that he had  not  been  arrested  on  those  dates  as
      claimed.  His evidence was rejected as  incredible  and  inconsistent.
      Further, the tribunal found that,  had  the  appellant  actually  been
      arrested in August 2009, the authorities would have  his  records  and
      would have been keeping a track of  his  movements.   The  appellant's
      evidence had been that the authorities did not know of his  travel  to
      the UK or that he had applied for a student  visa  in  2009.   He  had
      contradicted himself by saying that after his release the  authorities
      were  keeping  a  check  on  his  movements.   There  was  no   proper
      explanation as to why the appellant had returned to Sri Lanka in March
      or June of 2012 when, according to his evidence, the  authorities  had
      made many visits to his parents' house looking for  him.   Furthermore
      the appellant had travelled to  Sri  Lanka  and  returned  to  the  UK
      without problems and the tribunal concluded that he was of no interest
      to the authorities and had invented the visits by the  authorities  to
      his parents' house in order to claim asylum.

10.   The appellant claimed that his name had been given to the  authorities
      in March or April 2012 by LTTE members who had been arrested  and  had
      given information about the appellant assisting the LTTE between  2008
      and October 2010.  This was found to be fabrication on the basis that,
      if the authorities had known of  this  work,  they  would  have  taken
      action much earlier than June 2012.  He had been arrested and released
      on two occasions in 2009 and it was incredible  that  the  authorities
      would wait until his return from the United  Kingdom  in  2012  before
      again arresting and detaining him.  In any  event,  he  had  left  Sri
      Lanka on three occasions through normal channels with his own passport
      without problems.  This  demonstrated  that  the  authorities  had  no
      interest in him.

11.   The appellant had produced various documents from Sri  Lanka  said  to
      vouch his arrest in 2012.  These included a letter from  his  attorney
      dated 18 June 2015,  a report given to the magistrate  by  Sri  Lankan
      police and a warrant for the appellant's arrest signed by a magistrate
      upon the basis of the police information.  The documentation from  the
      police and the warrant was dismissed by the tribunal  as  having  been
      produced in order  to  embellish  the  appellant's  claim.   They  had
      existed since 2012 but had only been sent to the appellant in June  of
      2015 without  explanation.   There  was  no  explanation  as  to  what
      happened to the money given as surety for the appellant's  release  on
      22 June 2012.

12.   On the basis of the tribunal's assessment of the  credibility  of  the
      appellant's claims, the judge  dismissed  his  claim  for  asylum  and
      humanitarian  protection.   The  appeals  of  the  second  and   third
      appellants were also refused.

13.   Before  this  tribunal,  Ms  Ahmad  made  two  principal  submissions.
      Firstly the tribunal had erred in law  in  its  credibility  findings.
      While it had described the appellant as being  vague  and  evasive  no
      examples had been  given  in  order  to  substantiate  that.   It  was
      submitted that there was no proper basis advanced by the tribunal  for
      the findings of credibility made against the appellant.  Secondly,  Ms
      Ahmad submitted that the judge had erred in law in his approach to the
      supporting evidence advanced by the appellant.  The  only  mention  of
      this was at paragraph 48 and no proper analysis of the documents  had
      been conducted.  She referred to PJ  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1011.
      While the documents had only been obtained shortly before the hearing,
      if genuine they showed the appellant was at risk.  They  were  central
      to the appellant's claim.  In the skeleton argument advanced prior  to
      the First tribunal's hearing the respondent was invited to verify  the
      new material and to ask for  an  adjournment  if  required.   No  such
      request had been made.  There was no proper basis for rejecting  these
      documents.

14.   Mr Melvin for the respondent submitted that the tribunal was entitled
      to make the findings of credibility that were made  having  regard  to
      the fact that the appellant had returned repeatedly to Sri Lanka  and
      had been able to leave the country using his own passport without  any
      problem.  This substantially undermined his claim of being at risk  on
      return to Sri Lanka.  The tribunal had set out in paragraphs 39 to 49
      the basis upon which his evidence was rejected is incredible  and  the
      tribunal could not be said to have materially erred in that respect.

15.   In relation to the documentation produced, Mr Melvin  referred  to  a
      letter from the British High Commission, Colombo  dated  3 July 2015
      which confirmed that 86.7% of letters provided by Sri Lankan attorneys
      were not credible.  The documents founded on by the appellant included
      information from an attorney which forwarded the  documents  including
      the warrant for arrest and the police report.  Having  regard  to  the
      overall findings and credibility the tribunal was entitled  to  reject
      that evidence in the way that it had  done  at  paragraph 48  of  the
      determination.

Decision

16.   The tribunal sets out at paragraphs 39 to 49  of  the  Determination
      detailed examples of the inconsistencies and contradictions  given  by
      the appellant in respect of his account of  his  various  arrests  and
      detentions.    His   solicitors   attempted,   in   the   letter    of
      27 February 2014, to correct some of those issues but the  appellant
      then  blamed them for providing erroneous information in that  letter.
      At paragraph 49 the tribunal points out that  the  appellant  claimed
      that the authorities were unaware of his travel to the United Kingdom
      or that he had applied for a student visa.  That was despite the  fact
      that the appellant claimed to have been arrested in August 2009.   It
      was a legitimate for the tribunal to conclude that, had that been  the
      case, the authorities would have his records and would be  keeping  an
      eye on his movements.  There was a contradiction to  the  extent  that
      the appellant himself stated that, after his release, the  authorities
      were keeping a check on his movements.  The tribunal was  entitled  to
      come to the conclusion at paragraph 43 that he had invented the visits
      by the authorities to his parents' house since, if true, the appellant
      would have known of those visits and would have been aware of the risk
      of arrest and detention if he did return.  Furthermore,  the  tribunal
      was entitled to be sceptical about his  claims  that  his  moves  were
      being checked by the authorities who waited for two  years  until  his
      return to Sri Lanka before arresting and detaining him but allowed him
      repeatedly to enter and leave the country.   The  description  of  his
      evidence as vague and evasive was justified and cannot be said to be a
      material error in law standing the sustainable findings of credibility
      of which the tribunal made on the basis of the factors set out above.

17.   Having arrived at these legitimate conclusions about  the  appellant's
      credibility the tribunal was entitled to reject the  documentation  he
      produced as being fabricated.   The  tribunal  was  entitled  to  have
      regard to its  late  appearance.   No  application  was  made  by  the
      respondent to postpone the hearing and there was no obligation on  the
      tribunal to do so.  The findings on the credibility of the appellant's
      account and the ability to leave and enter Sri Lanka were a sufficient
      basis on which to reject that body of evidence.

18.   For these reasons this appeal is refused.  The appeals of  the  second
      and third appellants are also refused.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are refused.

Signed      Date

Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      Date

Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

