
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03548/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                     YAW
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Fujiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           ERROR OF LAW & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Uganda, born on 6 December  1982.   She
last arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 September 2012 and  claimed  asylum
on 20 August  2013  on  the  basis  of  her  political  opinion  and  sexual
orientation. She gave birth to her  son,  R,  on  26  September  2013  by  a
British national, DO.  She  was  interviewed  on  7  January  2015  and  her
application for asylum  was  refused  on  16  January  2015,  along  with  a
decision to remove her to Uganda.

2.    The Appellant appealed against the decision on 3 March  2015  and  her
appeal came before First Tier Tribunal Judge Jerromes for hearing on 27  May
2015. She and DO gave evidence but  her  partner,  K,  did  not  attend  the
hearing. In a decision dated 2 June 2015, she dismissed the  appeal  as  she
did not find the Appellant to be credible [44]; she did  not  consider  that
she would be at risk on return to Uganda as  a  result  of  her  involvement
with A4C [44.1.]; she did not accept that the Appellant  is  a  lesbian  nor
that she is in a same sex relationship with K [44.2(i)]; she found that  the
Appellant has  sole  responsibility  for  R  [44.3]  but  it  would  not  be
unreasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom  with  the  Appellant
[51.2].

3.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
the following bases: (i) the Judge failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
evidence of the Appellant's arrests; (ii) the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
account  relevant  evidence/insufficient  reasoning  for  disregarding   the
evidence of the Appellant's sexuality; (iii) the Judge  misdirected  herself
in law and failed to take into account a material  matter  with  respect  to
the Appellant's Article 8 claim.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge  Shimmin
on 7 July 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  misdirected
herself in law and failed to take account of material matters  with  respect
to the Appellant's Article 8 claim, particularly in respect of the  position
of her child who is  a  British  citizen  and  that,  whilst  the  remaining
grounds were less persuasive, she did not reject them.

Hearing

5.    Ms Wilkins referred me to the grant of permission to  appeal  and  the
fact that permission had been expressly granted in respect of the Article  8
point. However, she also relied on  the  other  two  grounds  which  were  a
little more subtle. She stated that the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  at
the hearing before the First Tier was  concerned  that  there  had  been  no
opportunity for the Home Office to consider the  Appellant's  sexuality  and
fact that her child is British.

6.    Ms Fijiwala stated that she  intended  to  defend  the  decision.  The
Judge made findings she  was  entitled  to  make  at  43.5  the  credibility
finding goes to the heart of the case and the Judge takes this into  account
in her overall assessment. She stated that the Judge's finding was  open  to
her to make based on the evidence and  to  find  she  was  not  credible  in
relation to A4C and arrests. She submitted that Ground 1 was a  disagreement
and was no material error.

7.    In respect of Ground 2 she stated that in  terms  of  the  Appellant's
claimed sexuality the  Judge  fully  considered  this  claim  at  40.1.  The
Appellant had a heterosexual relationship and a  child  whilst  with  K;  at
40.2  the  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  did  not  raise  her   sexual
orientation at the screening interview; at 40.3 the  Judge  found  that  the
Appellant denied being in a relationship in the United Kingdom and  did  not
mention her sexual orientation despite being aware of LGBT issues  in  terms
of her political stance. At 40.4 the Judge noted that K did not  attend  the
hearing. At 40.5 the Judge took account of Mr  O's  evidence.  At  44.2  the
Judge did not accept that the Appellant is a lesbian and in  a  relationship
with K and this evidence could not be tested and went to  the  core  of  the
claim in relation to her sexuality. The case of ABC C/148/13 - C/150/13  was
also taken into  account  but  the  Judge  notes  the  Appellant  had  three
opportunities to raise this claim but did not mention it  until  the  appeal
hearing. The Judge was satisfied the Appellant would have been aware of  the
possibility of making a claim based  on  sexual  orientation.  She  asserted
that the second ground is simply a disagreement and the Judge  was  entitled
to reach the conclusion she did based on the evidence.

8.    In respect of the third ground and the  Article  8  claim,  the  Judge
dealt with the case under Appendix FM and EX1. The Appellant was  in  breach
of the Immigration Rules and could not meet the financial requirements.  She
went through  the  Judge's  findings  at  51.1.  through  to  53.3(iii)  and
submitted that since Sanade and the guidance, the section 117B (vi) test  is
whether it would be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
Kingdom and this reflects Parliament's intention.  The  Judge  has  properly
considered that and there are no errors in the determination.

9.    Ms Wilkins submitted in  respect  of  Ground  1  and  the  Appellant's
involvement  with  A4C  that  because  the  sexuality  issue  had  not  been
previously considered this was the focus of cross examination and  that  she
had made submissions on A4C based on the  Appellant's  detailed  answers  in
her asylum interview, where there had been extensive  questioning  from  84-
114 - over 12 pages of interview. She submitted that it was  not  sufficient
for the Judge not to record the totality  of  the  Appellant's  answers  and
then make a negative credibility finding based on delay and  one  answer  in
the screening interview, where the Appellant misunderstood and  thought  she
was being asked about being arrested in the United Kingdom and had  been  in
the United Kingdom for 1 year at that time. It was incumbent upon the  Judge
to look at all  the  evidence.  The  Appellant's  political  claim  was  the
central plank and should have given  anxious  scrutiny.  The  Judge  made  a
material error given the detail  and  the  Appellant's  consistent  answers.
Regarding sur place activities in the United Kingdom, A4C  is  a  grassroots
organisation in Uganda not an  international  organisation.  No  regard  was
given to any of the Appellant's evidence on A4C - it  was  a  very  sweeping
finding based on a general credibility concern without looking at detail  of
the claim.

10.   In respect of Ground 2, Mr  O  came  to  the  hearing  principally  in
relation  to  their  son  but  he  also  gave  evidence  as  to  seeing  the
Appellant's partner, K. This is particularly significant  in  that  he  said
not only that it was not an act but also expressed his discomfort  with  the
nature  of  the  same  sex  relationship.  He  is  not  supportive  of   the
relationship but a third party  giving  evidence  in  support  of  it.  This
evidence should have been weighed in  the  balance  in  her  assessment.  No
reasons as to why Mr O's  evidence  in  this  respect  was  not  taken  into
account or given any weight. With regard to the decision of the CJEU in  ABC
just because someone is intelligent and articulate does not  mean  they  are
forthcoming about sexuality particularly as the  Appellant  is  from  Uganda
where it is not possible to speak about one's sexuality.

11.   In respect of Ground 3, she submitted that, in respect of Appendix  FM
the structure adopted by the Judge was unusual as she has not  followed  the
Rules appropriately as she started with the balancing  exercise.  There  was
little guidance from the Respondent as R's nationality was not confirmed  at
that time. In respect of the decision in Sanade it is  not  permissible  for
the Respondent to submit R should relocate outside the EU nor for the  Judge
to do this: 11.23 of the Respondent's IDIs at paragraph 12  of  the  grounds
of appeal provide that it is only in cases of criminality  or  a  very  poor
immigration history where a person has repeatedly breached  the  Rules  that
considerations of sufficient weight are raised to justify  separation  where
a child could otherwise stay with  another  parent  or  alternative  primary
carer.  No  part  of  Appendix  FM  under  the   parent   rules   for   sole
responsibility  permits  for  this  to  be  switched  to  someone  else  cf.
44.3.(i). In terms of the consideration of  reasonableness;  paragraph  11.7
of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  there  were  a  series  of  errors   in   the
consideration of Mr O's evidence. It is not an option in any case for  R  to
remain here with his father as he cannot live with him  full  time,  due  to
the fact that Mr O is married and has two children with  his  wife,  all  of
whom are unaware of R's existence and he does not wish to divorce his  wife.


Error of law decision

12.   I indicated at the end of the hearing that  I  found  the  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge erred materially in law. I now give my reasons.

13.   Permission to appeal was granted expressly with regard  to  Ground  3,
which concerned the manner in which the Judge had  assessed  the  Article  8
claim. This was based in particular on her decision at [51.2] that it  would
not be unreasonable to expect  R  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  with  his
mother. The grounds of appeal at [11] identified 7  errors  in  the  Judge's
assessment which include: the failure to properly apply the decision of  the
Upper Tribunal in Sanade [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) and  the  Respondent's  IDI
on Family Migration Appendix FM section 1.0b at 11.23 (where a  decision  to
refuse the application would require a parent or primary carer to return  to
a country outside the EU, the case must always  be  assessed  on  the  basis
that it would be unreasonable to expect a British  citizen  child  to  leave
the EU with that parent or primary carer.) Whilst  at  52.3(iii)  the  Judge
referred to the decision in Sanade she found that Mr O would "step  up"  and
care for R and he could exercise his residence in the  United  Kingdom.  The
difficulty with this finding is threefold:

    (i)    R was at that time 20 months old and it was  not  disputed  that
    the Appellant is his primary carer  albeit  he  has  contact  with  his
    father, the level of that contact was not accepted by the Judge. It  is
    clearly inappropriate to separate such a young child  from  his  mother
    and primary carer and this in itself amounts to  a  material  error  of
    law;

    (ii)   the Judge found at 50[4} that it would be in R's best  interests
    to remain in the United Kingdom with his mother  and  to  have  contact
    with and build a relationship with his father. This is clearly  correct
    in terms of a best interests consideration but  is  contradiction  with
    her subsequent finding at 52.3 that R remain and  the  Appellant  leave
    the United Kingdom;

    (iii)  as Ms Wilkins sets out in her grounds  of  appeal,  the  Judge's
    findings on Mr O's  potential  care  were  based  on  highly  selective
    quoting from his evidence and ignored the fact that in  order  to  care
    for R, he would have to divorce his wife, which he did not wish to  do;
    that R would not be able to come and live with him and his wife and two
    children as she would not  accept  that  and  it  was  clear  that  his
    evidence was at best equivocal, given that his wife  and  children  are
    entirely unaware of the existence of R. I consider that this submission
    is well founded when Mr O's evidence is considered in its totality.

14.   Whilst the Judge attempted to grapple  with  quite  a  complex  family
setup without much assistance  from  the  Respondent  who  at  [36]  of  the
refusal letter erroneously rejected the contention  that  R  is  British,  I
consider for the reasons set out in [13] above that she materially erred  in
law in finding that it would not be unreasonable for R to leave  the  United
Kingdom with his mother. I note that in respect of R's  British  nationality
that his birth certificate was examined by the Miss Knight,  the  Presenting
Officer at the  First  Tier  Tribunal  who  is  "forgery  trained"  and  she
confirmed it as genuine [11].

15.   I also consider  that  the  Judge  erred  materially  in  law  in  her
assessment of the Appellant's asylum claim and  that  it  is  arguable  that
this infected her assessment of the Article 8 claim, as  it  was  predicated
upon the basis that, if returned to Uganda with R the  Appellant  would  not
experience persecution. In respect of  Ground  1,  at  [44.1(i)]  the  Judge
accepted that the Appellant was a supported of A4C but failed  to  give  any
reasons as to why she found that the Appellant was  not  an  active  member,
given her express acceptance  that  the  Appellant's  accounts  are  largely
consistent and any inconsistencies were  minor;  at  [44.1.(ii)]  the  Judge
rejected the Appellant's accounts of having been arrested on  two  occasions
on the sole  basis  that  she  did  not  refer  to  this  in  her  screening
interview.  However,  I  accept  the  submission  by  Ms  Wilkins  that  the
Appellant misunderstood the question and thought she was being  asked  about
arrested in the United Kingdom. I note that question 5.1  of  the  screening
interview asks about arrests  "in  any  country"  and  this  is  potentially
confusing. Moreover, the purpose of the screening interview is to  obtain  a
basic rather than a detailed account of the asylum claim and  the  Appellant
gave details of her arrests during her asylum interview.

16.   In respect of Ground 2, the Judge rejected the Appellant's claim  that
she feared persecution on return to Uganda because of her sexuality  on  the
basis that  her  claimed  partner,  K,  did  not  attend  the  hearing;  the
Appellant got the age of  K's  daughter  wrong  and  because  the  Appellant
failed to mention  her  sexual  orientation  at  the  screening  and  asylum
interviews. I note that in the decision  of  the  CJEU  in  ABC  C/148/13  -
C/150/13 two of the Applicants, A & C, had made previous  asylum  claims  in
which they did not mention their sexual orientation at  all  [24]  and  [28]
refer. They did not seek to challenge the refusals of their first claim  but
made fresh  claims  based  on  their  sexual  orientation.  Thus  the  Judge
materially erred in finding against the Appellant on this basis in that  she
relied only on [71] of ABC and misconstrued the meaning of  this  aspect  of
the judgment as a whole, in that it is  not  simply  a  failure  to  declare
sexual orientation at the first occasion that is in issue  but  the  reasons
for this,  including  an  understandable  reticence  in  revealing  intimate
aspects of a person's private life [69]. In the context of Uganda, where  it
is uncontroversial that gay people  suffer  persecution,  it  is  explicable
that the Appellant might be reluctant to disclose her sexual orientation.  I
note that, in part, her activities with A4C  were  campaigning  against  the
government's stance on LGBT issues and she did refer to this on a number  of
occasions during her asylum interview.  In  evidence  she  stated  that  she
focused on fighting for LGBT  rights  as  she  could  not  express  her  own
sexuality through fear. The Appellant had a  relationship  with  a  girl  at
school, Mary, but this was not an intimate  relationship  [21]  however,  it
caused her to be suspended from school and she was sent to Bible  School  in
the United Kingdom in 2004 by her mother as a consequence and on her  return
to Uganda kept her sexuality hidden [22].

17.   Moreover, whilst K was unfortunately not present  at  the  hearing  to
give evidence, she provided a letter dated 25 March 2015  attesting  to  the
relationship and also a further undated letter as to the fact that  she  was
unable to attend due to the fact that it was half term and she is  a  single
parent with a 5 year old daughter and  also  financial  constraints  as  she
lives in Bristol (the hearing was  in  Birmingham).  I  accept  Ms  Wilkins'
submission that the Judge materially erred in law at  44.2.  in  failing  to
take  account  of  a  material  consideration  viz  the  evidence  of  Mr  O
confirming that the Appellant is in a same sex relationship with K and  that
he does not approve of this relationship. In the light of  the  evidence  in
support of the existence of this relationship I do  not  consider  that  the
fact that the Appellant wrongly stated that K's daughter was 7  rather  than
5 years of age materially undermines this aspect of her claim.

Conclusion

18.   For the reasons set out above I find that First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Jerromes erred materially in law in dismissing the appeal and that  decision
is set aside. In light of the  fact  that  the  Judge  did  not  accept  the
credibility of the Appellant's account there  will  need  to  be  a  further
hearing in order that the Appellant and any witnesses upon which she  wishes
to rely can give oral evidence. I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo  on
all issues by the First Tier Tribunal.

Directions

19.   I make the following directions:

19.1. The hearing will take place on the first available date with a 3  hour
listing.

19.2. The anonymity order should continue given  that  the  appeal  involves
both asylum and a child.

19.3. None of the findings of fact can be preserved. However,  I  note  that
Miss Knight, the Respondent's forgery  trained  Presenting  Officer  at  the
last hearing confirmed that R's birth certificate is genuine  and  thus  the
appeal should proceed on the basis that R is a British citizen.

19.4. Any supplementary decision  letter  on  the  part  of  the  Respondent
setting  out  her  position  regarding  R's  British  nationality  and   the
Appellant's sexual  orientation  to  be  served  on  the  Tribunal  and  the
Appellant's solicitors 21 days prior to the hearing.

19.5. Any further evidence is subject to the requirement to apply under  the
provisions of  paragraph  4(3)(d)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

19.6. Skeleton arguments to be submitted 5 working days before the hearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
5 November 2015
