
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03461/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 01 September 2015                 |On 24 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     BD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, counsel, instructed by Migrant Law
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Roopnarine-Davies who, in a decision dated 03 November 2014,
       but promulgated on 03 December 2014, dismissed the appellant's appeal
       against the Respondent's decision of 09 May 2014 to refuse her asylum
       claim and to remove her from the UK.



Background and summary basis of the Appellant's asylum claim

    2. The appellant is a national of Turkey, date of birth 15 October 1992.
       She entered the UK clandestinely on 15  December  2013  and  made  an
       asylum claim on 07 April  2014.  She  claimed  to  fear  the  Turkish
       authorities on the basis of her support for the  Peace  &  Democratic
       Party (BDP) and the authorities imputed belief that she  was  also  a
       supporter of the PKK. She claimed she  and  her  sisters  were  first
       arrested at their home by the Turkish authorities on 04 August  2013.
       She was detailed for 2 nights, kicked and beaten. She was arrested  a
       2nd time on 03 October 2013, along with about  50  others,  following
       her attendance at a BDP organised rally. She was detained for 2 days,
       raped and tortured. She was released and told to report weekly to the
       police station. She was arrested  when  she  went  to  report  on  04
       November 2013. She was suspected of  having  knowledge  of  an  armed
       clash that had occurred a couple of days previously. She was detained
       for 2 days, raped and tortured. The police took her fingerprints  and
       she was released because they did not have  enough  evidence  against
       her. Fearing further ill-treatment her father  arranged  for  her  to
       leave the country. The  appellant  maintained  that  the  authorities
       continued to manifest an adverse interest in her, that her father had
       been detained before and after her  departure,  and  that  an  arrest
       warrant had been issued against her.

The Reasons For Refusal Letter

    3. The Respondent accepted the Appellant and her family  were  low-level
       supporters of the BDP.  The  Respondent  did  not  however  find  the
       Appellant's account credible. The Respondent rejected  her  claim  to
       have been arrested and seriously ill-treated on three occasions,  and
       found that the Appellant was of any past or present adverse  interest
       to the authorities. As a result the Respondent was not satisfied  the
       Appellant faced any risk of ill-treatment on return.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and its decision

    4. Having witnessed the Appellant undergo examination-in-chief and cross-
       examination the Judge did not find her credible. The  Judge  rejected
       the Appellant's account of her three periods of arrest and detention.
       The Judge claimed the Appellant's account was internally inconsistent
       and inconsistent with the  background  information  before  her.  The
       Judge found it implausible that, if the Appellant was  so  passionate
       about the Kurdish cause, she  only  started  attending  meetings  and
       distributing leaflets when she was 20 years old. This was  contrasted
       with a cousin of the Appellant whose account was  found  credible  by
       another immigration Judge and who started his  political  involvement
       when he was 14 years old. The Judge found the Appellant offered scant
       details of her  father's  arrests,  nor  was  it  credible  that  the
       father's arrests would not  have  required  court  intervention.  The
       Judge found it incredible that the Appellant's mother would not  know
       where her husband was. The Judge did not find it  credible  that  the
       Appellant would  attend  a  BDP  rally  after  being  warned  by  the
       authorities to not participate in anti-state events.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    5. The Grounds contend that the Judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons
       for some of her adverse credibility findings,  such  as  her  finding
       that the Appellant's evidence in her interview was  rehearsed.  Issue
       is also taken with a number of the Judge's findings premised  on  the
       plausibility of aspects of the Appellant's account.  It  was  further
       submitted that the Judge took account of  information  that  was  not
       before the Tribunal.

The error of law hearing

    6. Mr Collins, representing the Appellant, relied on  and  repeated  the
       Grounds as drafted. The  thrust  of  his  challenge  related  to  the
       inadequacy of the Judge's reasoning. In addition to the points raised
       in the Grounds Mr Collins submitted, with respect to paragraph 17  of
       the determination, that there was no  basis  for  Judge's  conclusion
       that the family's relocation from the village in which they lived, as
       a result of frequent raids by the  Gendarme,  was  inconsistent  with
       their support for the BDP. The Judge's finding at paragraph  18  that
       the arrests  of  the  Appellant's  father  would,  according  to  the
       background material, have required court  intervention,  was  not  in
       fact supported by any such material.

    7. Mr Clarke, on behalf of the Respondent, submitted that  some  of  the
       points now raised by  Mr  Collins  had  not  been  specified  in  the
       Grounds. It was agreed that  further  written  submissions  would  be
       provided by both representatives following the close of the  hearing.
       Mr Clarke submitted that, despite the unfortunate  use  of  the  word
       'pithy' at  paragraph  12  of  the  determination  and  the  somewhat
       'cryptic' nature of  paragraph  19,  the  Judge  provided  voluminous
       reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account. Mr Clarke went through
       the paragraphs of the determination and invited me to find  that  the
       Judge was entitled to her findings for the reasons  given,  and  that
       those reasons were legally adequate.

    8. I reserved my decision, giving both parties an opportunity to provide
       further written submissions. In the event I received further  written
       submissions from Mr Collins. As Mr Collins relied on the COI  report,
       Mr Clarke indicated by email that he was content to make  no  further
       written submissions of his own.

Discussion

    9. The Judge stated, at paragraph  12,  that  some  of  the  Appellant's
       responses in her interview, particularly about Turkey  and  the  BDP,
       "... gave the impression that they had been rehearsed and  undermined
       the claim that she was only a 'house-girl' who left secondary  school
       after 3 years because of victimisation by Turkish school teachers and
       stayed at home to help her mother at home." The Judge has  failed  to
       explain what and why certain aspects  of  the  Appellant's  responses
       gave rise to that impression, and the Judge failed to  identify  what
       those responses were. The Judge then stated, also  in  paragraph  12,
       "The precise recall of dates and times of  the  arrest  coupled  with
       what in  substance  is  a  relatively  pithy  claim  underscored  the
       impression."  The  Judge  has  not  adequately  explained   why   the
       Appellant's ability to accurately recall dates of  arrest  undermined
       her account. In holding an adverse inference in  these  circumstances
       the Judge's reasoning has been deficient.

   10. At paragraph 15 the Judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  against  the
       Appellant because, although she was able to correctly answer  general
       questions about the BDP in her  asylum  interview,  she  'volunteered
       little' that showed more than a general knowledge of the party. Given
       that an asylum interview  is  very  much  a  reactive  exercise,  the
       applicant responding to specific questions put  by  the  interviewer,
       there is in practice little scope for one  to  volunteer  information
       over and above the specific question asked. In these circumstances it
       was inappropriate for the Judge to have held  against  the  Appellant
       the fact that she 'volunteered little'  when  questioned  during  her
       asylum interview.

   11. Also at paragraph 15 the noted that,  until  her  second  arrest  the
       Appellant claimed to have "... attended approximately 5-6 meetings at
       the BDP building in Gazianatep (approx. 54km away  from  her  village
       according to  information  on  the  Internet."  Although  it  is  not
       altogether clear it seems, given the context  in  which  it  appears,
       that the Judge may have regarded this information as detracting  from
       the  Appellant's  credibility.  There  was  however   no   downloaded
       information before the Judge relating to this distance, and Mr Clarke
       could not identify any evidence before the Judge that contained  this
       information. This suggests the Judge  engaged  in  her  own  research
       without informing the  parties  or  giving  them  an  opportunity  to
       comment on the accuracy or relevance of that research. It is a  trite
       proposition of law that a Judge should not conduct their own research
       without informing the parties and giving them an opportunity to  make
       any representations  (EG  (post-hearing  internet  research)  Nigeria
       [2008] UKAIT 00015). This constitutes an error of law. I additionally
       note that, at paragraph 24, the Judge refers to information  that  is
       'in the public domain' to the effect that the Turkish authorities had
       agreed to give military and other assistance to Kurds in their  fight
       against ISIS. The Judge has not however indicated the source  of  her
       information,  further  giving  the  impression  that  she  may   have
       conducted her own research or relied  on  information  that  was  not
       provided by the parties.

   12. Still at paragraph 15 the Judge appears  to  adopt  the  Respondent's
       position that the Appellant's claim to have been detained as a result
       of her ethnicity is inconsistent with her claim that the  authorities
       believed she was connected with  the  PKK.  The  Appellant's  account
       however  does  not  indicate  that  these  were  mutually   exclusive
       alternatives. It is  quite  possible  for  the  authorities  to  both
       believe, as a result of her and her  family's  activities,  that  the
       Appellant was associated in some way with the PKK, and that a further
       aggravating reason for the adverse interest in her  was  her  Kurdish
       ethnicity.

   13. In paragraph 17 the Judge concluded that the  earlier  relocation  by
       the Appellant's family from the village in which they used  to  live,
       as a result of frequent raids by the Gendarme, was inconsistent  with
       their  support  for  the  BDP  as  they  would  court  attention   by
       participating in BDP events. There is  however  a  clear  distinction
       between supporting a legal political party on the one  hand  and,  on
       the other, living in a small village that was  frequently  raided  by
       the Gendarme and where the inhabitants  were  frequently  accused  of
       helping the PKK. In these circumstances it is entirely understandable
       why a family who are BDP supporters would  wish  to  relocate.  I  am
       therefore satisfied that  there  was  no  sufficient  basis  for  the
       Judge's inconsistency finding.  I  additionally  note  that,  to  the
       extent that the Judge's conclusion may have impliedly  suggested  the
       family were not supporters of the BDP, this was inconsistent with the
       Respondent's  own  acceptance  in  the  Reasons  For  Refusal  Letter
       (paragraph 32) that the family were BDP supporters.

   14. At paragraph 18 the Judge was not satisfied that the alleged  arrests
       of  the  Appellant's  father  without  the  requirement   for   court
       intervention was not consistent with  the  background  evidence.  The
       Judge did not identify what particular background evidence she had in
       mind. The August 2010 COI report, at 8.18,  noted  that  the  Turkish
       government did not at times  observe  the  prohibition  on  arbitrary
       arrest and detention and that police routinely detained demonstrators
       for a few hours and several hundred members of  the  BDP  on  various
       occasions. In light of this background evidence, and in  the  absence
       of any particularised background  evidence  to  support  the  Judge's
       conclusion relating to the requirement for court intervention,  I  am
       not satisfied she was entitled to  her  conclusion  for  the  reasons
       proffered.

   15. At paragraph 19 the Judge claims it is 'simply not credible' that the
       Appellant's mother would not know her husband's whereabouts following
       his last release from custody given that he was planning  on  leaving
       the country. The Judge does not offer any explanation to support this
       finding, or for her subsequent assertion that there were 'substantial
       grounds for believing that he has left the country and will  seek  to
       claim asylum.'

   16. At paragraph 23 the Judge held against the Appellant her  failure  to
       request and obtain a copy of the arrest warrant issued  against  her,
       and the absence of evidence that warrants had been issued in  respect
       of her siblings. The COI report of August  2010  (the  most  recently
       issued), at 11.04 and 11.05, indicates the considerable difficulty in
       obtaining arrest warrants in Turkey.  The  Judge's  failure  to  take
       account of this directly relevant background material renders  unsafe
       this particular adverse credibility finding.

   17. Having carefully considered  the  determination  as  a  whole,  I  am
       satisfied, for the reasons  that  I  have  already  given,  that  the
       determination is unsafe and that it must be re-made.

   18. The appeal will be remitted for fresh consideration, all issues open,
       before a Judge other than Judge Roopnarine-Davies.



Notice of Decision and Directions

The First-tier Tribunal Judge did make a material error of law.

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant  to  section
12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  for  reconsideration,
to be decided afresh, all issues open.


[pic]    24 September 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
