
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03308/2013
                                                               AA/03351/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 30th October 2013                          |on 6th January 2014          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  A A M A M
                                  R A A A M
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants: Mr Draycott instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr M Hussain - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal  against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Judge
        Pooler promulgated on the 19th July 2013 in which he dismissed  the
        appeal of both appellants, a father and son born on the  1st  March
        1972 and 21st June 2001 respectively,  against  the  direction  for
        their removal to Jordan which  accompanied  the  refusal  of  their
        claims for asylum or any other form of international protection.



Discussion



     2. Mr Draycott relied upon all the grounds on which permission to
        appeal was sought.


     3. Ground A alleges the Judge erred in finding the claim of an ongoing
        risk arising from a dispute between the first appellant and his
        wife's family was not credible and in doing so failed to engage
        with the evidence of the country expert.


     4. The Judge clearly considered the evidence presented to him
        including the report of Ms Lazier of which there is specific
        mention in the determination [25, 26, 27, 29]. The fact the
        evidence was considered was in fact accepted by Mr Draycott before
        me. In SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155 the Court of Appeal held
        that the weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the
        judge provided it was clear the judge had considered the evidence
        with the degree of care required and had given adequate reasons for
        the findings made. I find the first of these criteria to be
        satisfied as it has not been demonstrated that Judge Pooler failed
        to consider the evidence with the degree of anxious scrutiny
        required in a case of this nature.  Mr Draycott submitted that the
        real issue was the legitimacy of the reasons given regarding the
        issue of future risk.


     5. Judge Pooler found the claim to be at risk on return not credible
        for the reasons set out in paragraphs 32 (a) to (f) of the
        determination. It is said these are not sustainable, which must be
        an assertion of perversity or irrationality as in themselves they
        are adequate, based in part upon the experts report and
        specifically the opinion set out in paragraph 7 of the grounds. A
        letter from the elders (A's bundle p17) is also relied upon.


     6. Judge Pooler found the expert report failed to provide an adequate
        explanation for why the appellants would be at real risk from his
        wife's relatives, yet his wife and daughter are said to be at no
        risk, when they have returned to Amman and the background evidence
        relating to honour killings suggest that in general the woman is at
        risk where the family honour has been impugned. It was found that
        the expert did not provide an adequate explanation for this.


     7. The risk is said to arise as the first appellant married his wife,
        both of whom are of Palestinian origin, in 2009 despite his request
        for permission to marry having been refused by her family and the
        unsuccessful intervention of the tribal elders to resolve the
        resulting dispute.


     8. The grounds quote from paragraph 3 (xvii) of Ms Lazier's report in
        which she  stated that marriage without parental consent is an
        'honour' issue for his wife's family and as the couple have gone
        ahead with the marriage without their blessing and consent is a
        slight on their 'honour': revenge becomes a permanent issue.  Ms
        Lazier goes on to state that the first appellant plausibly believes
        that if returned to Jordan he will face revenge killings from
        members of his wife's family, such as her brothers who still reside
        in Jordan, and that in some families the woman would also be at
        risk as recognised by the Home Office.


     9. In her conclusion Ms Lazier states that the first appellant could
        likely face internal family risk in Jordan on honour related issues
        and that it is unlikely the Jordanian police will intervene to
        protect him, as a Palestinian, from any threats made, such being
        perceived to be a family matter [A's bundle, p 13, para 6].


    10. It is also said the letter from the elders specifically states that
        "because of this act the family of Fadwa wants to kill AA and the
        blood of every male child to him"


    11. The reasoning in paragraph 32 (b) is arguably inadequate as
        although the thrust of the country material is that women are those
        at risk in relation to honour killing it does not specifically
        exclude males from being killed, and there is a possible
        explanation for why the first appellants wife has not been killed
        in the expert report. In Ms Lazier's report of the 30th May 2013
        she specifically states that whether a woman will be at risk is
        dependant upon the nature of her family rather than always being
        the case. Why this is said to be inadequate is not explained in the
        determination.


    12. The question for the Judge was, however, whether the alleged risk
        is objectively well founded. The Judge refers at paragraph 32 (c)
        to inconsistencies in the account relating to when the alleged
        threats were made and in 32 (d) to the fact the first appellant
        actually returned to Jordan in 2008 where he renewed his passport
        and between 7th July 2009 to 22nd September 2009 with his son after
        which he returned to the UK with both his children.  It was found
        not to be credible that the first appellant would have taken his
        son on a sightseeing trip to Jordan if he believed he and his son
        were at risk of being killed by his maternal relatives were he to
        be discovered.


    13. The Judge also found the first appellant to have been inconsistent
        with regard to the continuation of the threats claiming for example
        the threats were ongoing in his oral evidence, which is said to
        have been "vague", whereas in his interview at question 117 he
        claimed the last threat was made in 2001 [32 (e)].


    14. The letter from the elders was considered and in paragraph 32 (f)
        the Judge states:


          (f) The appellant relies on a letter received by e-mail and dated
   23 December 2011.            According to the appellant, it was written
   by one of the elders.  It referred to the              dispute between
   the families of the appellant and his wife which "began in the
   year 2000, and up to 2001 [sic]".  The tribal elders were said to have
   tried to                mediate but the wife's family refused to
   reconcile and the appellant had to move            around constantly.
   Two points arise.  First, the appellant provided no
   explanation when I gave him the opportunity to explain why a letter in
   these          terms had been writer in December 2001.  Secondly, despite
   the claimed                  involvement of the tribal elders in 2009 the
   letter only refers to an attempt to           mediate some eight years
   previously.


    15. Judge Pooler accepted there may have been a dispute in 2000 and
        2001 as the letter from the elders refers to that period and in
        interview the first appellant stated the last threat was in 2001.
        It was found however that such a threat was not sufficient to deter
        the appellant from returning to Jordan in 2008 or making the trip
        with both children in 2009.  The Judge was not satisfied on the
        evidence that the dispute continued beyond 2001 and was not such as
        to put the appellant or his son at real risk thereafter [33].


    16. The challenge to the decision, focusing as it does on the finding
        in paragraph 32 (b), fails to establish any arguable perversity or
        irrationality in the conclusion the appellants have failed to
        substantiate their cases to be entitled to be recognised as
        refugees or persons entitled to a grant of leave on Article 3
        grounds when the evidence is considered as a whole. The finding the
        claims have not been substantiated has not been shown to be tainted
        by material legal error and is a finding open to the Judge on the
        evidence. The challenge is in reality a weight challenge and
        argument that more weight should have been given to the opinion of
        the expert when weight is a matter for the Judge.


    17. Ground B alleges a procedural error such as to amount to a material
        error of law in refusing an adjournment application to enable the
        appellants' to make an application to renew their passports at the
        Jordanian Embassy in London. The Judge records at paragraph 13 of
        the determination that Mr Draycott made such an application. The
        Judge noted that on 5th June 2013 there had been a previous
        adjournment as a result of Ms Lazier mentioning differing types of
        Jordanian travel documents which could have been issued but that
        she was unable to specifically comment as she had not seen the one
        actually issued. The application made to the Judge was for a delay
        until after the expiry of the appellants passports to enable
        enquiries to be made of the Jordanian Embassy and for a further
        expert opinion. The application was refused for the following
        reasons:


          16. Having taken account of the Tribunal's overriding objective to
   handle                  proceedings as fairly, quickly and efficiently as
   possible I decided that it was not            appropriate to adjourn.  I
   took into account the fact that the final hearing had           already
   been postponed or adjourned twice in order to accommodate the
   provision of two expert reports. I considered that there was no adequate
   reason              why the expert had not been asked to report on this
   issue if it were to be relied             upon.  I also bore in mind that
   if one or both passports could not be renewed,              fresh
   circumstances would arise; these circumstances might result in the
     respondent's inability to remove the appellants to Jordan or they might
   give rise           to a fresh claim.  I considered that the reports
   before the Tribunal contained no              more than speculation with
   regard to the possibility that the passports might not               be
   renewed.


    18. The key principle to be applied by any judge considering an
        adjournment request is that of fairness. Judge Pooler clearly had
        this in mind and gave adequate reasons for refusing the
        application. Mr Draycott was asked why such an application of the
        nature he sought the adjournment for had not been made prior to the
        hearing before Judge Pooler but he provided no explanation. The
        application has been made since but the result not communicated as
        it is not relevant for the error of law stage of these proceedings.
        The Judge considered there had been ample opportunity to have dealt
        with this issue and no procedural error sufficient to amount to a
        legal error has been shown in the way in which the Judge exercised
        the discretionary powers conferred upon him in the way in which he
        did. The finding of an alternative remedy, if the application to
        renew was unsuccessful, is factually correct.


    19. Ground C, relating to Article 8 ECHR/section 55, alleges error in
        the Judge failing to undertake an individualised assessment of the
        needs of the child (the second appellant).


    20. Before commenting generally upon this issue I will deal with the
        assertion in paragraph 22 of the grounds that the primary
        information gathering obligation in respect of section 55 is upon
        the respondent, particular in light of the Judge's findings at
        paragraph 45 that there was no evidence as to the availability of
        medical treatment in Jordan that may in the future be offered in
        the United Kingdom.  This submission appears to be based upon the
        comments of Judge Thornton QC in R (on the application of
        Tinizaray) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWHC
        1850 (Admin) "that decision-makers could not solely rely on
        information volunteered by a parent, particularly if that
        information was incomplete. Instead, the decision-maker had a duty
        to seek further information. That included interviews of the
        applicant and separate interviews of the child as well as reports
        from local authority social services, CAFCASS and other child
        welfare agencies. ".  However, the above has no legal standing as
        an authoritative statement especially following SS (Nigeria) v SSHD
        [2013] EWCA Civ 550 in which Mr Justice Mann said at paragraph 62:
        "in the vast majority of cases the tribunal would expect the
        relevant interests of the child to be drawn to the attention of the
        decision maker by the individual concerned" and the judgment of
        Laws J who said "I would not with respect accept that the decision
        in Tinizaray should be regarded as establishing anything in the
        nature of a general principle".


    21. The burden is upon the appellants to adduce the evidence to prove
        that what they are alleging is the case. There is no obligation
        upon the Tribunal in a case such as this to do more. Also in SS
        (Nigeria) Mr Justice Mann said "...the circumstances in which the
        Tribunal will require further inquiries to be made, or evidence to
        be obtained, (about the children's best interests) are likely to be
        extremely rare. In the vast majority of cases the Tribunal will
        expect the relevant interests of the child to be drawn to the
        attention of the decision-maker by the individual concerned. The
        decision-maker would then make such additional inquiries as might
        appear to him or her to be appropriate. The scope for the Tribunal
        to require, much less indulge in, further inquiries of its own
        seems to me to be extremely limited, almost to the extent that I
        find it hard to imagine when, or how, it could do so".


    22. In Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward
        appeals)[2013] UKUT 197(IAC) (Blake J) the Tribunal held that
        although in some cases this may require a judge to explore whether
        the duty requires further information to be obtained or inquiry to
        be made, the judge primarily acts on the evidence in the case.
        Where that evidence gives no hint of a suggestion that the welfare
        of the child is threatened by the immigration decision in question,
        or that the child's best interests are undermined thereby, there is
        no basis for any further judicial exploration or reasoned decision
        on the matter.


    23. The Judge was clearly aware of the need to treat the needs of the
        child as a paramount consideration. It is noted in paragraph 47
        that there was no expert evidence regarding the needs of the child
        and that the child's mother and sister have returned to Jordan and
        that the best interests of the child is to be brought up by family
        members. The fact the best interests are met by being brought up by
        both parents is in accordance with established child care practise
        and the Tribunal case law. In paragraph 48 the Judge concluded;


          48. Accordingly the best interest of the son will be met by his
   remaining with his           father whether or not his father is removed
   to Jordan. The best interests of the          child are not a significant
   factor pointing one way or the other to the ultimate            decision
   on proportionality.  I take account of the length of time which the
     appellants have spent in the UK and that for most of that time they had
   leave.  I           have to recognise however that the appellants came to
   the UK on a temporary            basis and can have no expectation that
   they should have been allowed to remain            indefinitely: see MM
   (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8; "private life") Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT
   00037.  Taking into account all of the factors which I have identified, I
   am                  satisfied that the decision is proportionate and that
   the Article 8 appeal must fail.


    24. On the basis of the evidence made available at the date of the
        hearing this is a sustainable decision. The Judge considered the
        specific facts, including the medical needs of the child, and noted
        in paragraph 46 that "the Tribunal can only make findings on the
        basis of the evidence and the appellants have failed to adduce
        evidence of the significance of the treatment received by or
        offered to the son".  No legal error is proved in relation to the
        assessment of the best interests of the child.  On the available
        evidence the finding the decision is proportionate and that there
        will be no breach of any ECHR rights if the appellants are returned
        is within the range of findings the Judge was entitled to make on
        the evidence. No perversity or irrationally is proved.


    25. Finally I have seen within the file two letters dated 18th and 19th
        July 2013 providing additional evidence relating to matters that
        arose during the hearing. One can only assume that Mr Draycott
        reported back to those instructing him after the hearing and such
        evidence was obtained in an attempt to bolster the case. The
        determination is dated 18th July 2013 which is the date Judge
        Pooler approved it and would have sent it for promulgation. He did
        so unaware of the additional evidence as the letter dated 18th July
        2013 has a fax transmission time of 23:17 hours and a date received
        stamp of 19th July 2013 at the First-tier Tribunal office in Stoke.
        The letter dated 19th July 2013 was sent at both 16:43 and 18:05
        hours, after the determination was formally promulgated, which is
        an administrative task in which Judge Pooler is not involved.


    26. In SD (treatment of post-hearing evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT
        00037  the Tribunal said that, in the rare case where an
        immigration judge, prior to the promulgation of a determination,
        receives a submission of late evidence, then consideration must
        first be given to the principles in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1WLR
        1489. Under those, a tribunal should not normally admit fresh
        evidence unless it could not have been previously obtained with due
        diligence for use at the trial, would probably have had an
        important influence on the result and was apparently credible. If,
        applying that test, the judge was satisfied there was a risk of
        serious injustice because of something which had gone wrong at the
        hearing or this was evidence that had been overlooked, then it was
        likely to be material. In those circumstances, it will be necessary
        either to reconvene the hearing or to obtain the written
        submissions of the other side in relation to the matters included
        in the late submission.


    27. Not only was some of the additional information received post
        promulgation, no explanation has been provided for why it could not
        have been obtained earlier or it established why the evidence
        should be admitted. The Ladd v Marshall test is not satisfied.

Decision

    28. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    29. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20th December 2013
