
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03667/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 24 June 2015                          |             On 1 July 2015         |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     S T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
appellant or members of his family. This direction applies to, amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give
rise to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lankan and his date  of  birth  is  4
    July 1988.

2.   The appellant made an application to vary his leave to  remain  in  the
    UK as an asylum seeker having been granted limited leave to enter on 17
    May 2012.   This was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of
    27 March 2013.  He appealed against this decision  and  is  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  J  Bennett,  in  a
    determination dated 17 January 2014,  following  a  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross on 4 December 2013.

3.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain on 12 March 2015.  Thus the matter came before me.

4.   The appellant's evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  in
    March 2007 he joined the LTTE and he completed training with  them.  He
    transported ammunition, for the LTTE, from a supply point to the battle
    front.  The appellant and his family were taken to an  IDP  camp  where
    they were held for eight months.  The appellant made an application  to
    study in the UK and this was successful and he was granted a visa on  4
    October 2010.  He came to the UK on 14 October 2010 and made a  further
    application for an extension which was granted until  9  January  2014.
    He returned to Sri Lanka on 23 January  2013  in  order  to  visit  his
    mother who had a motorbike accident.  He was arrested in Sri  Lanka  on
    26 January 2013 and he was detained for ten days during which  time  he
    was ill-treated.  His parents paid a bribe which  secured  his  release
    and he left Sri Lanka on 7 February 2013 with the help of an agent.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant and Mr  M  K.
    There was a medical report relating to scarring on the appellant's body
    prepared by Dr A I Martin.  In addition there was a medical certificate
    relating to the appellant's mother  and  photographs  relating  to  sur
    place activities.



6.   Mr Paramjorthy relied on the grounds seeking leave  to  appeal  and  he
    did not make any oral submissions.

Conclusions

7.   It is maintained in the grounds that the Judge erred in relation to  Mr
    M K's evidence in finding that it could only substantiate  the  outline
    of the appellant's evidence about his involvement in the LTTE.  Mr M  K
    made a witness statement which is  at  pages  2-5  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  His evidence was that he lived next door to the  appellant  in
    Kilinochchi and that the appellant was recruited by  the  LTTE  at  the
    beginning of 2007.  He maintained that he saw the appellant on a number
    of occasions with LTTE members and LTTE police members.  He  maintained
    that the first time he met him the appellant told him that he had  been
    given basic military training by the LTTE and that they had sent him to
    the LTTE's police unit and he was doing work behind  the  battlefronts.
    He also told him that he was based in the Elephant Pass area.   He  did
    not see the appellant after the beginning of 2009 up until he  met  him
    in the UK at a temple in Ealing on 10 May 2013.

8.   The Judge did not dismiss the appellant's appeal on the basis  that  he
    had had no involvement with the LTTE.  It is what the appellant did for
    the LTTE and that he was subsequently arrested as  a  result  of  these
    activities that that the Judge did not accept. The Judge  was  entitled
    to conclude that Mr M K's evidence did not corroborate the  appellant's
    evidence in this respect. In any event, what weight to attach  to  this
    evidence was a matter for the Judge.

9.   It is maintained in the grounds that the Judge's  finding  relating  to
    internment is unsustainable.  It  is  maintained  that  the  background
    evidence does not demonstrate that the appellant's account of not being
    identified supports the proposition that he was not interned.  There is
    no merit in this ground of appeal.  What the Judge found  is  that  the
    appellant's account of internment was not credible.  He did not find it
    credible that no effort would have been  made  in  order  to  determine
    whether or not the appellant had been involved with the LTTE and he did
    not find it credible that the appellant and his parents would not  have
    been screened.  These findings were entirely open to the Judge  on  the
    evidence before him.  There is no background information adduced by the
    appellant that would lead me to conclude otherwise.

10.  It is maintained in the grounds that  the  Judge  erred  in  concluding
    that it was not credible that the appellant had left Sri Lanka  on  his
    own passport because as the Upper Tribunal noted in GJ and Others (Post-
    civil war: returnees) CG [2013] UKUT 00319, there is pervasive  bribery
    and corruption at the airport in Sri Lanka.  There is no merit in  this
    ground because it was fully acknowledged by  the  Judge  at  [56]  that
    bribery and corruption is widespread and at [58] the  Judge  took  into
    account that an ability to leave Sri Lanka without  difficulty  is  not
    probative of a lack of interest because of the prevalence  of  bribery.
    However, in my judgement, the Judge considered  this  evidence  in  the
    round and was entitled to draw adverse inferences from his evidence  of
    having  left  Sri  Lanka  undetected  whilst  he  was  wanted  by   the
    authorities having escaped by way of a bribe.

11.  The grounds maintain that there is a direct contradiction  between  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal and the evidence of  Mr  Martin  in
    relation to the causation of scarring.  The  case  of  AV  (Scarring  -
    medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 is relied upon.  However, the grounds
    do not fully reflect the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12.  The Judge properly considered the medical evidence in  the  round  (see
    [62]). He accepted that the appellant had recent scarring. He  did  not
    make a finding that the scars were self-inflicted as suggested  in  the
    grounds.  At [61] he stated that it was not for him to speculate  about
    possible explanations for the scarring.   However,  he  considered  the
    appellant's "overall  credibility"  and  he  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence in relation to the scarring finding (at [61]) that there  were
    "serious questions about his overall credibility." At  [60]  the  Judge
    put forward possible alternatives, but he does not  go  on  to  make  a
    finding as to how the scarring was caused.  However, having  considered
    the evidence in the round he did not find the appellant's account to be
    credible.     This finding must be viewed in the context of the adverse
    credibility findings generally.

13.  The grounds seeking permission argue that the Judge did not  take  into
    consideration the appellant's sur place  activities.   The  appellant's
    evidence relating to these activities was scant and, in any  event,  it
    was not a matter referred to in the skeleton argument or by Counsel who
    represented the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Judge
    adequately dealt with the issue at [63].  The appellant's case was that
    he would be at risk on return as a result of his  past  activities  and
    the Judge rejected this evidence.  There was some evidence that he  was
    involved in sur place activities, but his case  was  not  presented  on
    this basis. In any  event,  it  is  unarguable  that  the  evidence  in
    relation to sur place activities, if accepted, would put the  appellant
    into a risk category as identified in GJ and Others

14.  There are other grounds in  the  grounds  seeking  permission,  but  Mr
    Paramajorthy conceded that whether there is any merit in them  depended
    on a finding that there is an error in relation to  the  above  grounds
    that I have dealt with.  It follows, in the  light  of  my  conclusions
    above, the remaining grounds fall away.

15.      The Judge found the appellant to  be  lacking  in  credibility  for
    many reasons which are not touched upon in the grounds seeking leave to
    appeal.  The most significant inconsistency found by the Judge  was  in
    the appellant's own evidence in relation to  his  activities  with  the
    LTTE (see [39] and [40]).  Indeed, Counsel at the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, accepted that there were "difficulties" with  this
    part of  the  appellant's  evidence.   There  are  further  significant
    inconsistencies not touched upon in the grounds seeking leave to appeal
    in relation to the appellant's parents and father (see [48], [49], [50]
    and [52] of the determination). In addition, the Judge did  not  accept
    the appellant's reason for returning to Sri Lanka in January 2013.   He
    placed no weight on the documentary evidence produced by  him.  He  did
    not accept the appellant's evidence of  the  circumstances  surrounding
    his release from custody (see [53]). These findings are not  challenged
    in the grounds seeking leave to appeal.

16.  There is no error of law disclosed  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    decision of the Judge is lawful and sustainable  and  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 29 June 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

