
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03574/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 October 2014 and 29 January 2015      |On 10th March 2015              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     On 1 October 2014, Mr S Kandola, and on 29 January
                    2015,
     Ms J Isherwood, both of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    On both occasions, Ms A Pease of Counsel instructed
                    by
     C K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Applicant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Applicant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, AG to whom  I  shall  refer  as  the  Applicant,  is  a
    national of Guinea born on 3 January 1995.  She has two sons both  born
    in the United Kingdom in October 2012 and August 2014.

 2. On 12 March 2012 she arrived in the United Kingdom and on the same  day
    claimed international surrogate protection at the  Respondent's  office
    in Croydon because on  return  to  Guinea  she  feared  persecution  on
    account of the fact she  had  fled  to  avoid  a  forced  marriage  and
    subsequently had given birth to a child out of wedlock.

 3. Her account is that in December 2011 her father who is an imam  of  her
    home village told her she was to marry an older man.  She  refused  and
    her father assaulted her and then left her isolated in a room  at  home
    for three days without food or bathroom facilities.  He then  took  her
    to meet the man he proposed she should marry.  That night she was  able
    to escape to her boyfriend's house with whom she had sexual intercourse
    for the first time and as a result of which she fell pregnant.  He gave
    her money to travel to her maternal uncle in Conakry which she left  by
    air on 11 March 2012, arriving via Morocco in the United Kingdom on the
    next day: see para.11 of her 27 May 2014 statement.

The Decision and Appeal

 4. On 15 May 2014 the Appellant (the SSHD) refused the  Applicant's  claim
    and proposed to make directions for her removal to Guinea.  The reasons
    are as contained in the annex to a letter of 15 May 2014  (the  reasons
    letter).  The SSHD noted the Applicant had been fingerprinted in Calais
    on 30 October under a false name which she had admitted and claimed her
    date of birth was 31 January 1992 and she was a  French  citizen.   The
    Respondent also noted the Applicant's first child had been born in  the
    United Kingdom and at the time she was pregnant about which she and her
    partner were happy.  The SSHD set out at  some  length  the  background
    evidence about forced  marriage  in  Guinea  but  failed  to  make  any
    credibility  finding,  positive  or  adverse,  about  the   Applicant's
    account. She concluded her return to Guinea would not  put  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of its obligations under Section 55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 or the Refugee Convention  or  the
    European Convention.

 5. On 2 June 2014 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under  Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  Omitting the formal and generic grounds, the grounds assert
    the Applicant's uncle does not know she has given birth  to  her  first
    child out of wedlock or that she is pregnant  with  her  second  child,
    that on return she will be at risk of ill-treatment which  will  engage
    the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention and that such ill-treatment will also amount to  persecution
    so as to engage a Refugee Convention reason or such as to  entitle  her
    to humanitarian protection under the Qualifying Directive.  The grounds
    also assert a claim that her right to a private and family life in  the
    United Kingdom protected by Article 8 would  be  breached  if  she  was
    forced to return to Guinea and she would be deprived of her liberty  in
    breach of Article 5.  The Statement of Additional Grounds asserts  that
    on return her father would find her.  She could not [be]  supported  by
    her uncle as that would put him at risk and she would become the victim
    of an honour killing, having brought shame on her family and the Muslim
    community.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 6. By a determination sent by way of service on 15 July 2014 Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Chamberlain  allowed  the  Applicant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds and on human rights grounds.

 7. The SSHD sought permission to appeal and on 29 July 2014 Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Nicholson granted permission to appeal  because  he
    found it arguable the Judge's finding that the Applicant  was  credible
    was perverse in the light of a chronology  which  was  well  evidenced.
    Her account of the circumstances which gave rise  to  her  flight  from
    Guinea commenced in December 2011 but she  had  been  fingerprinted  in
    France in October 2011.

The Upper Tribunal Error of Law Hearing

 8. The Applicant was present with a key worker.  Ms Pease stated  she  had
    some English and the hearing could proceed without the presence  of  an
    interpreter.  I explained the  purpose  of  and  the  procedure  to  be
    adopted in the hearing and the Applicant confirmed she understood.   Ms
    Pease acknowledged there had been no response under Procedure  Rule  24
    on behalf of the Applicant but she referred to the written  submissions
    which she handed up at the start of the hearing.

 9. Mr Kandola relied on the  grounds  for  appeal  which  were  succinctly
    summarised in the grant of permission to appeal.  The Judge had  failed
    to resolve  the  conflicts  and  the  serious  inconsistencies  in  the
    Applicant's evidence and to give adequate  reasons  for  finding  that,
    notwithstanding these inconsistencies, she was credible.   He  referred
    to paragraphs 11 and 14 of the determination.  The finding at paragraph
    30 that the Applicant was in France in October 2011, which was  a  date
    before the start of the events in Guinea which  the  Applicant  claimed
    had caused her to flee, undermined  the  core  of  her  claim  and  her
    credibility.  In the  following  paragraph  the  Judge  had  found  the
    inconsistencies in  her  accounts  did  not  irretrievably  damage  her
    credibility.  It was unsafe for the Judge to proceed to make a positive
    credibility finding in the face of such a conflict  of  evidence.   The
    Judge had found the core of the Applicant's account to be credible  but
    had not attempted to address the inconsistencies in that account.

10. The determination contained an error of law and  should  be  set  aside
    other than the finding that the Applicant  had  been  fingerprinted  in
    France  in  October  2011.   The  Applicant  had  been  shown  to  have
    fabricated her evidence and there was only one possible  outcome,  that
    her claim for international surrogate protection should be dismissed.

11. For the Applicant, Ms Pease relied on her written  submissions.   These
    noted the Judge had found that whether or not the Applicant had been in
    France was irrelevant to the core of her claim, namely that she  feared
    her father because she had refused to accept a forced marriage and  had
    given birth to a child  out  of  wedlock.   The  Judge  had  heard  the
    evidence and found the Applicant credible and was  entitled  to  accept
    the Applicant's account overall despite the issue of the date on  which
    she had been fingerprinted in France.

12. The  Judge  had  gone  on  to  consider  at  paragraph  43  the  likely
    consequences for the Applicant and her child on return to Guinea.   The
    Judge found at paragraph 44 that the Applicant  had  refused  to  enter
    into a forced marriage and as a result was beaten and imprisoned  in  a
    room for three days and that she subsequently escaped.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to make these findings and whether the Applicant was in France
    in October 2011 was not material.  Accordingly there was  no  error  of
    law in his determination.

13. Ms Pease went on to submit that  the  Judge  knew  of  the  fingerprint
    evidence and had taken it into account and found it to  be  irrelevant.
    The claim rested on the background evidence about  forced  marriage  in
    Guinea and the treatment of women with children born  out  of  wedlock.
    He was entitled to reach his conclusions and consider  that  the  claim
    overall was true.  He had addressed the fingerprint  evidence  and  its
    timing at paragraph 31 of his determination and gone  on  to  find  the
    core of her account to be credible and corroborated.

14. If an error of law were to be  found  in  the  determination  than  the
    appeal would need to be re-heard in full.

15. Mr Kandola responded that the  Applicant  knew  about  the  fingerprint
    evidence because it was dealt with in the SSHD's  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter.  Ms  Pease  pointed  out  that  the  evidence  to  support  the
    assertions about the fingerprinting in France was  not  served  by  the
    SSHD until the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law Consideration

16. I noted that the Applicant's account of what had happened in Guinea was
    clearly problematical and that there had been no challenge to the  fact
    of and date when the  Applicant  had  had  her  fingerprints  taken  in
    France.  The Judge was bound to address directly the credibility of the
    Applicant's refugee claim and its basis.  He had failed to focus on the
    timeline of her account and yet made  a  general  positive  credibility
    finding.  He had failed to distinguish credibility findings in relation
    to the Applicant's account of events in Guinea and the undisputed  fact
    that she had a child and was pregnant with her second.  I commented  it
    was not impossible to find an account false  but  nevertheless  that  a
    person was still entitled to be recognised as a  refugee  but  in  such
    circumstances any Judge would need fully and squarely to  address  this
    issue.  In this instance full consideration was  required  if  only  to
    enable the SSHD, as the "losing party", to understand why the Judge had
    decided the Applicant was entitled to be recognised as a refugee.

17. The Applicant's account of events which happened in Guinea appeared  to
    be a fabrication because even before the claimed events  she  had  been
    fingerprinted in France and so could not have been  in  Guinea  at  any
    relevant time.  The Judge therefore needed to explain why  he  accepted
    her account that she had been threatened with the cultural  institution
    of "forced marriage" and there are many  types  of  marriage  which  in
    Western liberal society are described as  "forced"  but  are  not,  for
    instance arranged marriages where the parties willingly enter into  the
    marriage.  Given that the Applicant's account of what she said happened
    in Guinea was a complete fabrication, it was an error of law to find on
    the basis of the background evidence that the  Applicant  would  be  at
    risk of forced marriage and because of her child or children  born  out
    of wedlock without any reference to her particular circumstances.   The
    consequence is to suggest that every unmarried young woman in Guinea is
    at risk of forced marriage and that every single mother is at  risk  of
    persecution.  The background evidence referred to by the Judge did  not
    support such a conclusion.

18. The Applicant's position since the hearing before the Judge had changed
    in that she had now given birth to her second child.   I  was  informed
    the birth was sudden and quick and took place at home and  that  mother
    and baby were now fine.

19. Ms Pease pointed out the Applicant had claimed asylum but had not  been
    interviewed  by  the  SSHD.   It  was  acknowledged  there   had   been
    difficulties in arranging this interview and also interpreter problems.
     Mr Kandola went to take instructions whether the SSHD would be  making
    further efforts to interview the Applicant and returned to  confirm  it
    was not intended to interview the Applicant in view of the difficulties
    previously experienced.

20. I gave directions that the remitted appeal was to be heard before me at
    Field House in November and that a Susu interpreter would be  required.
    I noted the Applicant claimed she had had difficulties with a  previous
    Susu interpreter and the interpreter who had attended  the  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal was acceptable.  Mr Kandola confirmed  for  the
    SSHD that there would be no objection to  the  same  interpreter  being
    used.  I remarked  that  the  Applicant  should  consider  whether  any
    additional background evidence will need to be  submitted,  bearing  in
    mind there was very little background evidence before the Judge.

The Resumed Substantive Hearing

21. Following the hearing on 1 October 2014, I issued directions  that  the
    Applicant was to file a further statement  addressing  the  credibility
    issues raised by the SSHD in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  and  those
    canvassed in the First-tier Tribunal's determination,  giving  personal
    details with supporting documentation of her second child's father, his
    immigration status, his current circumstances and  involvement  in  his
    child's life, and to supply details with  supporting  documentation  of
    her current circumstances and those of her first child, with details of
    any medical conditions either child may have.  Further,  the  Applicant
    was to file an expert country report from Professor Lawrence Junior and
    an expert fingerprint report addressing the SSHD's  evidence  that  the
    Applicant had been fingerprinted in France.  Such documents were to  be
    filed not less than five working days before the resumed hearing on  29
    January.

22. In the event, the Applicant filed no additional material other than  to
    produce two photographs of a man whom she  stated  to  be  her  father.
    These were produced in the course of the resumed hearing.  There was no
    explanation for the absence of any of the other documentation  referred
    to in the directions.

23. The SSHD filed a witness  statement  by  a  Higher  Scientific  Officer
    signed on 22  December  2014  to  confirm  that  he  had  compared  the
    fingerprints held on file for the Applicant taken on 12 March  2012  at
    Croydon and for an individual bearing  a  different  surname  taken  at
    Calais on 30 October 2011 and that he had "found such a number of ridge
    characteristics in agreement to leave me in no  doubt  that  they  were
    both made by the same person".  The SSHD  also  filed  a  copy  of  its
    guidance on applications for leave to remain on account  of  the  Ebola
    outbreak in West Africa including a statement that  returns  to  Guinea
    have not been suspended.  It included a  comment  at  paragraph  1.1.14
    made by the World Health Organisation in  an  assessment  of  September
    2014 that:-

         The risk of a traveller becoming infected with Ebola virus during a
         visit to the affected areas and developing disease after  returning
         is extremely low, even if the visit included travel to areas  where
         primary cases have been reported.  ...   The  risk  for  travellers
         visiting family and friends in affected  areas  is  similarly  low,
         unless the traveller has direct physical contact  with  a  sick  or
         dead person or animal infected with Ebola virus.  ...

Adjournment Requests

24. On 22 January 2015 the Applicant's solicitors requested an  adjournment
    because Professor Lawrence had not been able to provide  a  report  but
    that the solicitors had  received  an  expert  fingerprint  report  and
    statement by the father of the Applicant's second child.  It  is  noted
    from the  copy  email  submitted  by  the  solicitors  to  support  the
    adjournment application that they had not contacted Professor  Lawrence
    until some three weeks after  the  directions  had  been  issued.   The
    adjournment application was refused by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor
    because  the  application  had  failed  to  identify   when   Professor
    Lawrence's report would be available.

25. On 27 January the SSHD wrote to the Upper Tribunal stating that she was
    aware of the Applicant's  request  for  an  adjournment  and  that  the
    Applicant's solicitors  were  only  then  serving  their  bundle.   She
    required time to consider the bundle.   This  request  was  refused  by
    Upper Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  and  after  the  opening  formalities  Ms
    Isherwood requested, and was given, time to finish reading the file.

The Standard and Burden of Proof

26. The standard and burden of  proof  in  relation  to  claims  under  the
    Refugee Convention, for humanitarian protection under the Qualification
    Directive and under  the  European  Convention  are  for  all  material
    purposes one and the same; that is the Applicant must show  that  there
    are substantial grounds for believing that if returned to  her  country
    of origin she would be persecuted for a Refugee Convention reason or if
    removed from the United Kingdom will be subjected  to  treatment  which
    for the purposes of humanitarian protection  as  defined  by  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules will amount to serious harm  or  will  be
    subjected to treatment which will violate her rights under the European
    Convention.  This is  known  as  the  lower  standard  of  proof.   The
    effective date for assessment of the evidence in support of each  claim
    is the date of the hearing.  In the case of a free-standing claim  that
    Article 8 of the European Convention is engaged based on  circumstances
    arising in the United Kingdom, the  standard  of  proof  is  the  civil
    standard; that is on the balance of probabilities.  The burden of proof
    remains on the Applicant.

Documentary evidence

27. There was an Applicant's bundle filed on 27 January 2015 which included
    a statement signed by the Applicant on 22 January  2015  and  Professor
    Lawrence's report dated 27 January 2015 (the expert report) as well as
    copies of the short birth certificate for the Applicant's  elder  child
    and the long birth certificate for her second child and  correspondence
    from the National Health Service relating to the younger child's crypto
    orchidism.  In addition, there was a very brief statement of 19 January
    2015 from the second child's  father  and  evidence  that  he  had  had
    discretionary leave to  remain  which  had  expired  on  21  June  2010
    together with a copy of the determination of  Immigration  Judge  Afako
    promulgated in May  2011  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  SSHD's
    refusal to grant him further leave on asylum and human rights  grounds.
    The Tribunal records show there was no application  for  permission  to
    appeal and his appeal rights are now long exhausted.

The Resumed Hearing

28. At the start Ms Isherwood for the SSHD said that an  expert  instructed
    for  the  Applicant  had  come  to  the  Home  Office  to  inspect  the
    fingerprint evidence but no report had been served.  Ms Pease  for  the
    Applicant  did  not  challenge  this  and  re-iterated  there  was   no
    fingerprint report to support the Applicant's claim never to have  been
    in France.  I noted that a copy of the  SSHD's  expert  report  on  the
    fingerprint evidence was in the Tribunal file  and  the  Applicant  had
    been served with a copy.

29. I noted there was no medical  evidence  for  the  Applicant  about  the
    medical conditions of the Applicant's two children other than  hospital
    appointment letters.  The older one is said  to  suffer  from  problems
    with his feet and the younger one has unilateral crypto  orchidism.   I
    confirmed to the parties  that  I  had  checked  in  the  Merck  Manual
    (Professional Edition) on-line what the symptoms and  signs,  diagnosis
    and treatments for crypto orchidism are.

30. Ms Pease stated that the Applicant's partner was not present because he
    was looking after the children since the family was moving on  the  day
    of the hearing to new accommodation.

31.  Ms  Isherwood  requested  additional  time  to  finish   reading   the
    Applicant's bundle which had been filed on 27 January  2015  and  which
    she had not previously seen. The hearing resumed and the Applicant gave
    oral testimony.

32. The Applicant confirmed she was aware of the contents of her statements
    of 11 July 2012, 19 February, 27 May and 11 June 2014, and  22  January
    2015.  They were all true to the best  of  her  knowledge  and  belief.
    There  were  no  other  questions  put  to  the  Applicant  by  way  of
    examination-in-chief.

33. In cross-examination the Applicant said she had now completed a  course
    in English and numeracy and wanted to learn how to look after  children
    in a nursery.

34. She had not known she was pregnant with her first child until after she
    had arrived in the United Kingdom.  She had felt unwell  and  had  been
    taken to hospital while detained by the SSHD: see hearing  replies  15-
    20.  However, at hearing reply 22 she said that on arrival she was told
    she was only three months pregnant.

35. Her partner's immigration status in the United Kingdom  was  uncertain.
    He had been given a year's discretionary leave which had expired on  21
    June 2010.  He had subsequently appealed  against  refusal  of  further
    leave on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.   That  appeal  had  been
    dismissed at the end of April 2011: see pages L2-8 of  the  Applicant's
    bundle of 27 January 2015.  Ms Pease accepted the partner had no extant
    leave, even under Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

36. The Applicant stated she did not live with her partner who  is  also  a
    citizen of Guinea.  They could not return  to  Guinea  because  of  her
    children: see hearing replies 27-29.

37. The Applicant stated her last contact with her family had been with her
    mother in October 2014 by telephone.  She did not  have  the  telephone
    number of her uncle who had arranged her travel to the  United  Kingdom
    and in any event he had now returned  to  the  family's  home  village,
    according to the Applicant's mother: see hearing replies 30-36.

38. The Applicant stated she had been in education until the age of 17  and
    could write a little and read.  The reason why she could not return  to
    Guinea was because of her father and the fact that she had now had  two
    children out of wedlock: see hearing replies 144 and 149.

39. At paragraphs 3-7 of her  statement  of  26  June  2014  the  Applicant
    described how her father forced her to enter into  a  marriage  with  a
    much older man.  Her father was said to be the village imam and a  much
    respected figure: see her statement of 11 June 2014 and hearing replies
    135-141.  The Applicant said her  father  starved  and  beat  her  into
    submission: see paras.5-6 of her statement of 26 June 2014 and  hearing
    replies 60-68.  The Applicant said that her marriage took place  simply
    by her being sent to the  intended  husband's  house  and  without  any
    religious ceremony: see hearing replies 45-47.  She was  asked  why  if
    her father was an imam she had  been  given  in  marriage  without  any
    religious ceremony or nikah and responded that her  father  could  give
    her to any man. At hearing reply 150 the Applicant insisted she had not
    been married to the older man to whom she was  handed  by  her  father.
    There was no explanation why if her father was an imam he  would  marry
    her off in this particular manner without any religious  ceremonies  or
    contract and there was no explanation to reconcile this reply with  her
    earlier replies and the expert evidence of Professor  Lawrence  Junior.
    she did not know what the Sharia law is and said  Mecca  was  important
    for Muslims because those who are well-off travel to Mecca.  Medina was
    important for Muslims because many visit there: see hearing replies 156-
    159

40. She said her boyfriend in her village to whom she  had  fled  from  her
    husband on their wedding  night  had  given  her  money  to  travel  to
    Conakry.  She had travelled to her maternal uncle who had arranged  her
    travel out of Guinea but she has not spoken with him since she  arrived
    in the United Kingdom: see hearing replies 176-178.

41. In the course of the hearing the  Applicant  produced  two  photographs
    which she stated were of her father as imam.   There  was  no  evidence
    either oral or on the photographs to explain when and in  what  setting
    they had been taken or any explanation why it had taken  the  Applicant
    so long to obtain such evidence.  She said  the  photographs  had  been
    taken by her mother: see hearing replies 181-190.  The  Applicant  said
    her parents had divorced over her refusal to marry in  accordance  with
    her father's wishes but she had not known of this until she had arrived
    in the United Kingdom and she could not explain how  it  was  that  the
    photographs were recent and how her mother had come to be able to  send
    them, bearing in mind that the Applicant said she had  left  Guinea  in
    March 2012: see her self-completed statement  of  evidence.   This  was
    notwithstanding that she had also claimed to have lost contact with her
    mother subsequent to October 2014: see hearing replies 30 and 94. There
    was no  explanation  for  any  of  these  apparent  inconsistencies  or
    implausibilities.

42. If she were to  return  to  Guinea  her  father  would  trace  her,  if
    necessary by despatching his students all over the country to look  for
    her: see hearing replies 152-154 and 135-137.

Submissions for the SSHD

43. Ms Isherwood urged me to dismiss the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Applicant had fabricated her account.  The previous  hearing  had  been
    adjourned to give her time to obtain expert evidence to show  that  she
    had not been to France and fingerprinted there.  An expert had  visited
    the Home Office but the Applicant had not submitted any evidence except
    her bald assertions that she had never been  in  France  and  so  could
    never have been fingerprinted there.  There  was  a  witness  statement
    from a Home Office expert about the matching fingerprints and the  SSHD
    had discharged the burden of proof in this respect. The  Applicant  had
    failed to give any reason for not accepting the evidence that  she  had
    been fingerprinted in France.

44. The Applicant on her own evidence had been  educated  in  Guinea  until
    shortly before she had left and had said she could  read  and  write  a
    little but the expert report  relied  on  her  being  illiterate.   The
    expert report at paragraphs 15 and 16 found that on her account she had
    married the older man chosen by her  father  but  at  the  hearing  the
    Applicant had denied this and had said there was no ceremony  or  nikah
    evidencing her marriage and yet she claimed to be the daughter  of  the
    village imam.

45. The Applicant had described how she had been ill-treated by her  father
    at paras.6-7 of her statement of 11 July 2012  but  had  never  claimed
    until the hearing he had beaten her on many occasions while he had kept
    her locked in the sitting room to persuade her to marry the man he  had
    chosen for her.  It was only at the hearing that she had  claimed  that
    she had been beaten by him on numerous occasions in the course of being
    locked up.

46. It was not plausible that the Applicant had not made efforts to contact
    her boyfriend in Guinea who she said  was  the  father  of  her  eldest
    child.  She had not disclosed until the hearing that her maternal uncle
    who had helped her leave Conakry had  now  moved  back  to  the  family
    village although the SSHD had maintained  the  Applicant  could  safely
    relocate with her uncle in Guinea.  There were inconsistent  statements
    from the Applicant about the contact she had had with her mother and it
    was implausible that she had not been in touch with her  uncle.   There
    were no statements from either of them or explanation for  the  failure
    to produce such statements, notwithstanding that in the course  of  the
    hearing the Applicant had managed to obtain by fax photographs of a man
    said to be her father.

47. The school letter of February 2014 at O1 of the Applicant's bundle  did
    not mention her father was an imam although this would  be  a  relevant
    matter.

48. The Applicant had been evasive in her answers at the  hearing.   Little
    weight could be given to the two photographs she had produced at a very
    late stage in the hearing.  There were issues  in  the  evidence  about
    when and how they had been obtained if her parents  had  been  divorced
    and the Applicant claimed that her  mother  had  sent  them  by  mobile
    phone; yet the Applicant had not had  contact  with  her  mother  since
    October.

49. Ms Isherwood continued there was limited evidence about the Applicant's
    two children and their medical conditions.

50. Addressing the expert report,  Ms  Isherwood  noted  it  was  dated  27
    January 2015.  At paragraph 10 it referred to an asylum  interview  but
    in fact there had not been one.  The reference  to  "the  narrative  of
    force" at paragraphs 22 and 24 failed to understand the  nature  of  an
    "error of law" decision.   Professor  Lawrence  Junior  had  found  the
    Applicant's account consistent with the background  evidence  but  this
    did not mean her account was true.  She  had  been  evasive  about  her
    travel to the United Kingdom.  The  Applicant  had  not  been  able  to
    recall when she first dated her partner although he is  the  father  of
    her younger child.  He is  a  failed  asylum  seeker  with  no  pending
    application and had no entitlement to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Professor Lawrence in  the  expert  report  treated  the  Applicant  as
    unattached and had made no reference to her second child born in August
    2014.

51. She noted the focus was on West Africa generally rather than Guinea  in
    particular.  The discussion of forced  marriage  at  paras.29-50  added
    little and failed to address the specific aspects  of  the  Applicant's
    claim.  With regard to para.54, the Applicant had indeed never  claimed
    her father had been dominating or abusive before  he  forced  her  into
    marriage.  Paras.61-62 referred to female genital mutilation  but  this
    did not figure at all as part of the  Applicant's  claim.   At  para.63
    there was a reference to "bride wealth transfer" but the Applicant  had
    not made any suggestion that that might have  been  a  reason  for  her
    father's choice of husband.  I accept that if it had been part  of  the
    arrangement  the  Applicant  might  not  have   been   aware   of   it.
    Nevertheless, the latter part of para.63 has little  reference  to  the
    context which the Applicant describes as the background to  the  forced
    marriage.

52. Although at para.65 the expert states the Applicant's uncle  could  not
    protect her, the fact is that on her account he  did  protect  her  and
    arranged her travel out of Guinea.  The report failed to address this.

53. Although the expert had seen  the  reasons  letter  he  had  failed  to
    address the background evidence referred to extensively at  paras.37-47
    about the extent of forced marriage and in particular the last sentence
    of para.43 which states:-

         The representative of Tostan who met with Landinfo was of the  view
         that a young girl who has sufficient knowledge of  her  rights  and
         who has [translation]  'the  strength  of  character  necessary  to
         confront the family decision' would have a chance  to  negotiate  a
         marriage refusal with the support of the members of her  family  or
         the local authorities.  ...

54. The expert had not mentioned the item from the Immigration and  Refugee
    Board of Canada at pages A2-A6 of the Applicant's  bundle  filed  on  4
    November 2014 which referred at the top of page A3 to evidence given in
    late 2011 that the practice of forced marriage  involving  physical  or
    psychological violence has [translation] "become marginal in Guinea and
    practically non-existent in urban areas" and to another report of March
    2012 that "generally, [translation] 'religious marriage, which is  most
    important to Guineans, comes before civil marriage, which is  sometimes
    not even celebrated'".

55. At para.73 of the report reference is  made  to  the  impossibility  of
    relocation because the Applicant's ethnic group inhabits all  parts  of
    Guinea.  No details are given of the Applicant's  ethnic  group  except
    for the reference to it at para.19 of  the  report  and  even  then  it
    appears from the wording of para.19 that the Applicant herself has  not
    identified her ethnic group.  Para.74 referred to the reporting of  the
    arrival of newcomers but focused, mostly  if  not  entirely,  on  rural
    districts.

56. With reference to para.77 of the report the Applicant had never claimed
    she had been trafficked.  She could return with her partner  and  would
    be able to seek protection from her mother and  maternal  uncle.   With
    reference to para.80, the Applicant had never claimed she had  been  or
    would be likely to be trafficked.

57. The expert report failed to refer to the Applicant's partner or to  the
    position of her children.  It had  failed  to  address  the  individual
    aspects of the Applicant's claim other  than  to  say  that  they  were
    consistent with the background evidence.

58. The Applicant could return with her partner who is a  Guinean  and  her
    two children who are also both Guinean.

59. Turning to the claim under Article 8 of the European Convention outside
    the Immigration Rules, Ms Isherwood referred to the Applicant's partner
    and  children.   Even  if  living  conditions,  education  and  medical
    facilities in Guinea were less favourable than in the  United  Kingdom,
    the Applicant would be returned with her two children as a family unit.
     Her partner and the father of her second child could return with  her.
    She referred to para.60 of the judgment in EV (Philippines and Others v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ. 874 which states:-

         That is a long way from the facts of our case.  In our case none of
         the family is a British citizen.  None has the right to  remain  in
         this country.   If  the  mother  is  removed,  the  father  has  no
         independent right to remain.  If the parents are removed,  then  it
         is entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them.   As
         the Immigration Judge found it is obviously in their best interests
         to remain with their parents.  Although it is, of course a question
         of fact for the Tribunal, I cannot see  that  the  desirability  of
         being educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit
         to the children of remaining with their parents.  Just as we cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world.

60. She also referred to para.24 of the judgment in Zoumbas v  SSHD  [2013]
    UKSC 74 dealing with the return of a family  unit  to  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo in which the Court said:-

         There is no irrationality in the conclusion  that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo.  No doubt it would have  been  possible  to  have  stated
         that, other things being equal, it was in the best interests of the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
         education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a  higher
         standard than would be available in the Congo.   But  other  things
         were not equal.  They were not British citizens.  They had no right
         to future education and health care in  this  country.   They  were
         part of a close-knit family with highly educated parents  and  were
         of an age when their emotional needs could only be fully met within
         the immediate family unit.  Such integration as had  occurred  into
         United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the context
         of  that  family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision-maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care of their parents without serious detriment to their  well-
         being.  We agree  with  Lady  Dorrian's  succinct  summary  of  the
         position in para 18 of the Inner House's opinion.

61. It was necessary for the  Tribunal  to  consider  the  public  interest
    factors referred to in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  It  was  accepted
    the Applicant had some ability to speak English but there was no  other
    evidence of integration or ability of the Applicant to support  herself
    and her children.  Throughout  her  time  in  the  United  Kingdom  her
    immigration position had at best been precarious.

62. She referred to the SSHD's guidance of 22 October 2014 on the issue of
    Ebola in West Africa.  It noted that returns to Guinea  have  not  been
    suspended and that the World Health Organisation in September 2014  had
    found that:-

         The risk of a traveller becoming infected with Ebola virus during a
         visit to the affected areas and developing disease after  returning
         is extremely low, even if the visit included travel to areas  where
         primary cases have been reported.  ...   The  risk  for  travellers
         visiting family and friends in affected  areas  is  similarly  low,
         unless the traveller has direct physical contact  with  a  sick  or
         dead person or animal infected with Ebola virus.  ...

    The Applicant had simply failed to evidence a sufficiently strong  case
    to warrant the grant of further leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    and her appeal should be dismissed on all grounds.

Submissions for the Applicant

63. Ms Pease relied on the skeleton argument of Ms Peterson filed  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.  This  briefly  set  out  the  Applicant's
    account and her assertions that she  feared  return  to  Guinea  for  a
    Refugee Convention reason. Reference was made to the  reasons  why  the
    SSHD found her account  not  to  be  credible  and  to  the  background
    evidence about forced and early marriage in Guinea and  that  according
    to the the US State Department Report for 2013 there were  no  reported
    prosecutions  of  child  marriage  during  the   year   notwithstanding
    estimates that some 63% of women aged between  20  and  24  years  were
    married before the age of 18 and  that  women  subjected  to  a  forced
    marriage generally do not report it to the authorities.  The  Appellant
    now had two children born out of wedlock  and  would  not  be  able  to
    return to Guinea as an unmarried mother from a conservative background.
    There would be no system of her support available to her and she  would
    be rejected by her family.

64. Ms Pease accepted the Applicant  had  not  submitted  any  evidence  to
    challenge the fingerprint evidence submitted by the SSHD.  Nevertheless
    she had always been consistent in her account in its  many  re-tellings
    that she had never been in France. She had not adjusted her account  of
    what had happened to her in Guinea in any way. That the Applicant might
    not be good at remembering the dates of various events  should  not  be
    held against her. Not everybody can accurately remember dates of events
    in their personal lives. The core of her account had remained the  same
    throughout and was both credible and plausible.

65. The Applicant had given a credible explanation of her  marriage  to  an
    older man arranged by her father. Her boyfriend in Guinea had given her
    money to travel to her matter of uncle in Conakry. On her return as  an
    unmarried mother of two neither would be able  to  offer  any  material
    assistance.

66. She referred to the two photographs supplied of a man whom she said was
    her father. She urged me to take account of the  limited  contact  with
    the Applicant had been able to maintain with her mother  and  that  she
    had had none since the previous hearing. Her friend with a smart  phone
    to whom the photographs had been sent was not in Guinea.

67. The evidence of  the  Applicant  was  consistent  with  the  background
    evidence and Ms Pease urged me to keep this in mind when assessing  the
    Applicant's credibility. Any inconsistencies  in  her  account  of  her
    travel to the United Kingdom should be considered in the light that the
    Applicant had not previously travelled by air and was heavily  pregnant
    at the time and not feeling well as was evidenced by what had  happened
    shortly after her arrival in the United Kingdom.

68. Ms Pease referred to  the  expert  report  and  in  particular  para.67
    referring to the Applicant's actions in resisting her  father  and  the
    man whom he had chosen for her to marry. In this  light  the  Applicant
    would be considered to have committed adultery. At para.63  the  expert
    report found the Applicant's account to be  consistent  with  a  "bride
    wealth transfer". That the appellant did not know  of  details  of  any
    liabilities which her father might have owed to the man he  had  chosen
    for her to marry  was  plausible  in  the  context  of  the  background
    evidence about forced marriage.

69. She accepted that the expert report did not properly address particular
    aspects of the Applicant's claim other than by generic reference to the
    background information. The expert report's account of  the  prevailing
    attitudes in Guinea towards women, would place the Applicant on return,
    as the unmarried mother of two children by different fathers,  at  real
    risk  of  ill-treatment  and  destitution.  Her  claim  needed  to   be
    considered in the context of society at large in Guinea.

70. Additionally there was the matter of the risk to the Applicant and  her
    children on account of the  Ebola  outbreak.  Ms  Pease  concluded  the
    Applicant was credible and her appeal should be allowed.

Findings and Consideraion

71. I have carefully scrutinised and considered  the  Applicant's  evidence
    together with the documents in the Tribunal file  and  the  submissions
    made for each of the SSHD and the Applicant.

72. The Applicant has been given more than adequate opportunity to  inspect
    the  SSHD's  evidence  to  support  the   allegation   that   she   was
    fingerprinted in France. There was no challenge to the statements  made
    for the SSHD that a fingerprint expert appointed for the Applicant  had
    attended the offices of the SSHD. There  was  no  explanation  for  the
    absence of any expert report challenging the SSHD's contention that the
    Applicant was fingerprinted in France in October 2011.  It  may  be  of
    note that the surname given for the owner of the fingerprints taken  in
    France was claimed to be 'Diaby' which is the same as the  surname  the
    Applicant has given for her  boyfriend  who  paid  for  her  travel  to
    Conakry and whom she claims to be the father of her first child.

73. Given the fact that the only challenge to the fingerprint  evidence  is
    the Applicant's assertion that she had never been in France,  I  reject
    the Applicant's denial that she has ever been in France. Looking at the
    chronology given the Applicant was  in  France  in  October  2011,  her
    account to have escaped from her husband to  Ahmad,  her  boyfriend  in
    January 2012 and to have left Guinea on 11 March 2012, arriving in  the
    United Kingdom the next day is rejected. The Applicant gave no evidence
    of Ahmad's whereabouts on the basis that  she  had  not  been  able  to
    contact him since leaving Guinea in March 2012.

74. I do not find plausible or credible the Applicant's evidence about  the
    nature of her betrothal and delivery to  the  home  of  the  older  man
    chosen for her by her father. The Applicant  claims  her  father  is  a
    locally well-known and respected  imam  but  her  account  contains  no
    reference to any religious ceremony or nikah,  even  allowing  for  the
    fact that her presence at the signing of the nikah or even the ceremony
    may not have been required. I do not find it likely that she would have
    been presented to her new husband having been kept locked up in a  room
    for  some  three  days  and  denied  proper  sustenance   and   washing
    facilities. The Applicant does not claim she was given any  opportunity
    to recover from her "imprisonment" and to prepare herself to  meet  her
    husband or that her new husband would not give her some time to prepare
    herself before taking her to the marital  bed.  The  implausibility  of
    this is in part underlined by the Applicant'  claim  that  she  had  no
    difficulty in obtaining his agreement  to  her  visiting  the  lavatory
    which she claims was the opportunity for her to escape.

75. I find the letter of denunciation from the Applicant's School  at  page
    O1 in the Applicant's First-tier Tribunal bundle does not refer to  the
    vocation of the Applicant's father whom she claims was and is  a  well-
    known and notable imam. She also claimed he was of such  standing  that
    he had his own school and would be able to order his students to search
    throughout Guinea to find her if she were to return.  One  of  the  two
    photographs shows a  man  teaching  young  boys.  There  was  no  other
    evidence beyond the Applicant's assertions about her father's  position
    and  no  explanation  for   the   absence   of   any   such   evidence,
    notwithstanding the stature and renown she claimed for her father.

76. The upshot is that I do  not  accept  any  aspect  of  the  Applicant's
    account of events leading to and the circumstances and  timing  of  her
    departure from Guinea. The consequence is that  what  is  left  of  the
    Applicant's claim is that as a single mother of two young children  she
    will be at risk on return to Guinea.

77. There was no evidence by way of oral  testimony  from  her  partner  in
    support of the Applicant. I was supplied with copies of  her  partner's
    statement of 18 April 2011 in response to the  SSHD's  refusal  of  his
    claim for international surrogate protection and the  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Afako promulgated following a  hearing  on  27  April
    2011 dismissing his claim for international  surrogate  protection  for
    lack of evidence: see paras.21-25 and 27 of  the  determination.  There
    was no evidence about the Applicant's claimed change  of  accommodation
    which was submitted as the reason her partner could not attend  because
    he was looking after the two children. There  was  no  recent  evidence
    from him except a brief statement of 19  January  2015.  The  statement
    confirms his lack of residential status although it refers  to  another
    application  which  has  not  yet  been  made.  He  asserts  his  close
    relationship with both of the Applicant's children.  It is to be  noted
    that what evidence there was about  him  pre-dated  the  birth  of  the
    Applicant's first child by some 17 months and a little more  than  five
    months before the Applicant had been fingerprinted in France.

78. It is evident from the expert's report the expert had  not  been  fully
    advised as to the nature and focus of the error of  law  hearing  on  1
    October 2014. Ms Pease accepted t the expert report did not  adequately
    or sufficiently focus on the particulars of the Applicant's  claim.  It
    is a  learned  piece  of  work  on  women  and  non-voluntary  conjugal
    association  generally  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  with   some   specific
    references to Guinea. There are  points  in  the  expert  report  which
    appear to go beyond its remit, for instance at paras.51-52. However the
    expert has not engaged with the particulars of the Applicant's  account
    with the degree of detail which the Tribunal generally seeks in  expert
    reports.

79. Where an appellant has been found not to be credible, reliance alone on
    the background evidence is generally, but not always,  insufficient  to
    establish  a  claim  for  international   surrogate   protection.   The
    Applicant's claim that she will be ill-treated and destitute on  return
    to Guinea needs to be considered on the basis  that  the  rest  of  her
    account has not been accepted. This will include her claim she  has  no
    family to turn to and that she  will  be  the  target  for  an  "honour
    killing". The Applicant gave little or no evidence  about  efforts  she
    had made to re-instate her claimed contact with her  mother.  She  said
    her uncle in Conakry had returned to her home village but there was  no
    information how she had discovered this, notwithstanding the little  or
    no contact she has had with anybody in Guinea for some time.  I  reject
    the suggestion that her father will be able to send students throughout
    Guinea to trace her and punish or kill her.

80. The Applicant states the father  of  her  second  child  is  a  Guinean
    national. There was no evidence that he had any right, however limited,
    to be in the United Kingdom other than that of a failed  asylum  seeker
    refusing voluntarily to return. The Applicant's account  is  that  both
    her children are of Guinean nationality and there  was  no  suggestion,
    let alone evidence, that she could not return to Guinea  with  her  two
    children and the father of her second  child,  as  a  family.  In  this
    context, she has failed to establish even  to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof, that on return she would be at risk of ill-treatment.

81. There remains the Applicant's claim under Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention. I take into account the  State's  duty  to  consider  as  a
    primary concern the welfare of the Applicant's  two  children  and  the
    medical complaints of both children who are very young,  there  was  no
    evidence that the older one  had  started  school.  The  Applicant  has
    stressed the involvement of her partner with  both  her  children:  see
    paragraph 4  of  her  statement  of  22  January  2015.  There  was  no
    submission that she and her partner with her  two  children  could  not
    return to Guinea as  a  family  unit.  She  states  that  she  received
    secondary level education in Guinea. As a family unit,  she  would  not
    have to make her presence known to members of her family in  Guinea  if
    she did not wish. I reject the claim, even made at the  lower  standard
    of proof, that  her  return  to  Guinea  would  come  to  her  father's
    attention or that if he knew she had returned  he  would  dispatch  his
    students to punish or kill her for  having  brought  dishonour  to  her
    family.

82. Adopting the approach to appeal is on grounds of Article  8  summarised
    at paragraphs 7-12 of EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL  41,  I  find  the
    Applicant has established a private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom by reason of her presence and her two  children.  Her  proposed
    removal would not interfere with her family life because  she  and  her
    two children could be removed as a family unit with her partner.

83. Beyond her presence in the United Kingdom with her two children  and  a
    tenuous because inadequately evidenced relationship  with  her  partner
    with whom she does not live there was little  or  no  evidence  of  any
    private life. I have considered the best interests of the children as a
    primary concern. While the educational and  health  facilities  in  the
    United Kingdom might well be  better  than  they  are  in  Guinea,  the
    Applicant and indeed the father of her second child are both of Guinean
    nationality and liable for removal. It is accepted that it is generally
    in the best interests of young children that they remain part of  their
    parents' family unit and there is no  evidence  of  any  particular  or
    unusual circumstances in this appeal which suggest to the contrary: see
    EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ.874  and  especially
    paras.60-61.

84. I conclude that the proposed removal of the Applicant and her  children
    would not amount to an interference with their private and family  life
    of sufficient gravity to engage the United Kingdom's obligations  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention. It follows that the claims of the
    Applicant and her two children must fail under the Refugee  Convention,
    the Qualification Directive  and  under  the  European  Convention  and
    accordingly they are all dismissed.

85. If I am wrong and the State's obligations are engaged then there was no
    suggestion that that  any  interference  would  be  otherwise  than  in
    accordance with the law and for a legitimate public end. The assessment
    of the proportionality of removal that must nevertheless depend on  any
    particular set of circumstances.

86. I have had regard to ss.117A,B and D of the  2002  Act.  There  was  no
    evidence to show the Applicant's integration into the  United  Kingdom,
    such as evidence that she spoke English,  was  not  relying  on  public
    funds or that her relationship with her partner had been at a time when
    either  of  them  had  any  lawful  right  of  residence  or  when  the
    immigration status of each of them had been at best anything more  than
    precarious.

87. For the reasons already given, I do not find that the  removal  of  the
    Applicant and her two children with her  partner  to  Guinea  would  be
    disproportionate  to  a  legitimate  public  objective.  Even  if   the
    relationship between the Applicant and her partner is not as  close  as
    that of an unmarried couple because it is said they  live  in  separate
    establishments, the partner  has  obligations  to  his  child  and  has
    claimed in its brief statement to be involved in the lives of both  the
    Applicant's children.

Anonymity

88. The Judge made an anonymity direction and this is continued.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's determination contained an error of law and is
set aside in its entirety. The following decision is substituted:
    The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.
    The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.
    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

    Anonymity direction continued.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 09. iii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE SSHD: FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid and so no award can be made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 09. iii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

