
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03164/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 November 2015                   |On 16 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M I
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. B. Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Saeed, Aman Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

      1. The Respondent, who was born on 8 March  1971,  is  a  national  of
         Iraq.  He moved to live in the United Arab  Emirates  in  1997.  In
         June 2013 he entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  and  then
         returned to the UAE. On 25 October 2013 he returned to  the  United
         Kingdom, as a visitor, with his wife and children.

      2. On 10 December 2013 he applied for asylum. He said that  he  feared
         persecution in Iraq because his father and uncle  had  belonged  to
         the Ba'ath Party and because he was a Sunni Muslim. His application
         was refused and he appealed on 16  May  2014.  In  his  grounds  of
         appeal, he said that he was feared persecution if  he  returned  to
         Iraq as he would be perceived as being wealthy.

      3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi dismissed his appeal in  a  judgment
         promulgated on 16  July  2014.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
         granted the Respondent permission to appeal on 5 August 2014 on the
         basis that First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi should have  granted  the
         Respondent an adjournment in order to obtain an expert report given
         the changing situation in Iraq. At  the  subsequent  error  of  law
         hearing, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup did not agree  that  an
         adjournment should have been granted but he did  find  that  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Obhi had made a material error of law. This was
         because his findings in paragraphs  31  and  32  appeared  to  have
         derived from his own research on which the Respondent had not  been
         provided with an opportunity to comment. Therefore, the appeal  was
         remitted for a re-hearing.

      4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett allowed the Respondent's  appeal
         in a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  14  April  2015.  The
         Appellant appealed on 22 April 2015 but First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Colyer refused her permission to appeal on 5 May 2015. However,  on
         23 July 2015 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  granted  permission,
         stating  that  it  was  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Grimmett's  approach  was  legally  flawed  and  that  the  grounds
         identified a number of plainly arguable challenges.

Error of Law Hearing

      5. At the start of the hearing, Ms Weller sought permission  to  amend
         the Appellant's ground (iv) to include reference to  paragraph  306
         of HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT  00409  (IAC).
         She said that she had not been able to make her application  at  an
         earlier stage as she only received all of the papers at  4  pm  the
         day before the hearing. The Respondent's representative opposed the
         application on the  basis  that  it  had  only  been  made  at  the
         beginning of the  hearing  but  accepted  that  the  paragraph  was
         relevant. I exercised my case management powers under rule 5(3)( c)
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and permitted
         the amendment on the basis that HM and Others is a country guidance
         case within the public domain and that the amendment only served to
         clarify the case being made against  the  Respondent  and  did  not
         amount to a new point which could be said to  have   taken  him  by
         surprise.

      6. Ms Weller then argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed
         to take into account  the  country  guidance  provided  in  HM  and
         others. She noted that in paragraph 92 of HM and others  Dr  George
         had explained that when he had said that there was a real risk of a
         returnee being kidnapped he meant that the risk was something  more
         than genuine and also something  slightly  more  than  nothing.  At
         paragraph 187 Dr George referred to a 2009 report which  said  that
         Iraqis who returned  from  Western  countries  walked,  talked  and
         dressed differently, were perceived to  be  financially  privileged
         and were at risk of kidnapping.

      7. The Home Office Presenting Officer also  relied  on  paragraph  306
         where the Upper Tribunal said that in its judgment the evidence  on
         risk to returnees from the West really does no more than  establish
         a possible or remote risk. It does not establish a real risk  or  a
         reasonable degree of likelihood that returnees  will  face  serious
         harm or ill-treatment.  In response the Respondent's representative
         noted that the Upper Tribunal had relied on reports from  2004  and
         2009 but that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had had the benefit  of
         an expert report by Dr George, which was dated  9  March  2014.  At
         paragraph 76  of  his  report  Dr  George  relied  on  a  US  State
         Department  report  entitled  Iraq:  Country  Specific  Information
         posted on 26 March 2014, which  stated  that  "Iraqi  citizens  are
         targets of kidnapping. Kidnappers often demand money but have  also
         carried  out  kidnappings  for  political/religious  reasons.  Many
         hostages have been killed". He  also  said  at  paragraph  81  that
         "kidnappings  remain  very  much  a  current  problem"   and   that
         "disappearances  and  kidnapping  were  regular  occurances".  This
         evidence post-dates HM & Others and given the duty to apply anxious
         scrutiny and the low standard of proof in asylum cases I find  that
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to find at paragraph  17
         of her decision  and  reasons  to  find  that  "the  Appellant  and
         possibly his family members would be at risk of  kidnapping  having
         spent time abroad which would mean that they would be perceived  as
         relatively wealthy according to the evidence of Dr George which was
         not challenged by the" Home Office Presenting Officer.

      8. Ms Weller also submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
         failed to give cogent reasons for departing  from  the  conclusions
         contained in paragraph 306 of HM & Others. However, in paragraph 17
         she did refer to relevant extracts from the  expert  and  objective
         evidence  and  analysed  it  in  the  context  of  the  Appellant's
         particular individual characteristics.

      9. Ms Weller then submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning
         in  paragraphs  18  and  19  of  her  decision  and  reasons   were
         inadequate. However, at paragraph 127 of his report  relied  on  in
         the current case, Dr. George concluded that the Appellant would  be
         at risk in Iraq on account of his Sunni religio-political  identity
         and would be especially vulnerable in mixed Sunni-Shi'a communities
         in  central  Iraq,  including  Baghdad.  (At  the  hearing  it  was
         confirmed that the Appellant would be returned to Baghdad.) Then at
         paragraph 128 he said that in his view  the  Respondent  "could  be
         regarded by armed  criminals  and  by  insurgents  in  central  and
         southern Iraq as a prime  target  for  kidnapping  because,  having
         spent a considerable time abroad, he could be  perceived  as  being
         relatively wealthy". He then referred to his sources for this view.
         This was the evidence which the First-tier Tribunal Judge  referred
         in paragraph 18.

     10. In paragraph  19  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  accurately
         recalled that in  paragraph  163  of  his  report  Dr.  George  had
         concluded that the Respondent and his family "would presently  face
         only relatively low risks because of their Sunni  religio-political
         identity and as returnees.from abroad". However,  when  considering
         their overall risk it is trite law  to  say  that  this  should  be
         considered in the context of  relevant  country  evidence  and  the
         evidence as a whole. One of these was the context in which they ran
         a real risk of violence just because of the  general  circumstances
         prevailing in Iraq.  In my view this was a finding which  was  open
         to the First-tier Tribunal Judge, albeit one that  not  all  judges
         would have reached.

     11. The grounds also argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
         failed to provide adequate reasoning for her  conclusion  that  the
         Respondent faced persecution as a Sunni. However, she was  entitled
         to rely on the expert report and at paragraph 121  of  that  report
         Dr. George quoted from the 2014 Annual Report of the bipartisan  US
         Commission on International Religious Freedom, which stated that in
         the  past  year  the  government  failed  to  stem  egregious   and
         increasing violence by non-state actors  against  Iraqi  civilians,
         including attacks  on  individuals  for  their  actual  or  assumed
         religious identity. He also noted at paragraph 123 that  Sunni-Shia
         tensions in Iraq have hardened dramatically in recent  months.  The
         examples given were of murders outside Baghdad  but  other  reports
         indicated that murders also occurred in Baghdad.

     12. The grounds also assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not
         give sufficient reasons for departing from HM  &  Others.  However,
         the Judge did rely on an up-dated expert report  and  a  number  of
         pieces of objective evidence  and  read  as  a  whole  the  grounds
         cumulatively amount to one complaint that the reasons given by  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  were  not  adequate.   The  Respondent's
         representative relied on the case of R (Iran) v Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and, in particular,  an
         extract from a judgement of Griffiths LJ in Eagil Trust  Co  Ltd  v
         Pigott- Brown [1985] 3  All  ER  119  in  which  he  said  that  an
         immigration judge "should give his reasons in sufficient detail  to
         show the [IAT] the principles on which he has acted and the reasons
         that have led him to his decision. They need not  be  elaborate.  I
         cannot  stress  too  strongly  that  there  is  no  duty   on   [an
         adjudicator], in giving his reasons, to deal  with  every  argument
         presented by [an advocate] in support of his case. It is sufficient
         if what he says shows the parties and, if need be,  the  [IAT]  the
         basis on which  he  had  acted...".  I  find  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge's  decision  and  reasons   complied   with   these
         requirements.

     13. For all the reasons  given  above  I  find  that  the  First  -tier
         Tribunal Judge did not make any material errors of law in the light
         of the evidence before her  and  that  her  decision  allowing  the
         Appellant's appeal should stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Date: 10 November 2015

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
