

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Numbers:    AA/03354/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                    |        Decision and Reason       |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On: 18th March 2015                      |        On: 03rd June 2015        |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              Mr Asllan Islamaj
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Kadic, Counsel instructed by Blavo & Co
Solicitors


                             DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Albania date of birth 23rd  March  1996.
    He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Ian Howard) to dismiss his appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
    claims.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he was in mortal danger  as
    a result of a blood feud that had developed between his family and  the
    Begaj family. There had been a land dispute back in 2005, as  a  result
    of  which  one  Iljaz  Begaj  had  shot  and  killed  the   Appellant's
    grandfather and uncle. Begaj had been prosecuted and was  sentenced  to
    prison for fourteen years. His two sons had fled Albania. In April 2013
    they had returned, and shortly  thereafter  their  home  had  exploded,
    killing both. The Appellant's father was immediately suspected. He  was
    arrested but released for lack of evidence. The  remaining  members  of
    the Begaj family indicated that they are going to exact  revenge:  they
    threatened that should the Appellant or his father be seen outside they
    would be shot on sight. The Appellant's  family  arranged  for  him  to
    leave the country.  The Appellant asserts that  the  Begaj  family  are
    criminals with corrupt connections to those in authority.  As  evidence
    of this the Appellant points to Iljaz Begaj's early release from  gaol.
    He claimed that he has lost all contact with his father  and  remaining
    brother as they have retreated into hiding in Albania.

 3. The  Respondent  rejected  the  claim  on  the  basis  that  it  lacked
    credibility. Limited leave to remain was granted  until  the  Appellant
    reached the age of seventeen and half; this expired in September 2013.

 4. At the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant
    was 18. He gave oral evidence. The Tribunal rejected the  account,  and
    so dismissed the appeal, giving the following reasons:

        i) There was no supporting documentary evidence in respect  of  the
           land, the dispute or the prosecution of Iljaz Begaj [at 19]


       ii) It is not plausible that the Appellant has lost contact with his
           family [19]

      iii) The evidence does not support the  Appellant's  claim  that  the
           Begaj family had influence because Iljaz  Begaj  was  imprisoned
           for 14 years, whereas the Appellant's father and  elder  brother
           were released after only 24 hours.

 5. The Appellant now seeks that the decision be set aside. It is submitted
    that the determination contains the following errors of law:


        i) The credibility findings have been made without  any  regard  to
           the extant country guidance  of  EH  (Blood  Feuds)  Albania  CG
           [2012] UKUT 348 (IAC);


       ii) The negative findings are  all  couched  in  terms  of  inherent
           implausibility,  a finding that an asylum decision-maker  should
           be slow to make: Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 ;

      iii)  In  expecting  a  young  appellant  to  produce   corroborative
           documentary evidence  the  Tribunal  was  imposing  too  high  a
           standard of proof.









    Error of Law


 6. I am satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    errors such that it must be set aside.


 7. In her detailed response to the grounds the Secretary of  State  relied
    on TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 20 for the proposition that where there
    would be evidence readily available  to  an  appellant,  the  court  is
    entitled to draw an adverse inference from a failure  to  produce  such
    evidence.   TK (Burundi) was an Article 8  case  and  the  evidence  in
    question was that of the appellant's claimed partner in the UK.  If  he
    shared a family life with her as claimed, the  court  was  entitled  to
    draw adverse inference from her failure to attend  his  appeal  hearing
    and give evidence. The 'missing' evidence in the present appeal  is  of
    quite a different nature. At paragraph 19 of the  decision  the  First-
    tier Tribunal appears to draw adverse conclusions from the  absence  of
    documentary evidence that the Appellant's family ever owned  the  land,
    that Iljaz Begaj was prosecuted in 2005 or that the Appellant's  father
    was released without charge in 2013. I do not  consider  that  this  is
    evidence of the kind under consideration in TK (Burundi).  In  contrast
    it is precisely the kind of evidence that asylum seekers, in particular
    very young asylum seekers, would find it  difficult  to  produce.   See
    paragraph 196 of the UNHCR Handbook[2]:
         "Often, however, an applicant may not be able to support his
         statements by documentary or other proof, and cases in which an
         applicant can provide evidence of all his statements will be the
         exception rather than the rule" .
    I do not find that, for instance,   court  documents  relating  to  the
    prosecution of  a  third  party  in  2005  would  be  material  readily
    available to a seventeen  year  old,  nor  necessarily  to  his  family
    remaining in Albania.  It was an error to use this gap in the  evidence
    as the principle reason for rejecting the account.

 8. In respect of the remaining credibility findings  I  agree  that  these
    are, in essence, plausibility points: although paragraph 21  refers  to
    "inherent consistencies" it would appear that this must be a  reference
    to the points about the lack of contact with family and  the  influence
    of the Begaj family. Ms Kadic submitted that the  failure  to  consider
    the Appellant's account in  light  of  the  country  guidance  led  the
    Tribunal to assess the evidence through the  prism  of  what  might  be
    considered reasonable or normal in the context of the UK. For  instance
    EH lends support to the claim that people involved in blood feuds might
    withdraw into incommunicado self-confinement: it  was  wrong  in  those
    circumstances for the Tribunal to reject this evidence without  reason.
     Although Mr Bramble may be right in his  submission  that  there  were
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account,  these are  not  identified
    in the determination. The reasoning is scant and does, as  the  grounds
    contend, boil down to matters of plausibility. As the Court  of  Appeal
    has made clear on a number  of  occasions,   the  IAC  should  approach
    questions of plausibility with caution. That is because, to  paraphrase
    Lord Bingham, no judge worth his salt could possibly assume that men of
    different nationalities or creeds would act or think as he  might  have
    done.


 9. As to the question of the "reach" of the  Begaj  clan  I  note  that  a
    discrete issue arises in that the Judge appears to  have  misunderstood
    the evidence. The Appellant had pointed to the early release  of  Iljaz
    Begaj as evidence of that family's influence. Although the reasoning is
    not altogether clear paragraph 20 suggests that the  Tribunal  did  not
    agree, since on the Appellant's own evidence Begaj had  been  sentenced
    to 14 years in prison. The sentence was not the  issue;  the  Appellant
    was pointing to the fact that Begaj was  released  after  serving  only
    half of his original sentence.

10. The parties were in agreement that if I were to find an error the  most
    appropriate disposal, having regard to  the  extent  of  judicial  fact
    finding required, would be that the matter be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The Respondent indicated that she would wish to  produce
    the results of her 'family tracing enquiries' at any  further  hearing,
    and it is open for her to do so. Any such evidence must  be  served  on
    the Appellant and his representatives no later than 28 days before  the
    next hearing.




    Decisions


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside.

12. I make no direction for anonymity because neither party  has  requested
    one and on the facts I do not consider such an order to be necessary.

13. The matter is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               17th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on the 21st January 2015
[2] HANDBOOK AND GUIDELINES ON PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING
REFUGEE STATUS UNDER THE 1951 CONVENTION AND THE 1967 PROTOCOL RELATING TO
THE STATUS OF REFUGEES Reissued Geneva, December 2011

