
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03430/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th September 2015               |On 7th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     SENIOR UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     KAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McGowan, Quinn Martin & Langan, Solicitors,
Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  12th  August  1971.   He
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  12th  February
    2015 refusing to grant him asylum or other  protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Debra Clapham on 22nd April 2015 and 18th May  2015.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on 2nd July 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler on 24th  July  2015.
    The grounds of application refer to paragraph 114 of the determination.
     In this the judge considers the Appellant giving up Islam and  turning
    to Christianity.  The judge states that this is  merely  the  appellant
    embellishing his account and dismisses this aspect  of  his  claim  for
    this reason and because this was not  raised  previously.  The  grounds
    state that this is  not  sufficient.    They  state  that  this  is  an
    Appellant who has been attending church since shortly after arriving in
    the United Kingdom and who will be  unable  to  practise  his  religion
    openly if he has to return  to  Iran.   They  state  that  the  judge's
    failure to assess the evidence properly amounts to a material error  of
    law.  The permission states that the judge may have  erred  in  law  by
    failing to properly assess the evidence relating to the Appellant's sur
    place claim to have converted to Christianity and that it  is  arguable
    that she has failed to engage with the evidence,  has  failed  to  make
    findings on a matter which was clearly in issue and has failed to  give
    adequate reasons for  concluding  that  the  account  has  merely  been
    embellished.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response from the Respondent which states  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  directed  herself  appropriately  and
    found there to be credibility issues at paragraph 101 of the  document.
    The response states that the  judge  goes  on  to  detail  the  adverse
    credibility findings and gives cogent reasons for these findings.

Analysis

 4.  It  is  clear  from  the  determination  that  the  First-tier   Judge
    disbelieved the Appellant's core account.  The challenge in the grounds
    is confined to  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  claim  based  on  his
    conversion to Christianity and abandonment of Islam.  Christianity  was
    not raised as a  Ground  of  Appeal  and  is  first  mentioned  in  the
    Appellant's statement dated 15 April 2015, in which he states  that  he
    attended the [-] Church in Istanbul and in  Greece,  the  [-]Church  in
    Glasgow for a few weeks and then started to go to the [-]  Church.   At
    the date of the hearing he stated that he had been attending the  Alpha
    course but had no date for a baptism.   He  gave  no  evidence  at  the
    hearing about how he would behave on return to Iran as a result of  his
    conversion to Christianity nor does it appear that  he  was  questioned
    about this.

 5. In the First-tier Judge's determination she noted that at his screening
    interview in November 2014 the Appellant stated that he was a Muslim.

 6. Mr McGowan for the Appellant explained why the hearing went on for  two
    days.  On the first day there were a number of passages which  required
    correction in the Appellant's evidence so  the  hearing  was  adjourned
    part-heard and on the second day a letter was  produced  from  the  [-]
    Church in Glasgow.

 7. Mr McGowan submitted that he and the Presenting Officer  had  discussed
    the decision and agreed that the judge has failed to properly  consider
    the Christianity aspect of the claim.  The word "embellished"  used  by
    the judge was discussed and it was decided that the  Appellant's  claim
    on the basis of his Christianity is not merely an embellishment of  his
    asylum claim.

 8. Mr McGowan submitted that if we find that there is a material error  of
    law in the decision it should be set aside and the appeal  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a new hearing before a different  First-
    tier Judge.

 9. There was no question of any remaking of the decision  going  ahead  on
    the day as no interpreter had been booked. Mr McGowan submitted that as
    the evidence relating to the  Appellant's  Christianity  had  not  been
    assessed and taking account of the letter from the [-] Church, it would
    be fairer to remit the appeal to the First-tier.   The  credibility  of
    the Appellant's conversion has to be tested.  There  was  a  discussion
    about the various churches the Appellant has  attended  and  the  Alpha
    course which is a precursor  to  the  Appellant  being  baptised  as  a
    Christian.  He submitted that the Appellant was not given the chance to
    give evidence about his conversion and the judge failed to  make  clear
    findings about the Appellant's shift of faith.

10. Mr Mullen  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  intentions  had  not  been
    properly considered so it is not clear whether he will be  at  risk  on
    return.

11. We find there to be a material error of law in the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision.  The judge did not make clear or  adequate  findings  on  key
    matters. The case required not only a finding on the clear evidence  of
    conversion but also a decision  about  the  Appellant's  intentions  on
    return. In this context the judge was required to  decide  whether  the
    Appellant's conduct would put him at risk on return to Iran.  The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision has to be set aside but confined to  the
    Appellant's  claim  to  have  converted   to   Christianity   and   the
    consequences for him if returned. There is no challenge to the findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal regarding the other aspects of his claim and
    these therefore stand.

12. We have considered the  Practice  Statements  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal dated
    21st September  2012  by  Sir  Jeremy  Sullivan,  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals when deciding whether the appeal should be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

13. At heading number 7 - "Disposal of Appeals in Upper Tribunal" -  it  is
    stated that where the Upper Tribunal finds that  the  First-tier  Judge
    when making her decision, involved the making of an error on a point of
    law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside the decision and if  it  does  so
    must either remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in  accordance  with  the  relevant  Practice
    Directions) to re-make the decision under  Section  12(2)(b)(ii).   The
    Practice Statements go on to state that the case should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal only if the Upper Tribunal  is  satisfied  that
    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal  or
    (b) the  nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to  the  overriding  objective  in  Rule  2  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. We find that the effect of the material error of law in this  claim  is
    that there will need to be comprehensive judicial fact finding  on  the
    new limb to the claim and so we are remitting this appeal back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing on  the  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    shift in faith from Islam to Christianity.

Notice of Decision

15. There is a material error of law in the First-tier Judge's decision.

16. We remit this case to be reheard in the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  not
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Debra Clapham, on one aspect of
    the Appellant's  claim,  being  his  conversion  to  Christianity.  The
    remainder of the First-tier Judge's decision shall stand.

17. Anonymity is directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

