
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03146/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision and Directions          |
|On 27th October, 2014                     |Promulgated On 19th November,    |
|                                          |2014                             |
|Dictated 27th October, 2014               |                                 |
|Signed 17th November, 2014                |                                 |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     f n
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, a Solicitor with Lei Dat & Baig,
Solicitors, Liverpool
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  on  10th  August,
    1977 and who arrived in the United Kingdom on 24th February,  2011  and
    was granted leave on the basis of a student visa.  On 26th  July,  2011
    his wife and daughter arrived in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant appeals the decision of the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department taken on 28th April, 2014, to remove the appellant as a
    person subject to  administrative  removal  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, having  refused  to  grant  an  asylum
    claim.

3.   According to the appellant's witness  statement  which  he  signed  and
    which is dated 12 June, 2014, whilst living in Pakistan, the  appellant
    was well-known for sports.  He played cricket  for  Loudhyana  Gymkhana
    and played cricket in Dubai.  He was also a gold medallist  boxer.   In
    his written statement he refers to his asylum interview conducted  with
    him by the Home Office.  His answer to question 142 is as follows:-

         "I am a  well-known  sportsman  in  Pakistan,  at  the  moment  the
         Pakistan cricket team some of  the  members  that  are  well-known,
         there are some players that come to the UK to play in  the  cricket
         league, I am well-known to them.  Gibran Khan has  also  played  in
         the first class cricket team, he  also  knows  the  players  I  do.
         Recently there was a champion trophy cricket tournament in the  UK.
         Naser Jamshed played in the team.  He is  a  very  good  friend  of
         mine.  Him and Gibran Khan played for the  same  team.   It  was  a
         Pakistani's customs team.  There are more examples where they  know
         each other."

    The appellant also said that he is a national gold medallist at boxing.

4.   The basis for the appellant's claim to asylum is set out  at  paragraph
    5 of the Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal Letter of 25th April,
    2014.  This is as follows:-

         "5.  You claim that:


             (a)   whilst  living  in  Pakistan  you  were   a   well-known
                  sportsman, playing  cricket  for  Loudhyana  Gymkhana  and
                  being a  gold  medallist  boxer.   You  have  also  played
                  cricket in Dubai.


             (b)  You came to the UK on 24th February, 2011 using a student
                  visa arriving at Heathrow Airport.


             (c)  You did some work for 10-11 months  for  a  business  man
                  called Asif Rehman.  You started working in his restaurant
                  then did odd jobs for him.  You also worked as a chauffeur
                  when you obtained your licence.  You stopped  working  for
                  him as he lied about getting you a work permit.


             (d)  You were then referred to Ricky, real name  Amir  Shafiq,
                  who said he could  get  you  a  work  permit  and  started
                  working for KAKA Cash and Carry in May or June 2013.   You
                  were hired as a driver but you were told you  would  be  a
                  floor manager on your first day.


             (e)  They told you to treat the staff like  animals  and  they
                  would double orders but take cash in  hand  for  half  the
                  order to avoid VAT charges.   When  you  questioned  their
                  methods they would get angry with you.


             (f)  When you were driving you would always be with Zahid Khan
                  Doltana known as Doltana.  All dealings were done  through
                  him.  You would pick up wine and beer from  all  over  the
                  country.


             (g)  On 8 December you told Doltana that you would inform  the
                  police or tax  people  about  the  VAT  avoidance  and  he
                  threatened you and informed you that in the past they have
                  cut the ears, tongue and hands off from people  who  spoke
                  against them.  He also threatened your wife and daughter.


             (h)  You became fearful and fled after stopping at  a  service
                  station as Doltana left for something to eat.  You  parked
                  the van and got a taxi to Liverpool and you told your wife
                  to join you with your daughter.


             (i)  You then went to London and stayed with a friend for  2-3
                  days and then moved to a house in Wakefield Street and you
                  were there until September 2013.


             (j)  The police arrested you and also took  your  wife.   Your
                  daughter stayed with  someone  from  facebook.   You  were
                  accused of stealing from the company.   You  do  not  know
                  what kind of evidence  they  used.   Doltana  and  another
                  employee, Jibran, did not appear to give evidence  against
                  you and the court ruled in  your  favour  and  Jibran  was
                  arrested for the VAT fraud following your evidence.


             (k)  Two people went to your father and threatened to tell you
                  to keep your mouth shut.  They also shot at  your  father.
                  This was reported to the police but they have taken little
                  action.  He was kidnapped on about 7th or 8th August.   No
                  one saw what happened to him.


             (l)  The police have given you a box which would get  them  to
                  your house within 45 seconds if you feel threatened or  if
                  someone suspicious was around your home but you  have  not
                  used it as you moved to a shelter."

5.   The appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary of State  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  De  Haney  sitting  in
    Manchester on 30th July, 2014.  Having heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not believe  the  whole  of
    it.  He noted that the appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of a student visa and that the appellant claimed to have attended
    college for "the first semester in Birmingham".  The judge  noted  that
    the appellant had provided no evidence that he  had  actually  attended
    college, but it was quite clear that at the end of the  first  semester
    the appellant had no intention of  continuing  studies.   Instead,  the
    appellant arranged for his wife and child to come to the United Kingdom
    and the appellant worked in contravention of his  original  visa.   The
    appellant claimed asylum on 7th September, 2013.  The judge noted  that
    the appellant not only knew that he was working in the  United  Kingdom
    illegally, but he also knew much of the  time  that  his  employer  was
    engaged in illegal activities.  The judge found that this  appeared  to
    be something the appellant was quite prepared to be involved in as long
    as it suited his interests.

6.   The judge was not prepared to accept that the appellant  is  so  famous
    in Pakistan that he would be  recognised  wherever  he  goes.   He  was
    prepared to accept that the appellant may well have had some minor  and
    peripheral involvement with members of the  National  Pakistan  cricket
    team but, even if the appellant was such a friend, the judge found that
    it was highly implausible that the appellant  would  be  known  to  the
    wider population in any way.  The judge noted that no evidence had been
    placed before him to show that there were any  criminal  investigations
    in respect of the appellant's former employers  or  indeed  that  there
    were any ongoing tax fraud investigation.  In relation to documentation
    provided by the appellant the  judge  noted  the  shortcomings  in  the
    documentation as pointed out by  the  Presenting  Officer  and,  having
    applied Tanveer Ahmed v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2002] UKIAT 00439 found that they could not be relied upon.

7.   The judge noted that the appellant claimed that he  had  been  targeted
    by perpetrators of a major fraud, but was unable to explain  how  these
    perpetrators had not been able to reach the  appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant claimed that he was  under  police  protection,
    but had shown no evidence of this at  all.   He  himself  had  been  on
    weekly reporting whilst on bail for his own criminal  activities.   The
    judge did not believe the appellant's account and did not  accept  that
    the appellant would be at risk if he were to be returned  to  Pakistan.
    He considered the matter in the alternative and found  that  protection
    would be available to the appellant were he to return to Pakistan.   He
    did not accept that even if the perpetrators of the fraud did know  the
    governor of Punjab (the former member  of  the  Scottish  Assembly,  Mr
    Choudrey Mohamed Sarwar) that he would be prepared on their  behalf  to
    take action against the appellant.  The judge found that the  appellant
    was not credible in the core of his account.  He did  not  accept  that
    the appellant would be targeted or had  been  targeted  in  the  United
    Kingdom and did not accept that the appellant  would  be  at  any  risk
    should he return to Pakistan.  In the alternative  he  found  that  the
    appellant would be able to internally relocate in any event.

8.   Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J  M  Lewis  granted  permission
    suggesting that:

         "It is arguable that based upon errors  of  fact  and  insufficient
         regard  to  background  evidence  the  judge  reached   conclusions
         insufficiently grounded in the evidence on risk on return, internal
         relocation and sufficiency of protection."


9.   At the hearing before me  Mr  Hussain  referred  to  a  letter  he  had
    written to the Tribunal dated 13th October in which he said  he  wished
    to raise an additional ground claiming a further error of  law  on  the
    part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The letter went on  to  suggest
    that at paragraph 39 of the determination the judge stated that it  was
    clear that there was some ongoing fraud investigation but that did  not
    necessarily mean criminal proceedings  would  be  brought  against  the
    appellant's former employers.  The judge referred to the fact that  the
    revenue may make investigations but the vast majority are concluded  by
    way of tax penalties and settlements and suggested that the  judge  had
    erred by failing to give adequate reasons for this conclusion.

10.  Mr Hussain asked me to consider granting permission in respect of  that
    additional ground.  I told him that I would refuse to grant permission.
     Having read the letter of 13th October, 2014 it was clear to  me  that
    the application was made considerably out of  time  and  there  was  no
    explanation  offered  for  that  late  application.   The   appellant's
    previous application for permission to appeal was  dated  22nd  August,
    2014.  This application was more than a month out of time.

11.  I told him that even if I had granted an  extension  of  time  I  would
    still have refused permission because it is clear  that  the  challenge
    fails to identify any error of law on the part  of  the  judge  and  is
    nothing more than a disagreement with the judge's decision.  It is,  as
    the judge pointed out, a fact that a huge number of revenue and customs
    investigations are concluded without criminal prosecutions.

12.   I  asked  him  if  he  would  care  to  direct  me  to  where  in  the
    determination he claimed that the judge had erred and  he  referred  me
    first to paragraph 40  of  the  determination.   Paragraph  40  of  the
    determination says this:-

         "There has been no evidence placed before me to show that there are
         criminal investigations in  respect  of  his  former  employers  or
         indeed that there are ongoing tax fraud investigations."

13.  Mr Hussain said that that was an  error  because  at  page  14  of  the
    appellant's bundle was a letter from Genga & Company Solicitors Limited
    who had appeared on behalf of the  appellant  in  connection  with  his
    criminal matters which referred to his  attendance  at  Stafford  Crown
    Court.  I pointed out to Mr Hussain that  the  letter  was  dated  27th
    June, 2013 and related to the appellant.  I asked him if there was  any
    evidence to show that there were criminal investigations in respect  of
    the appellant's former employers or evidence to show  that  there  were
    ongoing  tax  fraud  investigations.   He  then  referred   me   to   a
    conversation he had had with Genga & Company Limited.  He told me  that
    he had relayed the contents  of  that  telephone  conversation  to  the
    judge.  He denied having given the judge evidence and agreed that there
    was no evidence before the judge  to  show  that  there  were  criminal
    investigations in respect of the appellant's former employers  or  that
    there were any ongoing tax fraud investigations.

14.  Mr Hussain said that there was a threat  to  the  appellant  should  he
    return to Pakistan because the judge has misunderstood the  appellant's
    claim.  At paragraph 38 the judge says  that  he  is  not  prepared  to
    accept the appellant's claims that he is so famous in Pakistan that  he
    would be recognised wherever he  goes.   This,  Mr  Hussain  suggested,
    demonstrates that the judge misunderstood the evidence.  It is not  the
    appellant's case that  he  would  be  recognised  because  of  his  own
    sporting achievements but  because  of  his  association  with  current
    members of the Pakistan national team.

15.  Quite apart from the fact that the appellant himself had  claimed  that
    he would be at risk because he was a well-known sportsman, I  asked  Mr
    Hussain if he could explain how the fact that the appellant might  know
    some members of the Pakistan cricket team this would cause him to be at
    risk on his return to Pakistan.  He said that  were  the  appellant  to
    make contact with his friends they in turn may report the matter to the
    perpetrators of the fraud who were also their friends.  He told me that
    the appellant communicates with  these  friends  by  telephone  at  the
    moment.  I suggested that  there  was  no  reason  why  he  should  not
    continue to communicate with his cricketing friends by telephone if  he
    wanted to.  If they were truly his friends they were hardly  likely  to
    give  his  whereabouts  away  to  the  perpetrators   of   the   fraud,
    particularly if the appellant asked them not to.  If they were not  his
    friends then he would hardly need to maintain contact with them in  any
    event. I reserved my determination.

16.  At paragraph 38 Judge Deputy Judge Haney had said this:-

         "I am not prepared to accept the Appellant's claims that he  is  so
         famous in Pakistan he would be recognised  wherever  he  goes.   At
         best the Appellant seems to have  had  some  minor  and  peripheral
         involvement with members of the national  Pakistani  cricket  team,
         though this may have only been by being a member of  the  under  19
         squad.  No doubt during this time he would have mixed  with  people
         who went on to be famous cricketers and no doubt he would take  any
         opportunity that he has had, around the world, to identify  himself
         to them and gain some kind of kudos by representing  himself  as  a
         friend of theirs.  Even if he were such a friend I find  it  highly
         implausible that he would be known to the wider population  in  any
         kind of way; it is a well-known fact that famous people are  always
         surrounded by a number of hangers on or people  trying  to  closely
         identify with them or say they have known  them  at  some  time  or
         other."

17.  I do not believe that the judge has in any way erred  or  misunderstood
    the appellant's claim.   If  indeed  these  well-known  cricketers  are
    friends of the appellant then he will know if  they  are  also  friends
    with the fraud perpetrators and whether or not he can trust  them.   It
    appears, however, from what the judge said  at  paragraph  38  that  he
    believed that the appellant  may  have  come  into  contact  with  some
    members of the National Pakistan cricket team by himself having been  a
    member of the under 19 squad but what it  suggests  that  if  they  are
    truly his friends then he will know whether they represent  a  risk  to
    him  or  not.   If  they  are  not  truly  his  friends,   but   merely
    acquaintances, then there is no reason for him  to  make  contact  with
    them at all.  In any event, this ignores the finding of the  judge  who
    did not find the core of the appellant's account credible.  He did  not
    accept that the appellant would be targeted or  had  been  targeted  by
    anybody in the United Kingdom and did not  accept  that  the  appellant
    would be at any risk should he be returned.

18.  Mr Hussain then told me that the appellant was likely  to  be  at  risk
    from the governor of the Pakistan province.  He accepted  that  it  was
    not suggested at all that Mr Sarwar himself was engaged in any criminal
    activity or would have any associations with anyone  who  was  a  known
    criminal.   However,  Mr  Sarwar's  own  son  had  been  convicted   in
    connection with money laundering and Mr Sarwar's  former  business  and
    the business that the appellant was employed  with  did  have  dealings
    together and Mr Sarwar  did  know  the  appellant's  former  boss.   Mr
    Hussain agreed that he could not prove that Mr Sarwar was the owner  of
    any business connected to Kaka Cash and Carry, nor could he  show  that
    any business owned by Mr Sarwar had any links to Kaka Cash  and  Carry.
    Mr Hussain agreed with me that even if Mr Sarwar had  previously  known
    one of the former directors or owners of Kaka Cash  and  Carry  he  may
    very well have severed all links with this  individual,  having  learnt
    that he was the perpetrator of a major VAT fraud.  In any event,  given
    the overall finding of the judge that  the  appellant  was  simply  not
    credible as to the core of his claim it followed that there could be no
    threat to the appellant whether from the governor of Punjab province or
    otherwise.

19.  I was concerned that Mr Hussain had not addressed  me  on  every  issue
    raised in his grounds of appeal, but he told me  that  he  had  nothing
    further to add.

20.  I have  concluded  that  the  making  of  the  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney did not involve the making of any  error  on  a
    point of law.  I uphold the judge's decision which  shall  stand.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
    17th November, 2014
