
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03606/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 23 June 2016                     |On 11 July 2016                         |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [S N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Akinbolu, instructed by Joules Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, [SN], was born on [ ] 1965 and is  a  female
    citizen of Pakistan.  She appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Callender Smith) against a decision of the  respondent  to  remove  her
    from the United Kingdom having  refused  her  claim  for  asylum.   The
    respondent's decision  is  dated  18  February  2015.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  18  March  2016,  allowed  the
    appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is an Ahmadi Muslim.  As grounds record [2] the appellant
    claimed that she had  first  encountered  problems  in  Pakistan  on  1
    January 2015 when she returned to that country  from  a  visit  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The "root cause of her problem" was that she  had  met
    the Ahmadi khalif whilst in the United Kingdom and  this  had  inflamed
    non-Ahmadis to threaten her.  The grounds complain that  there  was  no
    evidence beyond that of the  appellant  herself  that  she  had  had  a
    private audience with the khalif in London.  It was  also  unclear  why
    the appellant, a moderately discreet  practising  Ahmadi,  should  have
    made a voluntary disclosure of her meeting  with  the  khalif  to  non-
    Ahmadi neighbours in Pakistan.

 3. I find that the appeal should be dismissed.   First,  as  Judge  Andrew
    noted when refusing permission in the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge
    had found [62] as a fact that the  appellant  would  not  moderate  the
    expression of her faith whilst in Pakistan (having become  more  active
    as a proselytiser whilst in the United Kingdom)  and  that  this  would
    give rise to risk.  That risk did not appear to be  associated  at  all
    with the appellant's meeting with the khalif in London.  Secondly,  the
    judge was entitled to make findings on the basis of the  evidence  that
    was before him.  That evidence consisted of the  appellant's  oral  and
    written testimony that she had met the khalif  whilst  in  London,  the
    judge was entitled to accept that evidence and make a finding  of  fact
    accordingly.  There was no requirement for the judge to go looking  for
    corroboration of the appellant's evidence.   Thirdly,  as  regards  the
    fact that the appellant had disclosed details of her  meeting  to  non-
    Ahmadis in Pakistan, there appears to be nothing in that  part  of  the
    evidence which contradicts the judge's finding that  the  appellant,  a
    devout Ahmadi whose devotion to her faith had deepened  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom, would not behave in that way.   The  ground  represents
    little more than a disagreement with the finding which was open to  the
    judge on the evidence.

 4. Fourthly, even if I were to set aside  the  decision  for  the  reasons
    stated in the ground and to re-make it, I am aware that  the  appellant
    has now produced evidence corroborating  the  fact  that  she  met  the
    khalif whilst in London.  I am, of course, aware that that evidence was
    not before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  but  Mr  Diwnycz,  for  the
    respondent, told me that  the  new  evidence  would  "prove  the  case"
    advanced by the appellant.  I do not find that the judge erred  in  law
    but, even if I were so to find, I would exercise my discretion  not  to
    set aside the decision in this instance.

Notice of Decision

 5. This appeal is dismissed.



 6. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 4 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
