
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03813/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th March 2016                            |On 11th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               miss Xiaoyan He
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadesham, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of China born on  15th  October  1989.   The
    Appellant left China on 13th March 2009 with the use of a student  visa
    arriving in the UK on the same day.  That visa expired on 13th December
    2013.  The Appellant claimed asylum on 26th March 2014 and  was  served
    with IS151A as an overstayer.  On 17th February 2015 the  Secretary  of
    State served Notice of Refusal on the Appellant.  Within that Notice of
    Refusal the Secretary of State acknowledged the Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum was based on a fear that if returned to  China  she  would  face
    mistreatment due to her religious beliefs as a  Christian  believed  by
    the authorities to follow "the Almighty God" sect.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Robson sitting at  Bradford  on  27th  May  2015.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 30th June 2015 the Appellant's appeals based on
    asylum and human rights grounds were dismissed and  the  Appellant  was
    found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3.  The  Appellant  lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was refused by Designated Judge  McClure  on  24th
    July 2015.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged on 11th August  2015.



 4.  On  21st  September  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam   granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge McWilliam considered that it was  arguable
    that the judge did  not  take  into  account  the  statement  from  the
    Appellant's father.  Further Judge  McWilliam  noted  that  so  far  as
    Ground 1 was concerned the issue was whether or not the  Appellant  had
    had communication with  Hehua  Lin  and  whether  this  individual  had
    communicated information to the  authorities  that  the  Appellant  had
    joined an illegal  sect.   Whether  the  Appellant  was  aware  of  the
    potential criminality in relation to her practice of  Christianity  was
    not material to the decision.  Judge McWilliam held that there  was  no
    freestanding arguable error of law in relation to Ground 1 if the Upper
    Tribunal concluded that there was a material error of law  in  relation
    to Ground 2 that this would impact on the judge's findings at paragraph
    55.

 5. On 8th October 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That response  submitted  inter  alia  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  directed  himself  appropriately  and
    that he refers to the arrest and  release  of  the  Appellant's  father
    within the determination.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears  via  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Jagadesham.  Mr Jagadesham is familiar with this matter.  He
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is  the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal and renewed Grounds  of  Appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr Jagadesham points out that it was before the Immigration Judge  that
    the Appellant feared the Chinese authorities  due  to  her  involvement
    with the Church of  Almighty  God  which  in  China  was  considered  a
    proscribed religious cult.  He acknowledges that she had never  been  a
    member of the church but she was suspected by the authorities of  being
    one.  He submits  that  the  judge  accepts  the  Appellant  "had  some
    knowledge of her claim to faith but such knowledge was lacking in depth
    and was itself subject to contradictions, a fact  referred  to  by  the
    Respondent in the claim."  He poses questions as to how the Appellant's
    knowledge could be shown to be lacking in depth and where and what were
    the contradictions and even more importantly why  were  they  material.
    He submits that this creates a material error and that  the  judge  has
    failed to apply the test of anxious scrutiny.

 8. Further he submits that the Respondent never suggested the  Appellant's
    knowledge of  her  faith  contained  contradictions  and  as  a  result
    contends that the adverse finding  of  credibility  was  perverse.   He
    submits that the judge has failed to take  into  account,  or  address,
    relevant evidence and asks me to give due and proper  consideration  to
    paragraphs 42 onwards, namely those relating to the  judge's  findings.
    He points out that the judge has concluded at paragraph 51  that  there
    was no evidence of there being an arrest and at paragraph 54 there  was
    no evidence that Heua was imprisoned and  that  at  paragraph  56  that
    there was no evidence that the Appellant was wanted by the authorities.
     He submits it was a material error of law to  reach  such  conclusions
    because there was such evidence.  He submits that that consisted of the
    Appellant's testimony and the letter from her father.  He submits  that
    this  was  the  point  taken  up  by  Judge  McWilliam  when   granting
    permission.  He contends the judge has not addressed the letter and  it
    was incumbent upon him to do so.  He further contends  that  there  are
    factual errors set out in the judge's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    case.  He takes me to paragraph 11 of the decision where the judge says



         "She explained that she was a member  of  a  secret  family  church
         having converted to Christianity in 2006 and had been arrested  for
         church involvement in December 2012.".

    Mr Jagadesham points out that  that  is  inaccurate  and  that  such  a
    statement had never been part of the Appellant's  case  nor  had  there
    been any detention.  He submits  the  judge  wrongly  imposed  a  wrong
    standard by relying on the absence of such corroboration  or  proof  of
    such events.  Looking  at  the  issues  as  a  whole  he  submits  that
    generally there has been a failure  which  is  material  to  take  into
    account aspects which ultimately infect the findings at paragraph 55 as
    a whole and he asks me to set aside the decision and to remit it to the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 9. In response Mr Harrison takes me to the Rule 24 response, pointing  out
    that the Secretary of State notes that the judge has actually  referred
    to  the  arrest  and  release  of  the  Appellant's   father   in   the
    determination.  He says this must have a material impact because it  is
    relied upon by the Appellant and therefore  any  comment  made  by  the
    judge must address the relationship of the father's letter to the claim
    and that the weight that the judge gave to  it  is  a  matter  for  the
    judge.  Generally he asks me to endorse the view set out in the  Notice
    of Refusal and to find that there is no material error of law.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. Analysis of this case shows that the approach adopted by Upper Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam is correct.  The starting point is whether or  not  the
    judge took into account the statement from the Appellant's  father.   I
    acknowledge the point made by Mr Harrison that there  is  reference  to
    the father's arrest in the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  but
    there is no reference therein to the letter of the  Appellant's  father
    and that is a material omission.  It may be that the judge  would  have
    come to the same conclusion but it is impossible to comment on that and
    the failure to address it is material.  It goes to  the  findings  that
    there was "no" evidence on certain matters made in the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  when  in  fact  there  clearly  were.   The
    Appellant had provided in evidence that he had actually been mistreated
    and I agree with the submissions of Mr Jagadesham the case has revealed
    the judge has consequently erroneously relied on an absence  of  actual
    or corroborative evidence and  that  that  is  contrary  to  the  lower
    standard and the notion of the benefit of the doubt as set  out  in  KS
    (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC).

13. As a result I am satisfied that the error is material and that it could
    well have impacted on the judge's findings set  out  at  paragraph  55.
    The correct approach consequently is to find there is a material  error
    of law; to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and
    to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  with
    none of the findings of fact to stand.

Additional Issue

14. There is one further issue that may or may not  be  relevant  when  the
    matter comes back before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is both clear  to
    me and I am advised by Mr Jagadesham that the Appellant is pregnant.  I
    understand that the birth is due to take place either  at  the  end  of
    April or the beginning of May.  The Appellant already has one child who
    is 21 months old.  I am advised that the father of the  expected  child
    is not a British citizen and has no status in the UK.  This appeal  has
    not in any way addressed the issues that might arise  as  a  result  of
    this child's birth.  It is agreed by both legal representatives that it
    is not a matter I  need  to  concern  myself  with,  be  it  they  both
    acknowledge that it may be an issue that needs to be addressed  in  the
    future and if that were to be the case it would have  to  be  addressed
    with a fresh claim.  In such circumstances that issue is not  one  that
    is extant before me.

Notice of Decision and Directions

     15. (1)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses  a  material
         error of law and is set aside.  None of the findings of fact are to
         stand.

    (2)  The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
         before any Immigration Judge other than Immigration  Judge  Robson.



    (3)  That it is  recorded  that  the  Appellant  lives  in  Oldham  and
         consequently it is appropriate that the rehearing of this matter be
         listed either in Bradford or in Manchester.

    (4)  That due to the imminence of the birth of the  Appellant's  second
         child the listing of the remitted hearing take place on  the  first
         available date after 1st July 2016  with  an  estimated  length  of
         hearing of three hours.

    (5)  That there be  leave  to  either  party  to  file  and  serve  any
         additional witness statements and evidence upon which they seek  to
         rely on a date  at  least  fourteen  days  prior  to  the  restored
         hearing.

    (6)  Mandarin interpreter required.

16. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

