
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03806/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 December 2014                           |On 8 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 SHOAIB AWAN
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ashiq of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a Pakistani  national  born  on  8  April  1968.   The
    appellant travelled to the UK in 2002 and 2006.  His most recent  visit
    was in 2007 when he travelled with a visit visa valid until 14th  March
    2009.  He worked illegally until 2011 when he was apprehended by police
    near Dover.  He attempted to leave the UK.  His visa had  expired.   He
    was therefore arrested and  detained.   Eventually  the  appellant  was
    issued with a travel document by the Pakistani authorities with a  view
    to return to his country of origin.  However, on  1  December  2011  he
    claimed asylum and he was given temporary admission to  the  UK  on  14
    December 2011.

2.   The appellant claimed that his  removal  to  Pakistan  would  not  only
    breach his rights to a private or family life which he  had  formed  in
    the UK under Article 8 of the ECHR but also that  he  was  entitled  to
    asylum here.  This was based on a fear of persecution from  a  gang  of
    four brothers who were related to  him.   They  were  alleged  to  have
    threatened him and extorted money from  him.   This  was  in  his  home
    village of Gujar Khan.  The  appellant  claims  that  they  killed  his
    family members and other people and as such the appellant had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason.

3.   However, the respondent considered that the appellant's claim  was  not
    based on a fear of persecution for a Convention reason but  rather  was
    based on a criminal  matter  and  the  appellant  would  be  adequately
    protected  from  such  criminal  behaviour  by  the  Pakistani  police.
    Accordingly, the application was refused on all grounds on 2 June 2014.
     Annex A of that decision sets out the consequences.  In  summary,  the
    respondent decided to remove the appellant as an  illegal  entrant  and
    served notice of that decision on 3 June 2014.

The Appeal Proceedings

4.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and that appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley (the Immigration Judge)  on  10
    July 2014.  The Immigration  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  because  he
    considered that the appellant's credibility had been seriously  damaged
    by his failure to claim asylum until he was apprehended by  immigration
    officials in 2011. The appellant claimed that his family  were  pursued
    by the Shia gang.  The Immigration Judge accepted that there  had  been
    First Incident Reports (FIRs) into the alleged incidents involving  the
    gang on the appellant's family.  However, the Immigration Judge did not
    accept that the appellant was a  target  for  gangs  and  some  of  the
    allegations made at the hearing were not made in the substantive asylum
    interview.  Some of the "FIRs" may relate  to  genuine  complaints,  he
    found, but there could be a number of reasons  why  attacks  had  taken
    place and having considered the evidence given  by  the  witnesses  the
    Immigration Judge was not satisfied that he should attach weight to the
    witnesses.  He concluded from the facts that both the  appellant's  and
    the other witnesses' evidence had not been credible.

5.   The appellant sought permission to appeal  on  grounds  settled  on  24
    July 2014.  The grounds state that  the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to
    consider or make  findings  on  the  relevant  evidence,  specifically,
    various affidavits, and made errors of fact or assessment or failed  to
    give sufficient weight to documentary evidence of the FIRs.

6.   Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb found that there  were  arguable  merits  in
    these grounds because it appeared to him that the Immigration Judge had
    failed to consider all the evidence in reaching his  adverse  findings.
    There were a number of statements supporting the appellant's claim that
    he was targeted by the Ali gang.  There was evidence  that  the  family
    had been attacked and indeed had been targeted by that gang.

The Hearing

7.   At the hearing  I  heard  oral  representations  by  both  parties  and
    received a written skeleton argument from Mr Ashiq,  who  appeared  for
    the appellant.   Mr  Ashiq  pointed  out  that  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal there was both the appellant's evidence and that  of  his  two
    brothers' which detailed the attacks on his family.  It seems that  the
    Immigration Judge found at paragraph 39 of his determination  that  the
    appellant's family had continued to reside in the family  home  in  the
    village where they had lived before.  The Immigration Judge went on  to
    find that there was "no evidence that they  had  been  subject  to  any
    attacks" but this was in fact incorrect.  Mr  Ashiq  also  pointed  out
    that the  Immigration  Judge  had  noted  the  appellant's  sister  had
    returned from Karachi to the village from whence the  family  had  come
    and "experienced no problems".  These findings  were  contrary  to  the
    evidence which was that there had been attacks  since  the  appellant's
    departure for the UK.  The Immigration Judge should have looked at  the
    witnesses and given their evidence appropriate weight.  It was accepted
    that it was open to him  to  reject  their  evidence  but  he  had  not
    considered it.  Furthermore, the FIRs  were  not  properly  considered.
    They were, on the face of it, important documents  in  support  of  the
    appellant's claim.

8.   In response, Mr Whitwell accepted that the Immigration  Judge  had  not
    referred to the two affidavits in any, or any sufficient, detail in his
    findings.  It was also accepted  that  the  appellant  had  given  oral
    evidence  together  with  his  two  witnesses.   Nevertheless,  it  was
    contended that the Immigration  Judge  had  given  clear  and  adequate
    reasons for dismissing the appeal.

9.   Mr  Ashiq  said  in  reply  that  it  was  clearly  an  error  for  the
    Immigration Judge to find there was "no evidence" when there was  some.
    This  was  not  a  "side  issue",  rather,  it  undermined  the   whole
    determination.  The Upper Tribunal may feel the need to hear some  oral
    evidence from  the  appellant  and  his  witnesses  before  reaching  a
    decision as to the correct weight to attach to this evidence.  Mr Ashiq
    suggested the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  fresh
    hearing.

Analysis and Conclusions

10.  The burden of proof rested  on  the  appellant  to  show  that  it  was
    reasonably likely his account was true.  Documentary  evidence  is  not
    required in asylum and human rights claims but  any  document  that  is
    produced has to be considered by the Tribunal  and  appropriate  weight
    ought to be given to it.

11.  The appellant gave oral evidence, called two witnesses and  produced  a
    number of documents.  He claimed before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    the problems between the Ali family and the appellant's family began in
    2001 and claimed that a number of FIRs had been  lodged  in  connection
    with these incidents.  The Immigration Judge considered the appellant's
    evidence and that of his witnesses but appears to have given inadequate
    consideration to the documentary evidence.  It is that  issue  that  is
    the principal basis for the present appeal.

12.  I have  carefully  considered  the  findings,  and  in  particular  the
    finding at paragraph  39  of  the  determination  that  there  was  "no
    evidence" that the appellant's family had been subject to  any  attacks
    since his claim.  The Immigration Judge also  specifically  noted  that
    the appellant's sister had returned to the  village,  from  whence  the
    family came from Karachi, but had experienced "no problems".

13.  It was clearly an error for the Immigration Judge to state  that  there
    was "no evidence" when  there  was  such  evidence.   The  question  is
    whether that error was material?

14.  Having carefully considered the matter, I have concluded  that  it  was
    material  because  it  may  impact  on  the  ultimate  findings  as  to
    credibility and risk on return.

15.  The question that now arises is  what  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  do
    about the identified error.

16.  The Immigration Judge comprehensively rejected the credibility  of  the
    appellant's account.  In particular, he noted that  the  appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom for four years before submitting  any  claim
    for asylum or human rights protection. He only advanced that claim when
    he was apprehended by immigration officials for  working  illegally  in
    the UK.  The respondent set out in her  refusal  the  full  immigration
    history which demonstrates that the appellant had been to the UK  on  a
    number of occasions prior to his arrival in 2007 travelling on his  own
    passport with a visit visa.  Indeed, he had travelled to the UK in 2002
    and 2006.  There was no indication on either of those occasions  or  on
    the subsequent occasion that he had any reason to fear  persecution  in
    his own country.  There were a number of points that  could  have  been
    made against the appellant's account.  There were  a  number  of  other
    clear findings by the Immigration Judge which in my judgment should  be
    allowed to stand and which need not be disturbed by the failure of  the
    Immigration Judge to refer to the incidents involving  the  appellant's
    family since he came to the UK.  He did not find that the  FIRs  showed
    that the appellant himself was the target and he  did  not  accept  the
    submission that the police had deliberately failed to  act.   In  fact,
    the respondent clearly  took  the  point,  and  the  Immigration  Judge
    accepted, that there was no evidence that the  police  did  not  regard
    such attacks seriously.  The Immigration Judge did not accept that  the
    gang attacks were "sectarian" nor that they were targeted  towards  the
    appellant or his family.  There were, in fact, a host of  reasons,  why
    the Immigration Judge rejected the account.

17.  The correct approach to the documents  was  set  out  in  the  case  of
    Tanveer Ahmed, relied on by the respondent.  The respondent is entitled
    to reject documents submitted  in  support  of  asylum  claims  without
    alleging fraud and submitting them to forensic analysis.  It  seems  to
    me the respondent  was  entitled  to  attach  little  weight  to  these
    documents provided they were considered by her.  The Immigration  Judge
    would have been equally entitled to attach little weight to them. In my
    judgment having regard to the whole evidence in the case and the  clear
    adverse credibility findings made by the Immigration Judge  should  was
    entitled to reject the appellant's case in its entirety.

18.  The respondent also took the point that there was  an  internal  flight
    alternative available to  the  appellant  in  Pakistan,  although  this
    appears not to have been considered by the Immigration Judge.  A  large
    number of individuals that  claim  asylum  abroad  return  to  Pakistan
    successfully reintegrate  into  that  society.   The  appellant  was  a
    financially astute person, the respondent found, and there is no reason
    to suppose that he would not be  able  to  reintegrate  into  Pakistani
    society.  Consideration was given to every aspect of his  case  by  the
    respondent and it seems that the respondent's  decision  was  one  with
    which the Immigration Judge wholeheartedly agreed.

19.  Therefore, in conclusion,  although  there  was  a  material  error  in
    stating that there was "no evidence"  when  there  was  such  evidence,
    having carefully consider that evidence  set  against  the  Immigration
    Judge's other findings I am not persuaded to take a different  view  of
    the appellant's credibility than the First-tier Tribunal.  The evidence
    left out of consideration was material in the sense that  it  may  have
    affected the outcome of the case but ultimately my  conclusion  is  the
    same as the Immigration Judge.

Notice of Decision

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does contain a  material  error
    of law.  In particular, the conclusion in paragraph 39 that  there  was
    "no evidence that the family had been subject  to  attacks"  since  the
    appellant's claim was plainly wrong.  However,  having  considered  the
    evidence of those attacks  I  do  not  consider  it  upsets  the  whole
    determination.  Indeed, I substitute the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in
    relation to that  evidence  that  it  is  not  evidence  to  which  any
    significant weight will attach and the overall conclusion  remains  the
    same.

21.  Accordingly, the appellant's appeal is allowed to  the  limited  extent
    indicated.  I substitute the decision of the Upper Tribunal which is to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds  and
    to dismiss his claim for  humanitarian  protection.   Accordingly,  the
    respondent's decision to reject those claims stands.

22.  No anonymity direction was made in this case.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



