
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03769/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                             |       Determination          |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 20 August 2015                            |       On 4 September 2015    |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     L R
                          (anonymity direction MAde)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M. O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Ruddy, Jain, Neil & Ruddy Solicitors

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   This is an appeal by LR against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Bradshaw promulgated on 27 May 2015. We make an order pursuant to
    Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless and
    until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted
    anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify her or any member of their family. This direction applies both
    to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  December  1988.   She
    entered the UK on a Tier 4 student visa in June 2010.  She left the  UK
    in 2011 and applied for a further Tier 4 visa which was  granted  on  8
    March 2012, giving her leave  to  enter  until  15  August  2014.   The
    appellant re-entered the UK on 4 April 2012.   On  15  March  2013  the
    licence of the Tier 4 sponsoring organisation was  revoked  and  on  26
    September 2013 the appellant's leave was curtailed to 25 November 2013.
     On 23 September 2013 the appellant requested  an  appointment  at  the
    Asylum Screening Unit and claimed  asylum  on  16  October  2013.   The
    respondent refused that application on 18 February 2015 and a  decision
    was made to refuse to vary the appellant's leave and to remove  her  by
    way of directions under Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The appellant appealed on the basis that she is a  refugee  as  defined
    within The Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred to as "The  2006
    Regulations") or alternatively she claimed humanitarian  protection  as
    defined within paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  The  appellant
    further relied on the Human Rights Act 1998, and specifically Article 2
    of the ECHR.

4.   Judge Bradshaw accepted, as had the respondent, that the appellant  has
    been involved in activities in  the  UK  with  the  TGTE,  a  pro-Tamil
    organisation active in the UK.  The judge further  accepted  (again  as
    the respondent did) that it is possible to identify the appellant  from
    the photographs in question.  However,  the  judge  did  not  otherwise
    accept the appellant's account and was not satisfied that she would  be
    of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

5    On 22 June 2015 the appellant was granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the basis that there may be arguable  errors  in  the
    judge's findings, in particular in relation to  handwritten  amendments
    made by the appellant and the judge's credibility findings on the basis
    of his understanding of those amendments.
6.   The appeal came before us.  As accepted by  Mr  Ruddy  there  were  two
    main grounds of appeal amongst the somewhat discursive lengthy  grounds
    before us: the first ground being an alleged error by the judge in  his
    application of the country guidance case of GJ & others (post civil war
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  The second ground was
    an  alleged  misinterpretation  of  the  evidence,  specifically   with
    reference to the manuscript notes on the interview which were added  in
    the five days following the asylum interview.
Ground 1

7.   Mr Ruddy argued that although Judge  Bradshaw  noted  the  respondent's
    acceptance that it was possible to  identify  the  appellant  from  the
    photographs that the  appellant  had  produced,  the  judge  failed  to
    adequately assess  the  issue  of  recognition  and  detection  of  the
    appellant from the photographs.  The  judge  had  noted  that  TGTE  is
    alleged by the Sri Lankan authorities to be a front for  the  LTTE  and
    the judge noted the submission that TGTE is a banned  organisation  and
    claimed by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  to  be  terrorists  with  the
    individuals involved being at extreme risk.  He argued  that,  although
    the judge noted that he was specifically referred to paragraph  338  of
    GJ & others in connection with the Sri Lankan authority's use of facial
    recognition technology which also stressed the significance of the  Sri
    Lankan authorities' perception of such individuals and highlighted that
    they are targets of the Sri Lankan authorities,  the  judge  failed  to
    adequately consider these issues particularly at paragraph [98] of  his
    decision and reasons.

8.   In addition it was argued that although the judge indicated,  at  [104]
    of his decision, that he had taken into account that  there  was  video
    footage of the appellant's speech at the TGTE conference  in  September
    2013, he failed to state how he had taken this into account.  Mr  Ruddy
    submitted that the judge's analysis of GJ  &  others  was  also  flawed
    because of the error set out at ground 2. He asserted  that  the  judge
    had  clearly  misinterpreted  paragraph  119,  121  and  124   of   the
    appellant's asylum interview record.  It was Mr Ruddy's case  that  the
    judge's analysis of GJ & others was also flawed because he had based it
    only on the issue of the photographic evidence and not additionally  on
    the basis of the two alleged  incidents  with  the  appellant's  family
    which the judge had found had not occurred; Mr Ruddy argued  that  this
    finding arose  from  his  misinterpretation  of  the  asylum  interview
    record.

9.   Our analysis of this ground is as follows. The judge in assessing GJ  &
    others placed weight, at [97] of his decision, on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had never been named and that she had used a  different  name
    of 'Layanya' when working with the TGTE in the UK.

10.  The judge considered paragraph 336  of  GJ  &  others  and  noted  that
    photographs are taken of public demonstrations and that the  Government
    of Sri Lanka  (GOSL)  may  be  using  face  recognition  technology  to
    identify participants.  He went on to direct himself that the  question
    which concerns the GOSL is identification of  Tamil  activists  working
    for Tamil separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri  Lankan  State.
    The judge noted that the Upper  Tribunal  did  not  consider  that  the
    attendance at demonstrations in the diaspora  alone  as  sufficient  to
    create a real risk or a reasonable degree of likelihood that  a  person
    will attract adverse attention on return to Sri Lanka.

11.  The judge did not accept that the appellant had been identified by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities from the images of her at various demonstrations
    and relied at [101] of his decision on his earlier findings that he did
    not accept that the appellant's family had been the subject of interest
    from the Sri Lankan authorities in September and December 2013.

12.  The judge also reminded himself of what was said at head  note  (8)  of
    GJ & others as to the Sri Lankan authorities' approach being  based  on
    sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within Sri Lanka  and
    in the diaspora and that the authorities  know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
    Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone  in
    the northern province has some  level  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE
    during the civil war.  The judge set out that the head note went on  to
    state that in post-conflict Sri Lanka an individual's past history will
    be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lanka state
    or the Sri Lankan government.

13.  The judge found at [103] of his decision that:

     'Taking into account of my above stated findings it  is  my  conclusion
    that if the Appellant is returned to Sri Lanka  she  would  not  be  of
    adverse interest to the authorities.  In my view the Appellant has  not
    demonstrated that her involvement with the said  TGTE  activities  have
    resulted in a profile of any significance which puts her  into  any  of
    the risk categories outlined in the said case of GJ & others.'

14.  Mrs O'Brien argued that when considering the entirety  of  the  judge's
    findings he was fully aware that the respondent  had  conceded  it  was
    possible to identify the appellant.  In her submission,  from  [96]  to
    [104] of the decision, it was clear that the judge had  considered  all
    the factors and held, given the level  of  activity  and  the  lack  of
    acceptance that the appellant's family had been targeted in Sri  Lanka,
    that the appellant would not be at risk on return.

15.  However, notwithstanding the judge's findings that he  did  not  accept
    that the appellant has been identified by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    and that he did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's  family  had  been
    targeted in Sri Lanka, we conclude that the judge erred in  failing  to
    make adequate or clear findings of the risk to the appellant  of  being
    identified on return and targeted due to her activities in the UK  with
    the TGTE despite rejection of her claim  of  adverse  interest  in  her
    family in Sri Lanka.

16.  As noted  above  the  judge  was  aware  that  the  TGTE  is  a  banned
    organisation in the UK.  The judge also noted, at [96] of the decision,
    the presenting officer's concession that it was not disputed  that  she
    'has been involved in the activities specified by her'.  The respondent
    had also made a concession in the refusal letter, as it was noted  that
    the appellant had:

    'provided a detailed and consistent account of the  issues  which  this
    group campaigns for as well as accounting for the reasons why you chose
    to join.  You have provided a similarly detailed and plausible  account
    of the  particular  activities  which  you  participated  in  with  the
    organisation'.
    We note that the appellant, at paragraph 45  of  her  asylum  interview
    identified the aims of TGTE including 'Tamil Ealam, i.e., 'separate the
    state' and that TGTE 'wants  the  Tamil  rights  regained  or  achieved
    through politics rather than violence'.

17.  Given that the judge had accepted that the respondent had noted it  was
    possible to identify the appellant from the  photographs  provided  and
    the judge took into account the country guidance findings that the GOSL
    may be using face recognition technology, we are of the view  that  the
    judge placed undue weight on the fact that the appellant has never been
    named and used a different name when she worked for the TGTE.

18.  Whilst this finding may not by  itself  be  material,  the  judge  also
    erred in our view in failing to make adequate findings as to  the  risk
    of the appellant being identified by the Sri Lankan authorities on  the
    basis of the photographs and video of her and her activity  in  the  UK
    for TGTE.  It was insufficient in our view to find  that  she  had  not
    been identified thus far and that her family had not been targeted, but
    not go on to make an evaluative assessment of the risk to the appellant
    on the basis of her particular profile and her accepted  activities  in
    the UK for TGTE.

19.  Although the judge found, at [103] of his decision, that:

     'the appellant has not demonstrated that her involvement with the said
    TGTE activities have resulted in a profile  of  any  significant  which
    puts her into any of the risk categories outlined in the said  case  of
    GJ & others',


    he failed in our view to engage with her specific  activities  and  how
    those would be perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities.  The judge  has
    conflated his negative credibility findings, that the appellant had not
    (to date) been identified by the Sri Lankan authorities  and  that  her
    family had not been targeted in Sri Lanka, with a separate finding that
    she would not be of adverse interest to the GOSL if returned  now.   In
    our view the judge made a material error in making inadequate  separate
    findings on that risk, given the acceptance of her TGTE  activities  in
    the UK, the acceptance that the appellant can be  identified  from  the
    photographs she  provided  and  that  the  GOSL  may  be  using  facial
    recognition technology, together with the acceptance that the TGTE is a
    banned organisation considered by the GOSL to be a front for the LTTE.

20.  It is not in dispute that appellant has been involved in activities  in
    the UK including her membership of  TGTE  in  the  UK.   That  included
    petitioning in relation to the UK Prime Minister's trip to  Sri  Lanka,
    passing a petition to her MP, Mike Gapes and confirmation from TGTE  of
    the appellant's attendance at a number of meetings.  The  appellant  in
    her witness statement set out in detail her activities for TGTE in  the
    UK including speaking at a 'Tamil Genocide Conference'  on  28  and  29
    September 2013 which the appellant indicated was broadcast live and has
    also been able to view  on  YouTube.   The  appellant  in  her  witness
    statement (at pages 9, 10 and 11) set out the  details  of  her  speech
    which included allegations of abuses carried  out  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities against Tamils.

21.  Although the judge at [104] of his decision stated that  he  took  into
    account 'what the Appellant has specified about video  footage  of  her
    speech at the TGTE conference in September 2013' given the respondent's
    acceptance of the appellant's activities in the UK including as set out
    in the Reasons for Refusal letter and as noted by the judge at [95], it
    is a material error in our view that he then failed to analyse  at  all
    the extent of the appellant's activity and failed to give any  adequate
    reasons as to why, given her activity and given  the  country  guidance
    findings including at paragraph 336 of GJ & others that the diaspora is
    'heavily penetrated by the security forces', the appellant would not be
    identified and would not be perceived as indicating a present  risk  to
    the unitary Sri Lanka state or the Sri Lankan government.

22.  It is not a foregone conclusion in our view,  that  if  the  judge  had
    proceeded to  make  such  separate  findings  with  reasons,  that  the
    appellant  would  not  have  succeeded,  notwithstanding  the   judge's
    negative credibility findings.

23.  We do therefore find a material error of law in relation to Ground 1.

Ground 2

24.  In respect of ground 2, the judge cannot be faulted per se  for  making
    the best of hand written annotations to the interview record which  had
    been submitted to the respondent in the five  days  subsequent  to  the
    asylum interview.

25.  However there were a number of errors in the judge's  approach  to  the
    entirety  of  this  evidence,  which  specifically   related   to   the
    appellant's claim that her family had been approached in Sri Lanka.

26.  The judge, at [48] of his decision interpreted the end  of  the  answer
    to question 119 of the asylum interview, as follows:

     'Then I did the presentation afterwards and that they came to  know  so
    afterwards when I after the presentation phoned  they  wouldn't  answer
    but they called me after this 3 months  the  authorities  came  to  say
    about this.'

27.  Mr Ruddy at the hearing before us indicated that with  the  handwritten
    annotations it should have read:

     'Then I did the presentation afterwards and that they came to  know  so
    afterwards when I phoned they wouldn't answer but they called me  after
    this.  Three months after the presentation the authorities came  to  my
    home about this'.

28.  Although Mrs O'Brien stated that it was  not  made  sufficiently  clear
    what the judge was to take from the amendments and she argued  that  it
    was still not clear whether it was the error of the interpreter or  the
    transcriber, Mr Ruddy indicated at paragraph 2 of his grounds  that  he
    had referred the judge to this answer  being  key  to  the  appellant's
    credibility and the judge had not indicated that he did not  understand
    any of the handwritten amendments and had declined Mr Ruddy's offer  to
    read over the amendment accurately.

29.  Question 121 of the asylum interview record reads as follows:

     'Since your sister's arrests, and 3 months later, have the  authorities
    been to your house again'?

    The judge at [87] of his decision and reasons did not accept Mr Ruddy's
    submission that this question indicated that the  interviewing  officer
    understood there to be two incidents, one in September 2013 and one  in
    December 2013 as the judge 'did  not  take  this  meaning  out  of  the
    question'.  However the judge fails to adequately explain why this  was
    the case or what alternative meaning he took from question 121.

30.  Mr Ruddy submitted that it was not rationally  open  to  the  judge  to
    interpret question 121  as  he  did  and  that  he  had  not  explained
    adequately why he did.

31.  He also  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    appellant's answer to paragraph 124 of the asylum interview  where  she
    referred to 'first time when they have  been  to  house'.   It  was  Mr
    Ruddy's submission that this was further evidence  that  the  appellant
    had clearly referred to two visits by the Sri Lankan  authorities.   He
    argued that the judge was wrong at [87] of his  decision  to  interpret
    this as meaning 'at first' in relation to one alleged incident and that
    the judge had completely misinterpreted core aspects of the appellant's
    account.

32.  Although the provision of  barely  legible  hand  written  annotations,
    without further, was clearly inadequate in our  view,  nonetheless  the
    judge did fail to give adequate reasons for his overall  interpretation
    of the appellant's cumulative evidence at interview as, in his findings
    (at [87] of his  decision),  not  containing  'any  reference'  to  the
    December 2013 incident.  Even without  the  handwritten  amendments  to
    question 119 of the asylum interview, we  are  of  the  view  that  the
    recorded reference at  119  to  something  happening  after  3  months,
    together with the interviewer's  reference  at  paragraph  121  to  the
    appellant's 'sister's arrest and 3 months later'  and  the  appellant's
    reference at paragraph 124 of her asylum interview to the  'first  time
    when they have been to house', leads to the conclusion that  there  was
    likely to have been evidence given at interview as to a second visit by
    the Sri Lankan authorities, 3 months after the first date.

33.  Although taking an opposing view may have been a finding  open  to  the
    judge,  given  the  cumulative  evidence  referred  to  above  and  the
    appellant's subsequent witness statement confirming that there were two
    incidents, in our view he failed to give adequate reasons for  reaching
    the findings he did.

34.  Although we note that the judge's negative  credibility  findings  were
    clearly not based solely on this identified error and  that  the  judge
    made a number of other  negative  credibility  findings,  including  in
    relation to the appellant's evidence as to the claimed first  visit  to
    her family by the Sri Lankan authorities in particular and in  relation
    to the appellant's actions in the UK after her college was closed,  the
    material error in respect of the appellant's evidence about the claimed
    second visit has in our view infected the entirety of  the  credibility
    findings; we note for instance the  judge's  finding  at  [89]  of  his
    decision and reasons, in relation to the disputed  second  incident  in
    December 2013:

     'this is another instance where the Appellant  has  not  provided  full
    and accurate information to the Respondent and her  failure  to  do  so
    further damages the credibility of her claim in general.'

Remaining Grounds

35.  Mr Ruddy indicated that he continued to rely on his  remaining  grounds
    including in relation to alleged typographical and other errors in  the
    judgment.  We are not of the view that  there  is  any  material  error
    disclosed in this regard.  However for the  reasons  we  have  set  out
    above in relation to grounds 1 and ground 2 the decision  falls  to  be
    set aside.

36.  We consider that the judge has materially erred in law  such  that  the
    decision and reasons cannot stand.  Although we considered remaking the
    decision in the Upper Tribunal, we are of the view that  under  section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2, the nature  and
    extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is particularly the case as fresh credibility  findings
    will need to be made in their entirety.

Notice of Decision

37.  The appeal is allowed.  The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside and the case is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.  No findings are to stand.  The member(s)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge Bradshaw.


Signed                                  Date: 3 September 2015


M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



