
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/03420/2015

                                                  aa/06169/2015

                                                  AA/03426/2015

                                                  AA/03424/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18th July 2016                          |On 27th July 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between


                                  MR A D D
                                   mrs DMD
                                  Miss H SD
                                 Master RDD
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Malhotra instructed by Marsh and Partners,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Officer Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Thew.  She dismissed their  appeal  against  the  refusal
    dated 13th February 2015 by the Secretary of State of their  claim  for
    asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  protection  under  the  European
    Convention.

 2. The appellants are  a  family  of  Sri  Lankan  nationals.   The  first
    appellant left Sri Lanka on 11th June 2012 using his own passport and a
    valid family visit visa and claimed  asylum  on  5th  July  2012.   The
    second appellant claimed to have arrived in the  UK  on  25th  November
    2013 with their two dependant children on  a  direct  flight  from  Sri
    Lanka and she attended  the  Asylum  Screening  Unit  Croydon  on  11th
    December 2013 with her two children as dependants.  The  children  were
    born on 20th May 2006 and 23rd September 2011 and are 10  and  4  years
    old respectively.

 3. At a hearing on 21st  September  2015  a  direction  was  made  to  the
    respondent to serve a document verification report (DVR) relating to an
    arrest warrant document which had been provided by the first appellant.
     The DVR was to be  provided  no  later  than  eight  weeks  from  21st
    September 2015.

 4. At the commencement of the hearing before Judge Thew  on  27th  January
    2016 (clearly later  than  8  weeks  from  21st  September  2015),  the
    appellants' representatives made  an  application  for  an  adjournment
    because the document verification report provided by  the  Home  Office
    had been served on the day before the hearing.  The application was not
    opposed by the representative for the Secretary of State but the  judge
    considered that there was no unfairness to the appellants in proceeding
    with the hearing and refused the application.  She put the matter  back
    in  the  list  to  allow  the  appellants'   representative   to   take
    instructions from his client and proceeded with the appeal at  a  later
    stage.  So  much  was  recorded  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision at paragraph 4.

 5. That decision was challenged by the appellant's representative.  It was
    submitted that the authenticity of the arrest warrant produced  by  the
    appellants was such that it was either genuine or not and  that  should
    be established and appropriate weight assigned.  The  decision  of  the
    judge for not accepting the arrest warrant was based on  that  document
    not matching the subjective judgments of what the judge would expect to
    see in a Sri Lankan arrest warrant.  The perception relied  on  by  the
    judge was at no point raised against the appellants by anyone  and  his
    views were speculative.  The judge gave no reasoning for  her  decision
    other than "there is no evidence to suggest that the Sri Lankan  system
    would be any different from any other system" and she determined that

         "The problem with a  warrant  is  simply  that  the  court  directs
         someone to arrest the appellant i.e. in this case where it says the
         person to whom the warrant is directed that should be quite clearly
         be logically be a person/a body who has that authority".

 6. The judge, it was contended by the appellants, was bringing no  special
    knowledge to her assessment of  the  veracity  of  the  arrest  warrant
    document and her assessment was contrary to the  principles  enunciated
    in Kasolo v Secretary of State for the Home Department 1310.  The judge
    had applied her own knowledge from a British system  to  a  Sri  Lankan
    arrest warrant.  The appellants were never fully or properly  told  the
    case against them.  The respondent was given a deadline to report  back
    to the court and the appellants to allow the appellants to make further
    enquiries.  The DVR, the respondent's evidence,  was  only  served  the
    afternoon before the hearing and they were unable to  properly  address
    the issues in the DVR.  Fairness dictated the concerns that the learned
    judge had should have been pointed out further to Nwaigwe (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 IAC.

 7. In addition there were concerns expressed with regards to Section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2005.

 8. I have taken account of the submissions of  both  Ms  Malhotra  and  Mr
    Duffy in respect of this case.  Nwaigwe is  clear  that  the  essential
    principle to be addressed in relation  to  an  adjournment  request  is
    whether it is fair not whether it is reasonable.

 9. Nwaigwe confirmed

    'If a Tribunal refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT  acted  reasonably.   Rather,
    the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there any  deprivation
    of the affected party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

10. The judge clearly sets out the case in relation to the application  for
    adjournment at paragraphs 54 to 58 and she recorded

         "54. The warrant  document  provided  by  the  appellant  with  the
             translation was the subject of the DVR which states  that  the
             warrant was verified as not genuine, that  information  coming
             from Colombo.  Mr. Garrod objected to the admission of the DVR
             requesting an adjournment and said that  the  appellant  could
             obtain further evidence about this.  I do not consider the DVR
             to be of real assistance as the problem with it is that  there
             is nothing to  indicate  the  experience  of  the  person  who
             verified the arrest warrant.  However,  when  looking  at  the
             arrest warrant itself and the translation it simply  does  not
             make sense.  There is no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  Sri
             Lankan system would be any different from any other system  in
             that an arrest warrant is what it is, that  is  a  warrant  to
             enable  the  authorities  to  arrest   an   individual.    The
             translation shows that the name of the person  in  respect  of
             whom the warrant is issued gives the details of the appellant,
             i.e. he is the person whom the  authorities  are  expected  to
             arrest.  The  particulars are given that the reasons  for  the
             issue of the warrant are for contempt of court and aiding  the
             LTTE, but the warrant  then  goes  on  to  state  that  it  is
             directed to a person and again the appellant's own details are
             entered in that section.  It then continues, "You  are  hereby
             required and authorised to arrest the above named  person  and
             to produce  him  before  this  court"  and  there  is  then  a
             signature said to be a registrar of a magistrates' court.  The
             problem with the warrant is  simply  that  the  court  directs
             someone to arrest the appellant, i.e. in this  case  where  it
             says the person to whom the warrant is  directed  that  should
             quite clearly logically  be  a  person/a  body  who  has  that
             authority.  It makes no sense at all  for  that  part  of  the
             warrant to have the appellant's name and not a person to  whom
             it is directed by the court to arrest the appellant.

         55.  The Respondent provided a letter dated 3 July  2015  from  the
             British High Commission Colombo identified as coming from  the
             Second Secretary, a named individual dealing  with  migration,
             this letter being addressed to the Presenting  Officer's  Unit
             at the Home Office.  The letter stated that 80 cases had  been
             checked since January 2014, 30 of them  relating  to  attorney
             endorsed documents from Sri Lanka.  The letter sets  out  full
             details of checks made on letters from attorneys compared with
             checks made with the Police Station or courts that purportedly
             issued warrants and  the  conclusion  was  that  in  the  vast
             majority, 86.7% of letters provided by  Sri  Lankan  attorneys
             were verified as not credible.  The  conclusion  that,  "Where
             there are no supporting  documents  to  verify,  our  findings
             incline us to be cautious about accepting  the  assertions  in
             the letters of Sri Lankan attorneys".

         56.  In PJ (Sri Lanka -v-SSHD) [2014] EWCA Civ 1011  the  Court  of
             Appeal considered the question of when the Respondent might be
             expected to verify  appellant's  documents  and  Lord  Justice
             Fulford at paragraphs 30-32 said as follows,

                  30.  Therefore, simply  because  a  relevant  document  is
                      potentially capable of being verified does  not  mean
                      that the national authorities have an  obligation  to
                      take this step.  Instead, it may be necessary to make
                      an enquiry in order to verify  the  authenticity  and
                      reliability of a document - depending always  on  the
                      particular facts of the case -  when  it  is  at  the
                      centre of the request  for  protection,  and  when  a
                      simple process of enquiry will  conclusively  resolve
                      its authenticity and reliability (see Singh v Belgium
                      [101] - [105]).  I do not consider that there is  any
                      material difference in approach between the decisions
                      in Tanveer Ahmed and Singh v Belgium, in that in  the
                      latter case the Strasbourg court simply addressed one
                      of   the   exceptional   situations   when   national
                      authorities   should   undertake   a    process    of
                      verification.

                  31.  In my view, the consequences of a decision  that  the
                      national  authorities  are   in   breach   of   their
                      obligations  to  undertake  a   proper   process   of
                      verification is that the Secretary of State is unable
                      thereafter  to  mount  an  argument  challenging  the
                      authenticity of the  relevant  documents  unless  and
                      until the breach is rectified by  a  proper  enquiry.
                      It follows that if a decision  of  the  Secretary  of
                      State is overturned on appeal on this basis, absent a
                      suitable investigation it will not  open  to  her  to
                      suggest that the document or documents are forged  or
                      otherwise are not authentic.

                  32.  Finally, in this context it is to be emphasised  that
                      the courts are not required to order the Secretary of
                      State to investigate particular areas of evidence  or
                      otherwise to direct her enquiries.   Instead,  on  an
                      appeal from a decision of the Secretary of  State  it
                      is for the court  to  decide  whether  there  was  an
                      obligation on her to undertake particular  enquiries,
                      and if the court concludes this requirement  existed,
                      it  will  resolve  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
                      sustainably discharged her  obligation  (see  NA  (UT
                      rule 45: Singh V Belgium) [2014] UKUT 00205 IAC).  If
                      court finds there was such an obligation and that  it
                      was not discharged, it must assess  the  consequences
                      for the case.

         57.  I declined the application for an adjournment by the appellant
             to provide further information from Sri  Lanka  following  the
             DVR.  I have not placed weight on the DVR in my assessment  of
             the evidence because as I have said there  is  no  information
             provided as  to  the  experience  of  somebody  verifying  the
             document.  However my  own  conclusion  is  that  the  warrant
             itself simply does not make sense for the reason that  I  have
             set out above relating to its contents.  Further I  take  into
             account that the appellant has known since the refusal  letter
             that his account was challenged and that  his  wife's  account
             was challenged.  They have had ample  opportunity  to  provide
             additional evidence from Sri Lanka  concerning  the  documents
             which lie at the core of  the  appellant's  case  that  he  is
             wanted by the authorities in  Sri  Lanka.   That  particularly
             takes into account that the appellant's wife said in her  oral
             evidence that the extract from  the  Police  Station  register
             relating to the fact  that  the  appellant  was  requested  to
             report to the Police Station on 25 June 2012 and that  he  did
             not do so, was obtained from the Police Station  by  her  with
             her lawyer present at the same time.  She confirmed  that  she
             obtained that document at the same time as the arrest  warrant
             with the lawyer present  with  her.   Evidence  from  the  Sri
             Lankan  lawyer  supported   by   the   confirmation   of   the
             authenticity of that lawyer as to the process of obtaining the
             documents would have greatly assisted but  such  evidence  has
             not been provided by the appellants.

         58.  Although the appellant said that he had been contacted by J in
             2009 to say that he was going into hiding after  the  raid  on
             the property in  Church  Road  the  appellant  in  his  appeal
             statement said that when J was re-arrested on 27 June  2012  J
             revealed the appellant's name to the authorities and that  was
             when his problems started and the arrest warrant  was  issued.
             The  appellant's  account  is  therefore  that  there  was  no
             interest in him at all by the authorities  in  2007  when  the
             attack on the harbour took place or in 2009 when the house  in
             Church Road was raided, that it was only in 2012 that  he  was
             being sought.  I do take  into  account  the  timing  of  that
             because that happened after the appellant arrived in the UK on
             the visit visa.  It was said that the visit  visa  was  issued
             after an appeal and he came to  the  UK  with  the  two  older
             children for a family celebration in January 2012 returning in
             February 2012 and then coming again in June  2012.   His  wife
             stayed behind  with  the  younger  daughter  because  she  was
             pregnant at the time, the  youngest  of  their  four  children
             being born in September 2011.  The expiry date for  the  visit
             visa was 12 July 2012 and it  was  on  5  July  2012  that  he
             attended the ASU intending to claim asylum and  was  given  an
             appointment a week later.  The timing of  his  application  is
             relevant but only in the context of considering this with  all
             of the evidence in the round.  What is clear is  that  he  had
             obtained a passport and left Sri Lanka using the visit visa on
             two occasions in 2012 without any difficulties concerning  his
             travel."

11. The judge was aware of the relevant test in relation to the adjournment
    and she properly directed herself as to whether it entailed  unfairness
    or not and that was recorded at paragraphs 4 and 57  of  her  decision.
    She did put the matter back in the  list  to  enable  counsel  to  take
    instructions from his clients (the appellants) in relation to the  DVR.



12. There is no mileage in the contention that the appellant was not  aware
    of the case made against him.   The  reasons  for  refusal  letter  was
    issued by the Secretary of State in February 2015 and clearly  set  out
    that the documentation including the arrest warrant was not accepted by
    the Secretary of State  as  being  genuine.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing was dated January 2016. The arrest  warrant  was  the  document
    produced by the appellant and the appellant was fully aware of what was
    both in the document itself and in the translation and indeed there  is
    a note on the translation which identifies  that  the  translation  was
    made in November 2013.

13. The Secretary of State clearly rejects the authenticity of  the  arrest
    warrant and the judge did not accept the DVR which in turn  stated  the
    warrant was verified as not genuine because he could not be sure of the
    experience of the person who verified the arrest warrant.   As  can  be
    seen from above the judge stated that she did not consider the  DVR  to
    be of real assistance as the problem with it was that there was nothing
    to indicate the experience of the person who verified it.

14. The judge did however decline to acquiesce to  an  adjournment  because
    she placed no weight on the DVR itself because  the  expertise  of  the
    authenticator was not given.  That was to the benefit of the appellant.



15. It was always open to the appellants, as the  arrest  warrant  document
    was their own, to consider the problem in the arrest  warrant  document
    for themselves.  The judge took into account  and  placed  reliance  on
    information that was on the face of the arrest warrant itself, for  its
    rejection.  The judge specifically states that she  took  into  account
    that the appellant had known since the refusal letter the  account  was
    challenged and they had ample opportunity to provide  further  evidence
    from Sri Lanka concerning the documents which "lie at the core  of  the
    appellant's case that he is wanted by the authorities  in  Sri  Lanka."
    The judge also took into account that "evidence  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    lawyer supported by the confirmation of the authenticity of that lawyer
    as to the process of attaining the document would have greatly assisted
    but such evidence has not been provided by the appellants."  The  judge
    correctly applied PJ (Sri Lanka v SSHD) EWCA Civ 1011.  It  is  not  an
    obligation for national authorities to verify documentation.

16. I find there was no unfairness visited on the  appellants.   The  judge
    did not bring a perspective merely from the British  legal  system  but
    looked at the document as produced by the Sri Lankan  authorities.   On
    the face of the document it is clear that the appellant is directed  to
    arrest himself.  Two and four are entirely  separate  sections  of  the
    document and four clearly states that the person to whom the warrant is
    directed is  the  appellant  and  underneath  states  "You  are  hereby
    required and authorised to arrest the above person and to  produce  him
    before this court.  That document is dated 15th  November  2013."   The
    judge is not obliged to give reasons for her reasons.

17. The judge made a full analysis of the evidence  giving  her  assessment
    from paragraphs 20 onwards and relied on a multiplicity of difficulties
    with the appellant's  case  not  least  at  paragraph  36  whereby  she
    recognised  the  difficulties  of  the  appellant's  accounts  and  the
    inconsistencies therein. There was reference to Tanveer  Ahmed  in  the
    decision by way of PJ.  It is quite clear that the judge made  numerous
    credibility findings against the appellants when  taking  into  account
    all the evidence including, declined to place weight  on  the  DVR  for
    valid reasons, and declined to place weight on the arrest  warrant  for
    valid reasons.  In the circumstances there is no material error and  no
    material error in her approach to the adjournment request.

18. A further criticism of the  decision  is  that  there  was  a  lack  of
    assessment in relation to Section  55.   I  find  that  is  a  baseless
    assertion.  The judge from paragraphs 66 to 84 sets  out  the  relevant
    caselaw and addresses in detail  the  best  interests  of  all  of  the
    children.  She records that the first appellant and two older  children
    came to the UK using a visit visa  in  a  temporary  capacity  and  the
    second appellant and the two younger children arrived  illegally.   The
    judge found they would be returning to Sri Lanka as a family unit where
    they still have relatives.  Specifically at paragraph 77 that the judge
    did not minimise the impact on the children and the disruption on their
    education.  The judge cited SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387 in relation to
    the proper approach and noted that none of the children had any special
    needs.  The judge had considered the factors cumulatively and  attached
    the relevant weight to the public interest.  In the  light  of  Section
    117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (referred to  by
    the judge) and  EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874  I fail to  see  how
    this challenge has any force.

19. Finally, at paragraph 54 the judge states that she had  considered  all
    of the factors that she had set out in her consideration of the appeals
    in respect of the particular circumstances relating to the parents  and
    children and finally concluded that  the  appellants  have  established
    that there were no compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
    under the Rules.  I find there is  no  error  in  law  in  relation  to
    Section 55

20. There is no error of law in the decision  which  is  material  and  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thew shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made as there are minors involved.






Signed                                  Date 27th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



