
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/03745/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 16 October 2013                            |On 15 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                 naheed riaz

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who was born on  12  November  1984,  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan whose application for asylum was refused by the respondent  on
    25 February 2010.  It is her case that she would be at risk  on  return
    because of her Ahmadi faith.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    before Immigration Judge M A Khan, sitting at Hatton Cross on 29  April
    2010, but in a determination dated 6 May 2010 and  promulgated  shortly
    thereafter, Judge Khan dismissed her appeal.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision,  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by Senior Immigration Judge Eshun on 28 May  2010.
    When setting out her  reasons  for  granting  permission,  Judge  Eshun
    stated as follows:

         "...The grounds disclose an arguable  error  of  law  by  the  IJ's
         failure to consider the medical evidence."

 4. Thereafter, on 30 July 2010, Judge Eshun found, without a hearing, that
    Judge Khan's determination had contained an error of law such that  his
    decision must be set aside and re-made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Her
    reasons were as follows:

         "Having regard to all the circumstances, including the  failure  of
         the respondent to serve within the permitted time a response, which
         adequately explains why the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         does not contain an error of law and should not be set  aside,  the
         Upper Tribunal, pursuant to Rule 34, has decided without a  hearing
         that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does contain an  error
         of law, as identified in the grant of  permission,  read  with  the
         grounds of application, and should be set aside and re-made by  the
         Upper Tribunal."

 5. Judge Eshun also noted as follows:

         "The grounds of appeal claimed that the appellant was  not  fit  to
         give evidence in the environment of the Tribunal  as  it  was  then
         constituted.   In  their  reply  to  directions,  the   appellant's
         solicitors have indicated that the appellant will give evidence  at
         the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  It is on  this  basis  that
         the hearing will proceed."

 6. The appeal then came on for hearing  before  a  panel  at  Field  House
    consisting of Senior Immigration  Judge  Waumsley  and  myself,  on  14
    September 2010.

 7. At that hearing, the  appellant  gave  evidence,  and  was  asked  some
    questions in cross-examination, but the appellant appeared to be unable
    to concentrate  fully.   Ms  Balani,  who  was  then  representing  the
    respondent, considered that it would not be in the interests of justice
    for the appellant to continue being cross-examined,  having  regard  to
    her state as it then appeared.  After some discussion, the hearing  was
    adjourned to the first available date after 14 December 2010,  it  then
    being estimated that at least a further three hours would be needed.

 8. Thereafter, for reasons of which I am unaware, but which were  not  the
    fault of either party, the appeal was not re-listed until  7  September
    2012, when it was re-listed just before myself, Judge  Waumsley  having
    by then retired.

 9. At that hearing, it was agreed on  behalf  of  both  parties  that  the
    entire case should be heard afresh, and at that stage both parties were
    content that I should continue to hear it.  However,  on  instructions,
    Ms Jegarajah (who was  then  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  appellant)
    applied for an adjournment because  a  country  guidance  decision  was
    imminent with regard to the position of  Ahmadis  in  Pakistan  and  on
    behalf of the respondent, Mr Avery did not oppose this application.

10. I granted this application,  because  I  considered  that  the  country
    guidance case, in which evidence had by then been concluded  (this  was
    MN & Others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00389) might very well have a significant impact on  this  appeal,
    in particular with regard  to  the  cross-examination  which  might  be
    necessary in light of the guidance which was  soon  to  be  given.   In
    those circumstances, I considered that it was not in the  interests  of
    justice for this appeal to be heard until  that  new  country  guidance
    decision had been promulgated.  I should add that I  did  not  formally
    make any decision as to whether or not it would be appropriate  for  me
    to continue to hear this appeal in any  event,  as  I  was  and  remain
    concerned that although I did not have any clear  recollection  of  the
    evidence that had been given before me some two years earlier, I  might
    nonetheless  be  influenced  by  that  evidence   without   necessarily
    realising that this was so.

11. The country guidance decision of MN  was  subsequently  promulgated  in
    November 2012 following which the appeal was re-listed before me on  28
    January 2013.  At that hearing, the respondent was  represented  by  Ms
    Tanner, but regrettably she was not in possession of the file,  because
    although it had been requested from storage, it had not been delivered.
     Ms Tanner was accordingly not in a position to inform the Tribunal  as
    to what course the respondent proposed to take  in  light  of  the  new
    country guidance which had been given.  However, Ms Tanner indicated to
    the Tribunal that she expected to receive the file shortly and that she
    would give her personal attention to it when it was  received,  with  a
    view  to  informing  the  Tribunal  shortly  thereafter   as   to   the
    respondent's position in light of the decision in MN.

12. Thereafter, it appears that on 19 February  2013,  Ms  Tanner  wrote  a
    letter on behalf of the respondent, which was intended to  be  sent  to
    the Tribunal, in which she wrote,  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  as
    follows:

         "It is confirmed that the refusal is maintained as although it  has
         been accepted that the appellant was an Ahmadi very little else has
         been accepted by the respondent regarding the core of her claim."

13. In that letter, the Tribunal was requested to list  the  appeal  for  a
    substantive hearing.

14. Regrettably, it does not appear that this letter was  received  by  the
    Tribunal (because it is not in the Tribunal file).  It is apparent that
    this letter was also not received by  the  appellant's  solicitors  (to
    whom it should have been sent following the directions which I gave  on
    28 January 2013)  because  on  9  September  2013  they  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal, referring to an  earlier  letter  they  had  written  to  the
    respondent on 3 May 2013, requesting the respondent to notify  them  as
    to whether or not they still intended to contest the appeal, but saying
    that no response had been received.

15. By that time I had already given instructions for the appeal to be  re-
    listed before me for mention, which is why the appeal again came before
    me on 16 October 2013.

16. Prior to that hearing, the appellant's solicitors requested  that  they
    be  allowed  not  to  attend,  but  supplied  written  submissions  for
    consideration by the Tribunal at this hearing.  The Tribunal considered
    that it could deal justly with the matters which  needed  to  be  dealt
    with  at  this  hearing  without  the  attendance  of  the  appellant's
    solicitors, and for this reason their attendance was not required,  but
    the Tribunal did take full note of the written submissions  which  they
    had sent.

17.  The  appellant's  solicitors  asked  that  the   appeal   be   allowed
    (effectively without a hearing) but that in the event that the Tribunal
    considered that the appeal should proceed to a full hearing, it be  re-
    listed "in one of the First-tier Tribunals in  London".   The  Tribunal
    was informed that the  appellant  and  one  other  witness  would  give
    evidence, that both would require an Urdu interpreter and that  it  was
    estimated that three hours would be required for the hearing.

18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Deller accepted that it  appeared  from
    the submissions received by the Tribunal on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    that neither the appellant nor the Tribunal had seen Ms Tanner's letter
    of February 19, 2013, but it was the  respondent's  position  that  she
    still wished to contest the appeal.

19. Clearly the appeal cannot simply be allowed without a hearing,  as  the
    appellant's solicitors have requested, and so it will have  to  be  re-
    heard, and the hearing will have to be a fresh hearing.  In my judgment
    there are no findings which can be retained from Judge Khan's  original
    determination.

20. Having given full consideration to whether  or  not  I  could  properly
    continue to hear this appeal, I do not  consider  that  this  would  be
    appropriate, as I would not know whether or not I would  be  influenced
    by evidence which I half remembered from the earlier  hearing.   Having
    had regard to paragraph 7 of the President's  Practice  Statements  for
    the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper  Tribunal,  I  consider
    that the effect of the errors contained  within  the  determination  as
    identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun (in  particular  Judge  Khan's
    failure to consider the medical evidence before assessing  credibility)
    were such that  the  appellant  was  effectively  deprived  of  a  fair
    hearing.  I consider further that the nature and extent of the judicial
    fact-finding which will now be necessary in order for this decision  to
    be re-made (a fresh hearing de novo) is such that, having regard to the
    overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal, as requested on behalf of the appellant, and I shall  so
    order.  I accordingly make this decision below,  and  shall  also  give
    directions for trial.





Decision

The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M  A  Khan  having  been  set
aside as containing a material error of law, I now direct that  this  appeal
be remitted for a re-hearing by the First-tier Tribunal, sitting  at  Hatton
Cross, to be put before any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  A
Khan.





Signed:                                 Date:  31 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

