

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03571/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 October 2013                            |On 30 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     AM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.   This  direction
      applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a  failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born in  1978.   On  23
      February 2013, the appellant  claimed  asylum.   His  application  was
      refused on 25 March 2013 and a decision made to remove him by  way  of
      directions to Zimbabwe.

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 16 May 2013, Judge James dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   On
      11  June  2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Taylor)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Thus,  the
      appeal came before me.

   4. In dismissing the appellant's appeal,  Judge  James  made  an  adverse
      credibility finding and rejected the appellant's evidence in  relation
      to events which had occurred before, as he claimed, he had come to the
      UK in 1999.  Applying the country guidance decision in CM (EM  Country
      Guidance; Disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 0059 (IAC), Judge  James
      concluded that the appellant had failed to show that he was at risk of
      persecution or serious ill treatment on return to Zimbabwe.

   5. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant  argued  that  the  Judge  had
      erred in law in two respects:  (1)  in  failing  to  consider  at  all
      whether his removal to Zimbabwe, having been in  the  UK  since  1999,
      would breach Article 8 of the ECHR and  (2)  in  failing  properly  to
      apply the country guidance decision in CM in considering the  risk  to
      the appellant on return to Harare.

   6. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Richards drew to  my  attention  that
      the Home Office had documentation showing that the  appellant  had  in
      fact entered the UK in 1999 contrary to the finding made by the Judge.
       Mr Richards accepted that had the Judge been aware of this she  would
      have gone on to consider the appellant's Article 8 rights.  It was, of
      course, through no fault of the Judge  that  she  did  not  have  this
      evidence before her and therefore could not consider  it  in  reaching
      her findings.  Mr Richards accepted that the there was,  nevertheless,
      an error of law and a judicial decision  needed  to  be  made  on  the
      application of Article 8 to the appellant.

   7. Following some discussion, Mr Richards also recognised,  when  I  drew
      the matter to his attention,  that  the  Judge's  adverse  finding  in
      relation to the appellant's claim to have entered the UK in  1999  had
      been part of the Judge's overall adverse credibility finding  made  in
      respect of the appellant's account  including  his  family  and  other
      circumstances  in  Zimbabwe.   Those  matters  are  germane   to   the
      appellant's Article 8 claim.

   8. In my judgement, it is clear that the Judge did take into account  the
      fact that the appellant could not establish, and  therefore  that  his
      evidence was unreliable generally, that he had entered the UK in  1999
      as he claimed.  That was a demonstrable mistake of fact  as  the  Home
      Office  document  now  established.   Consequently,  in  reaching  her
      adverse findings, the Judge made a mistake of fact which, applying the
      approach set out in E & R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  47,  amounts  to  an
      error of law.  It is an "established" fact; the mistake  was  not  the
      responsibility of the appellant or  his  advisers;  and  that  mistake
      played a material  part  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
      dismiss  the  appeal,  in  particular  to  reach  adverse  credibility
      findings.

Decision and Disposal

   9. For these reasons, as Mr Richards accepted, the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal cannot stand and it is set aside.

  10. Given the nature and extent of the fact finding required, this  is  an
      appropriate case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de
      novo hearing.  The adverse credibility findings cannot stand and fresh
      findings, on the evidence submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  will
      need to be made in respect of both the appellant's  asylum  claim  and
      also his reliance upon Article 8.  Even  if  believed,  the  appellant
      will have to establish  that  he  is  at  risk  applying  the  country
      guidance decision of CM.  Fresh findings will need to be made relevant
      to the appellant's Article 8 claim.

  11. For these reasons, the appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      allowed and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
      novo rehearing (not before Judge James).









                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















