
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03165/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     htb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, instructed by Lambeth Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                    (Delivered orally on 19 January 2016)

Anonymity

I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant  to
Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  the
Upper Tribunal or other appropriate Court or Tribunal orders  otherwise,  no
report of any proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall  directly
or indirectly identify the Appellant.  This prohibition applies to,  amongst
others, all parties and their representatives.

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia born in 1974.  She appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against decision made on  9  February  2015  to
    remove her pursuant to s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006. On the same date the Secretary of State refused to grant  her
    asylum or humanitarian protection.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 7 March  2010  on  a  false
    passport, with entry clearance as a  domestic  worker  conferred  until
    February 2011.  She claimed asylum on 11 June 2010.   That  application
    was refused the following month.  An appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    was thereafter pursued, but this was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kamara in a decision of 20 August 2010. At paragraph  19  thereof
    Judge Kamara concluded:

         "... that there is no aspect of the  appellant's  account  which  I
         accept, other than her nationality."

 3.   The   appellant   subsequently   submitted   fresh   representations,
    incorporating a plethora of documentation in support of  the  assertion
    that the account she had given as to the circumstances which led to her
    claiming asylum was a truthful  one.    Included  within  the  evidence
    relied upon were reports from (i) Dr Roy Love, who  identifies  himself
    as an expert in the circumstances appertaining in Ethiopia and Eritrea,
    and (ii) Lucy Kralj, an associate clinician with specialism in  "Trauma
    and Gender Based Violence" - the report  relating  to  aspects  of  the
    appellant's mental health.

 4. These representations were considered by the Secretary of State in  the
    decision of 9 February 2015 but, as identified above,  she  refused  to
    grant the appellant leave to remain.

Discussion

 5. The appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wylie on 3 July 2015 and dismissed on all grounds  in  a
    decision promulgated on 26 August 2015. Permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was subsequently granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Brunnen in a decision of 18 December 2015, thus the matter comes before
    me.

 6. The core of appellant's first ground relates  to  the  expert  evidence
    provided by Dr Love.  It is said in the grounds that Dr  Love's  report
    specifically  addresses  the  following  aspects  of  the   appellant's
    evidence, that had been found not to be plausible by Judge Kamara:

         "[a] The Applicant's inability to name the leader of the  EPPF  was
         not inconsistent with her being a member, as it would not  be  easy
         to come by for grassroots activists in Ethiopia [para. 5.3  -  5.4,
         22.08.2011 report];

         [b]  It was not inconsistent that the  Applicant  did  not  mention
         AFD, as AFD would not be widely known  or  have  local  impact  for
         ordinary members or supporters of EPF living in Ethiopia [para. 6.1
         - 6.2...].

         [c]  It was plausible that the Applicant carried out activities  in
         Addis Ababa, as it would be surprising if there was no EPPF network
         in the city [para. 72...].

         [d]  The Applicant's decision to join EPPF after the death  of  her
         husband is consistent in the context of the cultural  practices  in
         Africa [para. 18.2.1...].

         [e]  It  is  credible  the  Applicant's  husband  would  have  been
         detained and returned as described [para. 10.1 - 11.4...].

         [f]  The Applicant's account  of  her  activities  with  EPPF  were
         "consistent with how similar banned groups  recruit  and  function"
         [para. 7.2 - 7.3...]."

 7. Judge Wylie properly took the determination  of  Judge  Kamara  as  her
    starting point (see Devaseelan*), and having done so she concluded that
    the appellant was not credible in her assertions as to the events which
    she stated had occurred in her home country.

 8. The following passages from the Judge Wylie's decision are notable:

         "46. The issue is whether there are additional facts now  available
             which support the appellant's  claim  that  she  would  suffer
             persecution if returned to Ethiopia because of  her  political
             association.

         47.  The finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  that  the
             appellant's account of her circumstances which she claimed led
             her to leave Ethiopia and her  account  of  her  circumstances
             thereafter was an invention from beginning to end; her account
             was inconsistent with the background information and contained
             a number of implausible matters."

 9. Thereafter the Judge Wylie found:

         "60. Having found that the appellant is not a member of the EPPF in
             the United Kingdom, and having not accepted  that  she  was  a
             member in Ethiopia, I do not consider that she had any risk on
             return to Ethiopia.  The comments of Dr Love  with  regard  to
             potential difficulties on return as a failed asylum seeker are
             based on the hypotheses that her name would be on  a  list  of
             opposition  political  activists,  or  that   she   would   be
             recognised as an activist, and I disregard them.

         61.   Having  considered  all  the  evidence,  including  that  not
             specifically  mentioned  in  my  decision,  I  find  that  the
             appellant has not established, having taken into  account  the
             lower standard of proof that applies, that she is entitled  to
             the grant of asylum.  I do not accept that the  appellant  has
             established that she is entitled to refugee status.

         62.  Having regard to the findings I have made in  respect  of  her
             claim for refugee status, I do not consider  that  she  is  at
             risk of persecution on return  to  Ethiopia  and  entitled  to
             humanitarian protection."

10. Of the six features  of  Dr  Love's  conclusions  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant, Judge Wylie specifically dealt with two:

         "56. I take account of Dr Love's report as to the likelihood of  an
             ordinary member of EPPF in Ethiopia knowing the  name  of  the
             national  leader,  or  appreciating  the  position   of   ADF.
             However, even excluding these factors, I do  not  accept  that
             the additional evidence  can  change  the  conclusion  of  the
             previous determination that the appellant's claim of  being  a
             member of EPPF and as such having been detained in Ethiopia is
             not credible."

11. It is the failure to deal with the additional four identified  features
    of Dr Love's evidence (as set out in paragraph six above)  that  founds
    the central plank of the appellant's first ground of appeal.

12. In his submissions Mr  Chakmakjian  asserted  that  there  had  been  a
    failure by the First-tier Tribunal to recognise the significance of the
    evidence given by Dr Love - both in relation to its value in addressing
    the issues of plausibility specifically relied upon by Judge Kamara  to
    underpin  her  negative  credibility  findings,  and  in  the   general
    probative value that should be attached  to  such  evidence  given  the
    conclusion that the  appellant's  account  was  consistent  with  known
    circumstances in her country of origin.

13. Ms Savage, who came to the case very late but did an admirable  job  of
    understanding and dealing with the key issues, relied primarily on  the
    position set out in the Secretary of State's Rule 24 response,  and  in
    particular paragraph 3 thereof, which reads:

         "3.  The judge has  properly  considered  the  expert  and  medical
             reports.  It cannot be said that the report was considered  in
             isolation.  The judge  has  given  adequate  reasons  for  the
             findings made in respect of credibility.  The judge  has  also
             properly considered the evidence  of  the  two  witnesses  and
             given reasons as to why little weight should be attached."

14. I prefer Mr Chakmakjian's submissions. Given the  terms  of  Dr  Love's
    evidence  it  was  incumbent  upon  Judge  Wylie  to  explain  why  she
    nevertheless found  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be  untruthful,  in
    particular in light of the evidence which sought to undermine the  core
    of the rationale deployed by Judge Kamara for her negative  credibility
    finding, The FtT's decision fails in this regard.

15. Particular  confusion  derives  from  paragraph  56  of  Judge  Wylie's
    decision, in  which  the  judge  specifically  addressed  the  evidence
    summarised in paragraphs 6(a) and 6(b) above:

         "However, even excluding these factors, I do not  accept  that  the
         additional evidence can  change  the  conclusion  of  the  previous
         determination that the appellant's claim of being a member of  EPPF
         and as such having been detained  in  Ethiopia  is  not  credible."
         [emphasis added]

16. On the face of it the judge was therein accepting the evidence given by
    Dr Love in respect of the two of the matters  identified  in  paragraph
    six above, and thereafter disregarding the reasoning of Judge Kamara in
    relation to such. The judge does  not,  however,  make  clear  in  this
    paragraph, or elsewhere, what is made of the other four features of  Dr
    Love's evidence relied upon by the appellant. If the judge accepted  Dr
    Love's evidence in this regard, then it is difficult to understand  how
    reliance could have been placed on Judge Kamara's  conclusion.  If  the
    judge rejected Dr Love's evidence, the appellant  ought  to  have  been
    told why this was so.

17. Given (i) the clear emphasis placed by Judge Wylie  on  Judge  Kamara's
    adverse credibility finding, (ii) the weight attached by  Judge  Kamara
    to the lack of plausibility of aspects  of  the  appellant's  evidence,
    (iii) the evidence of Dr Love taking direct issue with  such  rationale
    and (vi) the lack of engagement by Judge Wylie with Dr Love's evidence,
    I find that the FtT's decision contains a lack of adequacy of reasoning
    such as to constitute an error of law therein.

18. This error is further compounded by the FtT's  consideration,  or  lack
    thereof, of the evidence of Lucy  Kralj.  As  identified  earlier  Lucy
    Kralj gave evidence relating to the appellant's mental  health  issues.
    At paragraph 4.2.4 of her report the following is said:

         "4.2.4    I  have  considered  the  possibility   that   her   [the
                appellant's] mental health problems are being caused by  her
                current   social   difficulties.    However,   her   present
                situation,  although  upsetting,  cannot  account  for   her
                current psychiatric profile ..."

19. And then at paragraph 4.2.9:

         "4.2.9   In  summary,  in  my  own  opinion,  there  is  sufficient
                evidence from a psychological perspective using my review of
                her ratings, our conversation,  her  non-verbal  behaviours,
                and my analysis of her  statements  to  conclude  that  [the
                appellant's] psychological profile and behaviours are highly
                consistent with the psychiatric profile of a person who  has
                suffered extensive traumatic experiences  over  a  prolonged
                period of time ..."

20. This evidence is plainly capable of being of  being  probative  of  the
    appellant's claim to have provided a truthful account of the events  in
    her homeland, and it was specifically drawn to the judge's attention in
    the skeleton argument placed before  her.   However,  having  read  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision as a whole I am also unable to determine
    what the judge made of this evidence.

21. In short, for the reasons given above, in my conclusion  the  appellant
    cannot ascertain from the decision under challenge why, in the light of
    Dr Love's and Ms Kralj's evidence, her  account  was  disbelieved.  For
    this reason I find that the First-tier Tribunal's decision is  vitiated
    by error of law, that such error is capable of affecting the outcome of
    the appeal and that the decision is therefore to be set aside.

22. I announced my decision at the end of the hearing and both parties were
    in agreement that given the scale of the further findings of fact  that
    it is necessary to undertake, the appropriate course is for this matter
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on a  de  novo  basis  to  be
    reheard.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an  error  of  law  and  is  set
aside.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  consideration
of the appellant's appeal.


Signed:
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 1 February 2016

