


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03079/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Manchester Crown Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 18 March 2016                            |On: 5 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     AIE
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Faryl, instructed by Protection of Human Rights
IPL
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on [ ] 1987. She claims to  have
entered the United Kingdom on 12 December 2009. It seems that there  was  an
attempt to claim asylum through solicitors in 2010 but the solicitors'  firm
closed down and nothing further happened. On 3 December 2013  the  appellant
made a human rights claim which was refused on 12 February  2014  without  a
right of appeal. On 24 April 2014 her claim  was  reviewed  and  a  decision
made to maintain the refusal but with a right of appeal. A removal  decision
was made the same day.

The Appellant's Case

In a statement of additional grounds  dated  16  March  2010  the  appellant
submitted that she feared return to Nigeria as her daughter was at  risk  of
being forced to undergo female genital mutilation (FGM) in Nigeria. She  had
previously lost another daughter who died as a result of FGM.

The appellant's application of 3 December 2013 also relied on the same  fear
of return, in addition to reliance upon family and private life in  the  UK.
In a statement dated 2  December  2013  accompanying  her  application,  the
appellant explained that she was given to her husband  by  her  family  when
she was 15 years of age and was married in a customary  ceremony.  She  gave
birth to her first daughter in 2004 but  she  died  whilst  undergoing  FGM.
When she became pregnant again she decided to run away and,  with  the  help
of a sister from her church, travelled to Ireland, arriving in August  2005.
She claimed asylum. Her daughter was born on 20 October 2005. She  completed
her secondary school education. Her asylum claim was refused in  early  2009
and she was forced to leave her accommodation. She stayed  with  a  Nigerian
friend and then went  to  the  UK  to  look  for  her  father's  brother  in
Birmingham but, when unsuccessful,  went  to  London.  She  had  since  made
contact with her uncle. She had limited contact with her family  in  Nigeria
and only spoke to her mother. She would be at risk on return to her  village
because she had run away.


The appellant's application was refused by the respondent,  initially  on  7
February 2014, but then following a review, on 24 April 2014, on  Article  8
grounds. With regard to asylum and Article 3, she was  advised  to  make  an
asylum claim in person.

The appellant appealed against that decision and, in her grounds of  appeal,
referred again to her fear of her daughter being forced to undergo FGM.  She
referred also to being in danger in Nigeria as a result of  owing  money  to
the agents who arranged her departure in 2005.


In a subsequent statement of 2  June  2014  prepared  for  her  appeal,  the
appellant claimed to have been trafficked to the UK and to  fear  return  to
Nigeria on that basis. She claimed to have lived with her  uncle  after  her
father died and her mother ran away  to  escape  her  husband's  abuse.  Her
uncle's family treated her  like  a  servant  and  abused  her  and  on  one
occasion her  cousin  slashed  her  arm  with  a  razor.  She  was  sexually
assaulted by an older man and then forced into marriage at the  age  of  15.
Her husband raped and beat her. They had a  daughter  in  January  2004  who
died when circumcised at seven days of age.  The  appellant  said  that  she
befriended a woman named Rosemary. In 2005 she  became  pregnant  again  and
Rosemary arranged for agents to take her to Ireland. She was told  that  she
would have to work in Ireland to pay off the fee of 40,000  Euros.  She  was
taken to a Juju man who took some of her pubic hair and made  her  swear  an
oath. She was told that Juju would be used against  her  if  she  broke  her
oath to pay back the money and that she would have  to  pay  a  further  500
Euros to cancel the oath once the 40,000 Euros was paid off. She  then  flew
with Rosemary to Ireland, arriving in August  2005  and  Rosemary  left  her
with a Nigerian family, with directions where to go to claim  asylum.  After
she claimed asylum she was given NASS accommodation. She  was  contacted  by
telephone by one of the agents who told her it was time to start working  to
pay off the debt and she realised the job was prostitution. She  refused  to
do that and they argued. She then hung up and smashed the SIM card  and  had
not heard from them since. She was refused asylum in Ireland  and  then  had
no fixed address and eventually, in December 2009, bought a  bus  ticket  to
London using a student ID. She tried to  claim  asylum  through  solicitors.
She was given accommodation through social services in  Manchester  and  was
assisted in making a human rights claim. If  she  returned  to  Nigeria  she
would be found by the traffickers and  punished  for  not  paying  back  the
money. She also feared that her daughter would be forced to undergo FGM.

On 28 July 2014, a referral was made by the Home  Office  to  the  Competent
Authority, as a result of the appellant's claim to have been  trafficked  to
the UK. On 1 August 2014 a positive Reasonable Grounds  decision  was  made.
However, following a Conclusive Grounds Consideration it was decided,  as  a
result of inconsistencies in the appellant's account, that  she  was  not  a
victim of trafficking.

The appellant submitted  a  further  statement  for  her  appeal,  dated  16
January 2015, in which she responded to the adverse credibility findings  in
the decision of the Competent Authorities.

The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Malik in the  First-tier  Tribunal
on 29 January 2015 and  was  dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  10
February 2015. Judge  Malik  referred  to  the  decision  of  the  Competent
Authorities  in  the  Conclusive  Grounds  Consideration.  She  went  on  to
consider the appellant's claim herself  and  found  it  to  be  implausible,
inconsistent and lacking in credibility, noting in particular the fact  that
the appellant had made no mention, in  her  earlier  statements,  of  having
been trafficked. She concluded that the appellant had fabricated  her  claim
to have been trafficked to the UK and found that she would be at no risk  on
return to Nigeria on that basis. With regard to  the  appellant's  claim  to
fear her daughter being subjected to FGM, the judge found that  there  would
be no risk on return in that regard and that the appellant and her  daughter
could relocate to another  part  of  the  country.  The  judge  went  on  to
consider the appellant's Article 8 claim but found  that  her  removal,  and
that of her daughter, would  not  be  disproportionate.  She  dismissed  the
appeal on all grounds.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, on the grounds that  the  judge's  rejection  of  the  appellant's
account of having been trafficked owing to  her  delay  in  mentioning  that
aspect of her claim failed to take account of the  reasons  for  the  delay;
that the judge misunderstood  the  expert's  evidence  in  relation  to  the
scarring on the appellant's body; that the judge had erred in  her  findings
in regard to availability of protection by accessing women's  shelters;  and
that the judge's findings on the best interests of the child were flawed.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 12 March 2015.

Before me, Ms Faryl submitted that the  judge  had  confused  the  different
areas of scarring on the  appellant's  body  and  had  failed  to  note  the
expert's opinion  that  the  scarring  on  her  back  and  upper  chest  was
consistent with her account of the  Juju.  The  judge  had  failed  to  take
account of the appellant's explanation for not having  previously  mentioned
being trafficked to the UK. The judge ought to have considered the views  of
the appellant's child in making her findings on her best interests.


Ms Johnstone submitted that the scarring did not  show  that  the  appellant
had been trafficked and the judge was entitled to conclude as she  did.  The
judge, in concluding that the appellant's child could  go  back  to  Nigeria
with her, had considered all relevant matters. The judge's  decision  should
be upheld.


Ms Faryl, in response, reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and findings.

The first assertion made in the grounds was that the  judge  had  failed  to
give consideration to the  appellant's  explanation  for  having  previously
made no mention of being trafficked. However that is plainly not  the  case,
as the judge gave detailed consideration to the appellant's explanation,  at
[43] to [46]. She provided cogent reasons  for  rejecting  the  explanations
given by the appellant and was  entitled  to  reject  her  account  for  the
reasons given.

It is asserted on behalf of the appellant that the judge  misunderstood  the
views of the expert, Dr Lord, in regard to the appellant's scarring.  It  is
asserted that, in concluding that the scars identified by Dr Lord  could  be
explained by the appellant's account of having been slashed with a razor  by
her cousin, the judge confused the scars on the appellant's arm  with  those
on her back and upper chest, which Dr Lord attributed to  other  causes.  Ms
Faryl submitted that Dr Lord's opinion at paragraph  38  in  regard  to  the
scars on the appellant's back and upper chest, as  being  traditional  marks
which could be used in voodoo ceremonies, supported  the  appellant's  claim
to have been subjected to Juju, and thus  supported  her  account  of  being
trafficked. She submitted that the judge had failed to understand that.


However I do not agree with Ms Faryl. Whilst the judge considered  that  the
appellant's account of having been slashed by  a  razor  went  some  way  to
explaining some of her scars, it was clearly not the case that  her  finding
at [50] was that that explained all  of  the  scarring  on  the  appellant's
body. The judge specifically referred to Dr Lord's opinion that some of  the
scars were diagnostic of tribal scars.  She  concluded  that  that  did  not
advance the appellant's  claim  to  have  been  trafficked.  Indeed,  it  is
relevant to note that in her more detailed statement  of  2  June  2014  the
appellant did not claim to have been scarred as part of  the  Juju  ceremony
and neither did she make such a claim when cross-examined before the  judge.
There was no attempt by the appellant's own representative to  question  her
about the scarring at the hearing, as  is  clear  from  the  record  of  the
evidence  at  [29]  ,  [38]  and  [40]  of  the  judge's  decision.  In  the
circumstances the judge was entitled to draw the conclusions  that  she  did
in regard  to  the  appellant's  scarring  and,  having  identified  various
inconsistencies and discrepancies in the appellant's account,  was  entitled
to reject her entire account of having been trafficked to the UK.

Ms Faryl did not advance the second ground  of  appeal  before  me.  In  any
event I find no error of law in the judge's findings in regard to  the  risk
to the  appellant's  daughter  of  FGM.  The  judge  considered  the  matter
carefully at [50] to [52], taking account of relevant  country  information,
and gave cogent reasons for concluding that the appellant could  safely  and
reasonably relocate to another part of Nigeria with her daughter.


As regards the last ground of appeal, it seems to me  that  the  judge  gave
detailed and careful consideration to the best interests of the  appellant's
daughter when considering Article  8  outside  the  immigration  rules.  The
judge considered all relevant matters, including  the  length  of  time  the
child had been in the UK,  the  ties  that  she  had  formed  here  and  the
circumstances to which she would be returning in Nigeria.  For  the  reasons
cogently given, the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  removal  to
Nigeria of the appellant and her  daughter  would  not  breach  their  human
rights.


For all of these reasons I find no errors of law in the judge's decision.


DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.







                               Signed                                  Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
