
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/03625/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 8 November 2013                            |                             |
|Oral Determination                            |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                    a s b
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Dhanji, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale which was promulgated on 14  July
    2011 in which she dismissed his appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 11 March 2011 refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and
    making a decision to remove him  to  Syria  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  I do not propose to set  out  in  any
    detail the appellant's claim.  It is set out adequately in the  witness
    statement and in the refusal letter and also  it  is  recorded  in  the
    decision of Immigration Judge Nightingale.  It is  not  suggested  that
    her recording of the facts of the case is incorrect.

 2. The respondent refused the application for the reasons set out  in  the
    refusal letter.  Again I do not propose to set those out in any detail.
     There is no dispute of the basis on which that was reached.

 3. Judge Nightingale heard evidence from the appellant.  She  also  had  a
    large number of documents before her, including in particular an expert
    report from Dr Fatah as well as other evidence  which  is  set  out  in
    detail in  paragraph  19  of  her  determination.   In  summary,  Judge
    Nightingale did not believe the appellant's account of what happened to
    him in Syria and considered, for the reasons set  out  particularly  at
    paragraph  52  of  her  decision,  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    identified as a failed asylum seeker on  return  to  Syria,  concluding
    that as he had a valid Syrian passport which bears a UK visa  he  would
    not be in difficulty on return.  The judge also  went  on  to  consider
    that the detailed references in Dr Fatah's report to those detained  on
    arrival  in  Syria  are  largely  to  those  who  had  some   political
    involvement or anti-government activity or  religious  extremism.   The
    judge then dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. An application was  then  made  by  the  appellant  to  the  First-tier
    initially for permission to appeal to the Upper-tier.  That was refused
    as was the renewed application which  was  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Warr on 10 July 2012.  Subsequent to that the appellant then made
    an application for leave to apply  for  judicial  review  against  that
    decision and by a consent order dated 8 February 2013  the  High  Court
    ordered first that the claim is allowed and that the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision to refuse permission dated 18 July 2012 was quashed.  The High
    Court also ordered that the determination of the claimant, that is  the
    appellant's application for permission to appeal be  remitted  back  to
    the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration in light of the country guidance
    set out in KB (failed asylum seekers and  forced  returnees)  Syria  CG
    [2012[ UKUT 426 (IAC).

 5. Subsequent to that order the matter came back before the Upper Tribunal
    and on 22 August 2013 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  granted  permission
    stating:

         "The judge heard the appeal on 13 July 2011 and  the  determination
         was promulgated  on  25  July  2011.   The  appellant  was  refused
         permission to appeal and this decision was upheld by Upper Tribunal
         Judge Warr on 10 July 2012.  The appellant applied for  JR  and  by
         consent of both parties the High Court quashed Upper Tribunal Judge
         Warr's decision so that the Tribunal can reconsider the appellant's
         application in  light  of  the  country  guidance.   Permission  is
         granted to deal with this issue."

 6. When the matter came before me it was a  matter  of  agreement  between
    both parties that the order of the High Court was in  effect  difficult
    to implement given that the issue in this case is  whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's determination involved the making of an error  of
    law which is of necessity confined to the situation as at the  date  on
    which it was promulgated, it being obvious that the country guidance in
    KB postdated that significantly.

 7. Mr Dhanji's submissions were to the effect that because the decision in
    KB set out in some detail what had happened in 2011  that  the  judge's
    findings in respect of what happened in 2011 should be viewed from that
    prism and that on that basis it was evident that she had erred  in  her
    assessment of the evidence.  Mr Nath, on the contrary,  submitted  that
    this was not an appropriate way to  do  so  and  that  looking  at  the
    judge's determination as a whole it contained  conclusions  which  were
    open to her on the evidence that had been presented for her and that it
    could not reasonably be said that she had erred in  her  assessment  of
    that evidence, had reached findings which were not open to her or  that
    her evaluation of the evidence, particularly the evidence of Dr  Fatah,
    was flawed.

 8. The grounds on which permission was granted (drafted  by  Mr  Fripp  of
    Counsel who appeared below) are detailed and they do,  with  particular
    reference to the third ground, consider that the judge's assessment  of
    the risk was flawed in particular due to the failure  to  evaluate  all
    the evidence of what happened to failed asylum seekers and the  general
    level of violence.

 9. Having considered the matter carefully I consider that the  judge  did,
    in the particular circumstances of this case, when viewing the evidence
    of the rapidly deteriorating situation in Syria which  is  set  out  in
    significant and considerable detail in the material presented  to  her,
    fail to attach sufficient weight to the opinion of Dr Fatah who  is  an
    acknowledged expert and whose expertise has been approved  in  numerous
    country guidance decisions.

10. In particular, whilst Judge Nightingale is correct in  stating  as  she
    does at paragraph 52 that some of the examples  referred  to  of  those
    asylum seekers who had difficulty on return are those who are suspected
    of Islamic extremist  activity,  that  does  not  deal  with  the  more
    specific examples of other failed asylum seekers who were not  in  that
    category nor does it deal sufficiently with the difficulties identified
    by Dr Fatah at paragraph 109 and 121 of his report.   I  consider  that
    that those taken with the other material are such that the judge should
    have explained why she rejected  Dr  Fatah's  opinion  on  that  point,
    having accepted his expertise on other points.   On  that  basis  I  am
    satisfied that the determination of Immigration Judge  Nightingale  did
    involve the making of an error of law  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    decision and I set it aside on that narrow point, that is the  risk  to
    the appellant as a failed asylum seeker.  The  other  findings  of  the
    judge are preserved.

11. It therefore follows that I must re-make the determination.  I think it
    fair to say that both parties  are  in  agreement  that  re-making  the
    decision now in light of the decision in KB that  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker the appellant is at risk of persecution on return  to  Syria  on
    that basis.  It is not suggested that he is one  of  those  very  small
    number of people who would not be at risk on return due to  connections
    to the regime and it is not disputed  that  he  comes  from  the  Druze
    minority.

12. Accordingly, on the basis of the country guidance in KB which  has  not
    been challenged, I am satisfied that  as a  failed  asylum-seeker,  the
    appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in Syria on account of
    his perceived political opinions   and accordingly that to  remove  him
    would be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to  the
    Refugee Convention.  It also follows on that  basis  that  his  removal
    would be contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  pursuant  to
    Article 3 of the Human Right Convention.  I therefore allow the  appeal
    on refugee grounds on that basis.

13. The appellant is not entitled  to  humanitarian  protection,  it  being
    found that he is a refugee and I dismiss the appeal on that basis but I
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds on the basis that his  removal
    would be in breach of Article 3.  It is unnecessary for me to  consider
    any of the other grounds of appeal in the circumstances.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
      error of law and I set it aside.


   2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on refugee grounds and on
      human rights grounds.


Signed:                                 Date:  26 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


