
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/03310/2015

                                            AA/03312/2015

                                            AA/03313/2015

                                            AA/03316/2015

                                            AA/03318/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 April 2016                        | On 16 May 2016                     |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                             jaspal singh chopra
                            harpreet kaur chopra
                            rajmeet singh chopra
                            pardeep singh chopra
                             gurveen kaur chopra
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Sinker instructed by Christian Gottfried & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, a husband, wife and their three children, all nationals
    of Afghanistan, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  decisions
    of the Secretary of State dated 9 February 2015  to  refuse  the  first
    appellant's application for asylum and the applications of his wife and
    children as his dependants and to remove them from the  UK.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Myers dismissed  the  appeals  and  the  appellants  now
    appeal with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The appellants claim to be Afghani  Sikhs  and  claim  that  they  were
    evicted from their home in Jalalabad in 1991  and  had  to  move  to  a
    building in  the  compound  of  the  Gurdwara  along  with  other  Sikh
    families. The first appellant claims to have run a successful  business
    as a wholesale trader along with his younger brother.  He  claims  that
    the Taliban demanded money from him in July and October 2013  and  that
    he gave them money then. He claims that they demanded $10,000 from  him
    in January 2014 and when he said that he did not have this money he was
    told that if he did not pay within one month they would  forcibly  take
    his son to join them as a Taliban fighter. The first appellant arranged
    for the family to leave the country, by selling stock  and  calling  in
    debts he paid an agent $65,000 and they left Afghanistan on 25  January
    2014.

 3. In dismissing the appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the
    appellants had not demonstrated that they are Afghan  citizens  on  the
    basis that the first appellant conducted his asylum interview  and  his
    oral evidence in Punjabi and he had difficulty understanding the Pashtu
    interpreter who he claimed read his witness statement back to him.  The
    Judge also found  that  the  appellant's  answers  in  interview  about
    Jalalabad were incorrect and that  his  description  of  Sikh  life  in
    Afghanistan was vague and lacking in detail. The Judge found  that  the
    appellant's credibility was damaged because in his asylum interview  he
    gave discrepant dates   for  the  second  demand  for  money  from  the
    Taliban; because he said that he could not pay the Taliban $10,000  yet
    he raised $30,000 and then $35,000 to leave the  country;  he  did  not
    discuss the demands for money with his  younger  brother  who  he  said
    worked with him, until just before he decided to leave the country; and
    he was unable to explain whey he  did  not  take  steps  to  avoid  his
    problems such as selling his business or  moving  to  another  area  of
    Afghanistan. The Judge placed little weight on documents the appellants
    submitted. The Judge concluded that she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellants originate from Afghanistan and found that  the  claim  lacks
    credibility.

 4. In their grounds of appeal the appellants contend that the Judge  erred
    in concluding that the first appellant was not Afghani because  he  did
    not speak Pashtu at the interview and hearing because there was not  an
    interpreter available on each occasion and the  Judge's  conclusion  is
    said to be at odds with the country information which confirms that the
    Sikh minority in Afghanistan often speak in Punjabi  with  a  localised
    dialect. It is contended that  the  Judge  gave  undue  weight  to  the
    typographical error in the appellant's witness statement in relation to
    the year of his eviction from his house  and  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant had difficulty understanding the Pashtu interpreter who  read
    it back. It is further contended that the Judge erred in  finding  that
    the appellant's answers in relation to the landmarks  in  the  city  of
    Jalalabad  were  incorrect  and  just  followed  what  the   respondent
    asserted. It is contended that the Judge's assertion that the appellant
    was asked twice in interview if he meant August  (in  relation  to  the
    second Taliban demand for money) was not found in the asylum interview.
    It is contended that the Judge misunderstood the  appellant's  evidence
    in response to the Taliban's third demand  for  money.  It  is  further
    contended that the Judge erred in attaching little weight to the  voter
    registration which is dated 2003 and 2004 in that the Judge  said  that
    the elections took place in 2005 whereas the country information states
    that they took place in June 2004.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    in making the finding of credibility and fact against the appellant due
    to the language he spoke in evidence the Judge failed to have regard to
    the background information. It was considered arguable that  the  Judge
    failed to set out in adequate detail examples of the incorrect  answers
    given by the appellant about Jalalabad.

Error of law

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Sinker submitted that the appellant's  case
    is that he speaks both Punjabi and Pashtu. He accepted that  there  was
    no evidence before the Judge that Sikhs in  Afghanistan  speak  Punjabi
    but said that he now had evidence that Afghani Sikhs speak Punjabi.  Mr
    McVeety submitted that a Punjabi interpreter had been requested for the
    hearing and that the appellant had a Punjabi interpreter at the  asylum
    interview and the appeal. He submitted that the Judge pointed out  that
    on  the  one  occasion  the  appellant  says  that  he  had  a   Pashtu
    interpreter, when he made his witness statement,  there  is  a  glaring
    mistake. He submitted that in these circumstances it was  open  to  the
    Judge to find as he did and  that  this  was  a  rational  finding.  He
    submitted that this was a live issue as the respondent did  not  accept
    in the Reasons for Refusal letter that Punjabi is an official  language
    of Afghanistan. He submitted that there was no  evidence  submitted  on
    the appellant's behalf in relation to this issue and that it  was  open
    to the Judge to find as he did.

 7. Mr Sinker accepted that there was  no  evidence  before  the  Judge  to
    support his assertion that Afghani Sikhs speak Punjabi, this is despite
    this clearly being an issue raised in the Reasons  for  Refusal  letter
    (paragraph 16-17). Further, it seems from the Judge's decision, and  Mr
    Sinker did not submit otherwise, that no submission  was  made  to  the
    Judge in relation to this issue. The evidence before the Judge was that
    the first appellant claims to speak Pashtu, Punjabi and  Dari  (witness
    statement dated 27 February 2014) and that his  witness  statement  was
    read back to him in Pashtu, that  he  conducted  his  asylum  interview
    through a Punjabi interpreter and gave oral evidence through a  Punjabi
    interpreter. The Judge noted that the appellant said in  his  statement
    that he had been evicted from his home ten years previously yet he said
    in his asylum interview that he had been evicted in  1991.  Again  this
    discrepancy was referred to in the Reasons for Refusal letter. Further,
    the Judge noted that in response to Q125 (this should read Q129) in the
    asylum interview the appellant said that the witness statement was read
    to him in Pashtu whereas the interview was in Punjabi. In the light  of
    this answer I consider that it was reasonable for the Judge to conclude
    that the implication was that the appellant could  not  understand  the
    statement because it was read to him  in  Pashtu.  Considering  all  of
    these issues and the evidence before the Judge I am satisfied  that  it
    was open to the Judge to conclude as he did  that  the  fact  that  the
    first appellant spoke Punjabi damaged the credibility of his  claim  to
    be Afghani.

 8. Mr Sinker submitted  that  the  Judge  did  not  detail  which  of  the
    appellant's answers to questions about Jalalabad lacked detail or  were
    wrong, he submitted  that  the  Judge's  reasoning  was  inadequate  in
    relation to that issue. Mr McVeety submitted that the appellant did not
    counter the conclusions in the Reasons for Refusal  letter  as  to  the
    appellant's knowledge about Jalalabad, and the burden of proof is  upon
    him and that in these circumstances it was open to the Judge  to  refer
    to the Reasons for Refusal letter.

 9. This issue was also raised in the Reasons for Refusal  letter  and  the
    Judge sets out the explanations given by the first  appellant  in  oral
    evidence and the reasons why he  did  not  accept  those  explanations.
    Again I am satisfied that these findings were open to the Judge on  the
    evidence before her.

10. Mr Sinker submitted  that  the  Judge  made  a  mistake  in  saying  at
    paragraph 20 that the appellant was asked twice at interview to confirm
    that he meant August (in contrast to his earlier answer  when  he  said
    October) when the appellant was not asked twice.  Mr McVeety  submitted
    that the appellant was in fact asked  twice  and  that  the  Judge  was
    right.

11. At Q 121 of his asylum interview the appellant  said  that  the  second
    payment was made to the Taliban on 15 August 2013, he was asked at Q122
    if it was in August 2013 and he answered 'yes'. At Q137 he  gave  three
    dates, the second was 15 October 2013 and when asked why he had earlier
    said August he said that he could not hear (Q138) and  then  failed  to
    answer Q139 when he  was  asked  for  an  explanation.  The  Judge  was
    therefore right in  saying  that  the  appellant  was  asked  twice  at
    interview to confirm that he meant August and that he did so each time.
    The Judge was entitled to conclude that this  discrepancy  damaged  the
    appellant's credibility.

12. In response to Mr Sinker's submissions as to how the Judge treated  the
    documentary evidence Mr McVeety submitted that the Judge  was  entitled
    to look at the documents along with all of the evidence in the round.

13. The Judge considered the documents  at  paragraph  22.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to conclude, in the absence of an explanation to the contrary,
    that it would have been easy for the appellant to  have  obtained  more
    contemporaneous documents from his brother who he claims still lives in
    Afghanistan. It was open to the Judge to consider the documents in  the
    round along with all of the evidence.

14. The appellants have not made out their grounds  of  appeal.  The  Judge
    properly considered all of the evidence and reached conclusions open to
    her on the basis of that evidence.



Conclusion

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                                       Date: 12 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date: 12 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



