
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03147/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Pakistani national born  on  25  October  1983.  She
    applied for asylum in the United Kingdom. In a decision letter dated  5
    February 2015 the Respondent concluded that she was not a refugee,  did
    not qualify for international protection and rejected her  claim  under
    Articles 2, 3  and  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    ("ECHR"). The Respondent decided to remove the Appellant as an  illegal
    entrant under s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The Appellant appealed this  decision  and  First-tier  Judge  Devittie
    dismissed her appeal in a decision promulgated on  19  August  2015  on
    asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds.  Permission  to  appeal
    against that decision was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    on 10 September 2015 on the basis that he was satisfied that there  was
    an arguable error of law that the Judge had not  considered  Article  8
    which was raised in the grounds of appeal. He  did  not  consider  that
    there was an arguable error of law in the decision in relation  to  the
    findings on the asylum claim.

The Grounds

 3. Whilst the grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal erred in relation
    to  the  findings  on  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim,  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal  was  limited  to  Article  8  ECHR.  I  therefore
    consider that ground only. It is submitted in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  give  proper  weight  to  the
    Appellant's case, and did  not  look  at  all  the  oral  evidence  and
    documentary evidence. It is said that in these circumstances, Article 8
    of the ECHR had not been dealt with properly.

The Rule 24 Response

 4. According to the Home  Office  representative's  note  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  Appellant's  representative  made
    brief submissions on Article 8 as he was "not really making an  Article
    8 claim". It is noted that the current  application  does  not  make  a
    discrete challenge as particularised by the grant of permission but  is
    rather focussed on the impact of the failure of the First-tier Tribunal
    to consider properly the documentation in relation to the asylum  claim
    and resulting impact (if any) on the residual grounds (if indeed relied
    upon or  in  which  way,  given  the  failure  to  particularise).  The
    Respondent  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed
    himself appropriately.

The Hearing

 5. Neither the Appellant nor her representatives, MR Solicitors,  attended
    the hearing. I instructed my clerk to telephone MR Solicitors who  said
    that they were no longer acting for  the  Appellant  and  provided  the
    number of Reliance Solicitors who they stated were the Appellant's  new
    solicitors. My clerk telephoned them and no solicitor  was  present  to
    take the call. At 3.30pm a representative from Reliance Solicitors rang
    the Tribunal to say that they were not representing  the  Appellant  in
    this appeal because MR Solicitors had not released the file as she owed
    them money. In view of  the  fact  that  both  the  Appellant  and  her
    solicitors had notice of the hearing and the Appellant had  chosen  not
    to attend  I  considered  that  it  was  fair,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective, to proceed with the hearing in her absence.

 6. Mr Jarvis submitted that the appeal was  limited  to  the  question  of
    Article 8. Counsel at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not advance a case under Article 8.  It  was  understandable  that  the
    Judge would give it little or no consideration. The Appellant had  only
    been here for a short period and her child was not old enough  to  have
    access to 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules. The  parent  route  was
    not open to her and nor  was  section  117B  (6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act). Mr Jarvis accepted that
    the 2002 Act required the First-tier Tribunal to deal  with  Article  8
    under s86. The grounds were silent about what  points  in  relation  to
    Article  8  would  have  been  argued.  Presumably  the  Appellant  had
    instructed her Counsel to act in the way he did. The statute required a
    finding but it was a cosmetic defect. There may  have  been  a  factual
    case before the First-tier Tribunal. Perhaps it was  not  the  same  as
    abandoned ground of appeal but there was no materiality.

 7. I concluded that I should re-make the decision if I  found  that  there
    was a material error of law. I reserved my decision.

Discussion and Findings

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on limited grounds only. The Appellant
    raised Article 8 as a ground of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    paragraphs 2 (i) and 6 of the grounds. In paragraph 6 of the grounds of
    appeal the Appellant asserted that she could  not  return  to  Pakistan
    with her child given the past mistreatment and  her  future  fear.  The
    Appellant also relied on Article  8  in  her  statement  of  additional
    grounds under s120 of the 2002 Act.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did not engage with the Appellant's claim under
    Article 8. There is no reference to the  Appellant  or  her  daughter's
    family or private life in the UK in the body of the decision and it was
    not determined as a ground of appeal as required by section 86 (2)  (a)
    of the 2002 Act.

10. In Sakar v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 195 Moore-Bick, LJ  at  paragraph  [13]
    held that where no evidence or argument was placed  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in support  of  an  Article  8  claim  the  tribunal  was
    entitled to treat it as having been abandoned.

11. According to the Rule 24 response, the Appellant's representative  made
    brief submissions in relation to Article 8. There was  evidence  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  in
    relation to her claim to be  entitled  to  remain  here  by  virtue  of
    Article 8. In  the  circumstances,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not
    entitled to treat the claim as having been  abandoned.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal therefore made an error of law. The Appellant's case  was  not
    inarguable and there was evidence to support it. It cannot therefore be
    said that the outcome would have  been  the  same  notwithstanding  the
    error.  I therefore find that the decision involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.

12. The Appellant did  not  attend  the  hearing  and  there  has  been  no
    application for further evidence to be submitted. I therefore determine
    the appeal on the basis of the findings of fact and evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

13. The Appellant applied for a Tier 4 (general) student visa on 20  August
    2013 and arrived in the UK on 19 September 2013. She  claimed  to  have
    arrived with her husband and daughter. On 26 March 2014  her  visa  was
    curtailed as she did not enrol on her course of study. On  4  September
    2014 she claimed asylum.

14. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant's account that she was
    at risk of persecution from her husband's parents on return to Pakistan
    was untrue. The First-tier Tribunal also found that her claim that  her
    husband had left her in a state of anger and frustration and had ceased
    all contact with her after they had arrived  in  the  UK  was  palpably
    false. The Judge found that the Appellant's  evidence  was  not  to  be
    believed and did not accept that her parents and her  spouse's  parents
    were opposed to the marriage.

15. The Appellant relied on Article 8 in her  grounds  of  appeal.  In  her
    witness statement at pages 6-7 of the Appellant's  bundle  she  asserts
    that she has established a private life in the UK with her family  (her
    brother) in the UK and friends. She  states  that  she  feels  settled,
    protected and comfortable in the UK with her  family  and  friends  and
    that it would be disproportionate to send her back to Pakistan, knowing
    that she had settled into the way of life in the UK.

16. The  Appellant's  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contended at paragraph 21 that it was not in the best interests of  her
    child  to  uproot  them  to  Pakistan  given   the   family's   factual
    circumstances.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not record  the  submissions  made  by  the
    representatives at the hearing in the decision. Neither  the  Appellant
    nor a representative attended the hearing in the Upper Tribunal despite
    being properly served with notice of  the  hearing.  I  have  therefore
    taken her case to be as set out  in  her  witness  statement,  skeleton
    argument and grounds of appeal.

18. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application under the family and
    private life provisions of the Immigration Rules. She was found not  to
    meet the requirements for leave to remain as a parent as  she  did  not
    meet the eligibility provisions. She was also found  not  to  meet  the
    requirements for indefinite leave to remain as an  adult  dependent  as
    she did not meet  the  eligibility  provisions.   The  Respondent  also
    considered her  application  under  paragraph  276ADE  and  refused  it
    because she had not met the requirements regarding length of residence.



19. The Respondent considered the best interests of her child under section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and found  that
    the Appellant's daughter would be able  to  easily  adapt  to  life  in
    Pakistan given  her  age  and  that  health  care  and  education  were
    available there.

20. The Appellant did not claim in her grounds of appeal or in her skeleton
    argument that she met the requirements of  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules. She has not met the length of residence requirements
    and in order to satisfy paragraph 276ADE (vi) would have to  show  that
    there were very significant obstacles to her integration on  return  to
    Pakistan. The Appellant's claim that she would be  persecuted  was  not
    found credible and the First-tier Tribunal found that she  was  not  at
    risk in Pakistan. Aside from a fear of  persecution,  she  advanced  no
    other reasons which could amount to very significant obstacles  to  her
    return. I therefore conclude that she does not meet the requirements of
    paragraph 276 ADE.

21. A two-stage approach with regard to Article 8 has been approved by  the
    Court of Appeal in a number of cases including Singh and Khalid v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA  Civ  72.  The  decision-maker  should  adopt  a  two-stage
    process.  The first question is  whether  the  individual  can  succeed
    under the Rules and the second is,  if  not,  can  he  or  she  succeed
    outside the Rules under Art 8. There is  no  threshold  requirement  of
    arguability before a decision maker reaches the second stage.  However,
    the extent of any consideration outside  the  Rules  will  depend  upon
    whether all the issues have been adequately addressed under the  Rules.
    In Singh and Khalid the Court of Appeal opined at paragraph [64] "there
    is no need to conduct a full separate examination of Art 8 outside  the
    Rules where, in the circumstances of a particular case, all the  issues
    have been addressed in the consideration under the Rules."

22. The Rules do not provide for the consideration of the best interests of
    the Appellant's daughter. I  have  therefore  considered  the  evidence
    before me in relation to those best interests. The Appellant's daughter
    was born on 2 October 2011 and was therefore just under two  years  old
    when the Appellant arrived in the UK and is now 4 years  old.  She  has
    spent just over two years in the UK. She therefore does  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (iv) in relation to her private life,
    as she has not lived continuously in the UK for 7 years at the date  of
    the application. She also is not a "qualifying child" for the  purposes
    of section 117B of the 2002 Act.

23. According to the witness statement  Appellant's  witness  statement  at
    page 6 of her bundle, she lives with her mother. Her best interests are
    a primary consideration (ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4).  The  correct
    starting point in considering the welfare and best interests of a young
    child is that it is in the best interests of a child to live  with  and
    be brought up by his or her parents, subject to any very strong contra-
    indication (E-A (Article 8 - best interests of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00315). It is clear  from  the  consistent  jurisprudence  of  the
    higher courts that the best interests of a child are an  integral  part
    of the proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR and a child must
    not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not responsible,  such
    as the conduct of a parent (ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4,  Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74).    Further,
    the best interests of the child are to be determined  by  reference  to
    the child alone without reference to the immigration history or  status
    of either parent (EV (Philippines) and others v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874).

24. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013]  UKUT  197  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  summarized  the  best
    interests of the child and noted, at paragraph 13 (iv) that seven years
    from age four is likely to be more significant  to  a  child  than  the
    first seven years of life. Very young children  are  focused  on  their
    parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.

25. It is clearly in her best interests to remain with her mother. There is
    no evidence before me to show that it would  be  to  her  detriment  to
    return to Pakistan, the country of her nationality,  with  her  mother.
    Whilst the Appellant asserts in her witness statement that she lives in
    the UK with her brother, she did not attend  the  hearing  and  I  have
    heard no evidence in relation to any ties the Appellant's daughter  may
    have established here. She is very young and has only lived in  the  UK
    for two years.  Given her age, her focus is likely to be on her mother.
    Whilst she may therefore have established a limited private life in the
    UK, her removal from the UK with her  mother  would  not  result  in  a
    disproportionate interference with that right. In so concluding, I have
    had regard to  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.  The  maintenance  of
    immigration control is in the public interest. There is no evidence  to
    show that the Appellant and her daughter are  financially  independent.
    In view of the fact that she conducted her asylum interview in  English
    I accept that she speaks English. However, the public interest in  firm
    immigration control is not diluted by this  consideration  (Forman  (ss
    117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)). The Appellant and  her
    daughter's private life have been established  whilst  they  have  been
    here either precariously or unlawfully. I find  that  the  Respondent's
    decision is a proportionate one.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it under the  Immigration
Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
