

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03273/2014
                                                               AA/03275/2014
                                                               AA/03276/2014
                                                               AA/03279/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Columbus House, Newport           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On:             22 October 2014               |On:                   4      |
|                                              |November 2014                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                      THUSITHA CHANDANA WICRAMARACHICHI
                 SAMUDRA DESHANTHI WANASINGHA MUDIYANSELAGE
                  HASHELI CHATHUMINI CHAMYA WICRAMARACHICHI
                     DILNA SESHAN HASHEL WICRAMARACHICHI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:         Mr D Kumudwena, Liyon Legal Limited
For the Respondent:        Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellants are citizens of  Sri  Lanka  born  respectively  on  17
      February 1971 and 29 September 1974 and are husband and wife and their
      two children. They appeal against the decision of First-tier  tribunal
      Judge Britton who following a hearing on 24 June 2014 dismissed  their
      appeal against the decision of the Respondent made on 30 April 2014 to
      refuse their application for asylum.   Permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal was given on 18 July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Ford.


   2. At the hearing  before  me  the  Appellants  were  represented  by  Mr
      Kumudwena who submitted a bundle of documents under cover of a  letter
      dated 14 October 2014. Mr Richards represented the Respondent and  had
      no further documents to submit a rule 24 response having been filed on
      5 August 2014.


   BACKGROUND

   3. The First Appellant (the Appellant) is a married man with two children
      who came to the United Kingdom as a student  and  was  joined  by  his
      family as his dependents. The appellant  worked  in  Sri  Lanka  until
      coming to the United Kingdom and claimed to be a committee  member  of
      the trade union associated with the opposition United National  Party.
      His role within the party involved investigating  the  wrongdoings  of
      government ministers, organising public meetings,  strikes  and  other
      activities. The Appellant was particularly involved in  investigations
      relating to a member of  Parliament,  Mervyn  Silva.  The  Appellant's
      activities  brought  him  to  the  adverse  attention  of  politicians
      including Mr Silva. Threats were made against the Appellant and  three
      specific incident occurred. The first in 2009, the second in 2010  and
      third in 2011. As a result of these  incidents  the  Appellant  claims
      that he is in danger of being arrested and killed on a return  to  Sri
      Lanka.


   SUBMISSIONS


   4. For the Appellant Mr Kumudwena referred to the grounds  of  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal. The Judge made no clear  credibility  findings  in
      respect of the Appellant's trade union activities. Referring to page 4
      of the Appellant's bundle Mr Kumudwena said that  the  Appellant  gave
      evidence of what he did as a trade union activist. I was  referred  to
      his  witness  statement  and   interview   record.   There   is   also
      corroborative evidence from the Appellant's mother,  his  brother  and
      from the trade union. Trade union activities are a  risk  factor  that
      should have  been  taken  into  account  in  accordance  with  country
      guidance.


   5. Mr Kumudwena said that the findings made by the Judge  in  respect  of
      the Appellant's  departure  from  Colombo  airport  were  against  the
      objective evidence. There were no court proceedings in  being  against
      the  Appellant  so  he  could  travel.  Mr  Kumudwena  said  that  the
      determination shows a lack of high scrutiny  had  been  given  to  the
      Appellant's evidence.

   6. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that the Judge took  into  account
      all the evidence placed before him (paragraph 55) and reached a  clear
      conclusion (paragraph 69) that the core of the Appellant's account  of
      persecution lacked credibility. Whilst the Judge may not have  made  a
      specific finding as to the Appellants trade union activities there  is
      no material error disclosed. The  Judge  focused  on  the  Appellant's
      account.


   7. Mr Richards said that the Appellant's account involved three  separate
      episodes. In 2009 there was a police raid on  his  home  when  he  was
      threatened with a gun to his head. In 2010 a complaint was  made  that
      he had threatened people with  a  bomb.  In  2011  the  Appellant  was
      arrested and escaped detention.  The  Judge  examines  each  of  these
      episodes and comes to conclusions, for  good  reasons,  that  none  of
      these events happened. So far as the 2010 incident  is  concerned  the
      Judge had in mind that the Appellant was under suspicion  of  being  a
      terrorist and he was entitled to conclude that if this was the case he
      would have had difficulty leaving the country. The Judge  was  clearly
      of the opinion that the Appellant had failed to make out his claim and
      that his account of persecution  was  a  complete  fabrication.  These
      conclusions were open to the Judge and disclosed no material error.


   8. In reply Mr Kumudwena said that his main point was the Judge's failure
      to make clear findings about the Appellant's trade  union  membership.
      As a trade union member the Appellant was a human rights activist  and
      was therefore a  key  opponent  of  the  government  as  envisaged  in
      paragraph 356 of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka
      CG [2013] UK UT00319 (IAC).


   DECISION

   9. I have  carefully  considered  the  papers  before  me  and  the  oral
      submissions made  by  both  representatives.  It  is  the  Appellant's
      contention that the Judge's findings in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
      ability to leave  Sri  Lanka  are  not  in  line  with  the  objective
      evidence, that he failed to make clear findings about the  Appellant's
      claimed  trade  union  activities,  that  he  failed  to   apply   the
      Appellant's profile to the relevant country guidance decision and that
      he erred in his credibility findings by making his own assumptions and
      placing too much weight on plausibility.


  10. In dealing with these assertions it is in my judgment clear  that  the
      basis of the Judge's decision was his  finding  that  the  Appellant's
      account lacked credibility. In reasoning this finding the Judge  notes
      that he has considered all of the evidence before him (see  paragraphs
      55 and 69) and he refers to this evidence noting the  statements  made
      and the medical evidence.

  11. The Judge's reasoning in respect of the Appellant's ability  to  leave
      Sri Lanka is clear. In paragraph  59  he  explains  why  he  does  not
      believe the Appellant's account in this respect. A serious  allegation
      was made against the Appellant. The nature of the allegation was  such
      that the Judge did not accept that the police would  have  reacted  in
      the way that the Appellant claims, that  the  Appellant  could  simply
      have failed to report for more than 10 days or that he would have been
      able to leave the country. The reason the Judge found the  Appellant's
      claim incredible in this respect is not because he was not on a  'stop
      list' as suggested in the grounds of appeal  but  rather  because  the
      Judge did not believe that if such a serious allegation had been  made
      the Sri Lankan authorities would have reacted in such a casual manner.
      This finding was fully open to the judge.

  12. In respect of the Appellant's trade union activities, the  main  issue
      raised by Mr Kumudwena, it is suggested that clear findings  have  not
      been made.  In fact it is clear from reading the  decision  that  this
      was not relevant to the outcome of the appeal. The Judge made reasoned
      adverse credibility findings in respect of the core  elements  of  the
      Appellant's account. In doing so the Judge found (paragraph  58)  that
      being a member of the UNP and belonging to the trade union and  making
      speeches would not of itself bring him to the adverse attention of the
      authorities. This finding is sustainable.  Mr  Kumadwena's  suggestion
      that the Appellant's  membership  of  the  UNP   or  his  trade  union
      activities bring him into the risk categories  outlined  in  paragraph
      356 (7) of GJ and others is not correct. It was  not  the  Appellant's
      case that his membership or activities of themselves caused him to  be
      seen as a human rights activist or seen as critical of the Sri  Lankan
      government. His case was that specific incidents took place  and  that
      as a result of those specific  incidents  the  Appellant  believed  he
      would be persecuted on his return. The Judge found that the  Appellant
      was not telling the  truth  in  these  respects.  Those  findings  are
      sustainable.


  13. The final assertions put forward  do  not  demonstrate  any  potential
      errors of law. It is entirely within the Judge's remit to  assess  the
      credibility of the evidence put before him. In  assessing  credibility
      the Judge is entitled  to  consider  plausibility  as  an  element  of
      credibility and is further entitled to consider what  is  feasible  or
      practically possible. It is clear to the losing party why the case was
      lost; it was because the Judge did not believe the Appellant's account
      and his reasons for disbelieving  that  account  were  succinctly  but
      adequately given. In my finding there is no error of law.




   Summary of decision


  14. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of no error on a point of law. Appeal dismissed.









J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal      Date 4 November 2014
