

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA035212014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 April 2016                          |On 10 June 2016                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     A M
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B. Poynor, Counsel instructed by Bindmans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    A brief summary of the background to the appeal  is  set  out  in  the
    annexed error of law decision. The First-tier Tribunal  was  set  aside
    and further to written submissions received from both  parties.  I  now
    remake the decision.

2.    The focus of the appeal is as follows:

       i) The appellant's account of past events is accepted.


      ii) It is accepted that the appellant is a victim of trafficking.


     iii) It is not disputed that the appellant  is  a  vulnerable  person.
          Various reports and other pieces of evidence support  her  claim.
          The appellant's vulnerability and current support network in  the
          UK  underpinned  the   respondent's   decision   to   grant   her
          Discretionary Leave to Remain until 04 May 2018.


      iv) The appellant did not seek to challenge the  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge's findings relating to the absence of a real risk emanating
          from her former employer. Those findings shall stand.

       v) The focus of the appeal is whether, in light of  the  appellant's
          particular circumstances, there is in general a real risk of  re-
          trafficking that would bring her within  the  protection  of  the
          Refugee Convention.

Decision and reasons

3.    I have taken into account the  further  written  submissions  made  by
    both parties as well as the expert and background evidence  before  the
    tribunal.

4.    The appellant's account of past events in Morocco  can  be  summarised
    as follows. She comes from a large family from the Sale area of  Rabat.
    She is the fifth of ten children. Her father worked in construction but
    is now retired. Her mother is blind.  The  appellant  attended  primary
    school but she had to leave  school  when  she  was  eleven  years  old
    because her family could not afford  to  continue  her  education.  She
    helped her sisters, who worked as cleaners. She had to  start  work  at
    such a young age in order to help pay for the younger children to get a
    basic education. She says that the economic situation was very  bad  in
    Morocco.

5.    In 1998 she was offered a job, through a  friend,  with  a  family  in
    Saudi Arabia. She worked for the family for about four years. She  says
    that the family treated her "so-so". She was paid  but  sometimes  they
    would shout at her. She left that job because she was not happy  living
    in Saudi Arabia and she missed her family. On return to Morocco she was
    unable to find regular employment but worked on and off as a cleaner.

6.    In September 2011 her sister, Z, encouraged her to apply for a job  in
    the household of 'Mrs C'. Z worked as a cleaner for Mrs C's cousin. The
    appellant says that she was not in a position to negotiate with  Mrs  C
    and agreed to her terms because she needed a job. She gives a long  and
    detailed account of subsequent events. It is not necessary to set  them
    out here save to say that the events form the basis of the finding that
    she has been trafficked. As a result  of  those  events  she  has  been
    diagnosed with Post-traumatic Stress Disorder and has been assessed  as
    being in need of high levels  of  support  because  of  her  particular
    vulnerabilities.

7.    It is accepted that the appellant is a victim of trafficking.  I  find
    that the  past  ill-treatment  is  sufficiently  severe  to  amount  to
    persecution within the meaning of  the  Refugee  Convention.  Paragraph
    339K of the immigration rules states:

           "339K. The fact that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
           persecution or serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of  such
           persecution  or  such  harm,  will  be  regarded  as  a  serious
           indication of the person's well-founded fear of  persecution  or
           real risk of suffering  serious  harm,  unless  there  are  good
           reasons to consider that such persecution or serious  harm  will
           not be repeated."

8.    In this case the First-tier  Tribunal  gave  sustainable  reasons  for
    concluding  that  there  were  good  reasons  to  consider  that   such
    persecution from her previous employer would not  be  repeated.  Having
    left her employer there was no reliable evidence to show that  she  had
    any adverse or continuing interest in her. Her sister  Z  continued  to
    work for Mrs C's cousin. Neither she,  nor  any  other  member  of  the
    appellant's  family  in  Morocco,  appeared  to   have   suffered   any
    repercussions.

9.    The central issue for determination in  this  appeal  is  whether,  in
    light of the appellant's background and particular vulnerability, there
    is a real risk of further exploitation and abuse of a similar nature if
    returned to Morocco.

10.   The respondent  argues  that  the  appellant  has  family  members  in
    Morocco who would be able to support her on  return.  For  this  reason
    there is no good reason to suppose that she would be at real risk of re-
    trafficking. On behalf of the appellant it is argued  that  her  family
    was to some extent complicit in arranging her previous  employment  and
    are too poor to support the appellant  without  the  pressing  economic
    need for her to work. It is  argued  that  the  background  and  expert
    evidence shows that she  would  continue  to  be  at  risk  of  similar
    exploitation and harm and that  the  authorities  would  be  unable  to
    provide sufficient protection.

11.   A report of the  UN  Special  Rapporteur  on  trafficking  in  persons
    (especially women and children)  dated  01  April  2014  sets  out  the
    information that she gathered following a  visit  to  Morocco  in  June
    2013. The Special Rapporteur prefaced her report by noting  that  there
    was a general lack of data and knowledge of human  trafficking  amongst
    the interlocutors [pg.130 appellant's  bundle  "AB"].  She  noted  that
    Morocco was a source, transit and increasingly  a  destination  country
    for human trafficking. The majority of victims of trafficking  appeared
    to come from the irregular migrant community. Lack of opportunities for
    education, employment and poverty were said to be the main root  causes
    that might heighten the vulnerability of people  to  human  trafficking
    [pg.131 AB].

12.    The  report  recognised  that  Moroccans  were  also  vulnerable   to
    trafficking. It cited a field survey conducted  in  2007,  which  found
    that it was predominantly Moroccan women who were employed  abroad.  In
    the United Arab Emirates it was said that around 70%  of  Moroccan  ex-
    patriots were women. Many found that the contracts they were issued did
    not correspond to the agreed duties of the job and many Moroccan  women
    found themselves trapped in situations of exploitation by  prostitution
    networks [pg.132  AB].  Elsewhere  the  report  cites  evidence  of  "a
    considerable number" of  Moroccan  women  living  in  the  Gulf  region
    becoming victims of trafficking, labour and sexual exploitation.  While
    the  Ministry  in  Charge  of  Moroccans  Living  Abroad  worked   with
    diplomatic and consular missions abroad and received a large number  of
    complaints it did not have a mechanism dedicated to the  protection  of
    such victims [pg.137 AB].

13.   The Special Rapporteur found that protection and assistance,  as  well
    as access to justice for victims of trafficking and irregular migrants,
    were very  limited.  Domestic  workers  were  outside  the  purview  of
    Moroccan labour law, which left women and  girls,  both  nationals  and
    foreigners, vulnerable to exploitation and abuse. She  noted  that  the
    absence of adequate protection services dissuaded  trafficking  victims
    from seeking help and exposed  them  to  criminals  who  can  act  with
    impunity in the knowledge that  victims  "have  no  legal  recourse  or
    effective  remedies"  [pg.140  AB].  Although  the  Special  Rapporteur
    acknowledged that Morocco  expressed  its  commitment  and  resolve  to
    combat trafficking she was concerned that, at that time, there  was  no
    specific legislation on trafficking or  targeted  policies  that  would
    provide trafficked persons  with  adequate  protection,  assistance  or
    support in their recovery process [pg.144 AB].

14.   The US State Department Trafficking  in  Persons  (TIP)  Report  dated
    July 2015 categorises Morocco as a Tier 2 country (government does  not
    comply with minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking but is
    making significant efforts to do  so).  The  report  is  consistent  in
    stating  that  irregular  migrants  are  particularly   vulnerable   to
    trafficking but also notes that many Moroccan men, women  and  children
    are exploited in forced labour and sex trafficking. The  government  of
    Morocco does not full comply  with  minimum  standards  but  is  making
    "significant efforts" to do so. In the reporting period the  government
    adopted  a  national  anti-trafficking  action  plan,  which   included
    commitments to  adopt  an  anti-trafficking  law  [pg.125  &  127  AB].
    However, Moroccan law does not prohibit all forms of human trafficking.
    The  lack  of  anti-trafficking  legislation  and   confusion   amongst
    officials in differentiating between human smuggling, illegal migration
    and human trafficking offences remained a "serious  obstacle"  to  what
    were described as "modest" law enforcement efforts [pg.126 AB].

15.   While the government had made some progress there was no  evidence  of
    government  services  designed  specifically  to   assist   trafficking
    victims. The government did not  report  providing  care  for  Moroccan
    trafficking victims. While some services were available  to  women  and
    child victims of violence the government  did  not  report  that  these
    services  were  available  to  trafficking  victims  [pg.126  AB].  The
    Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs conducted labour  inspections
    and identified hundreds of child labourers in the first quarter of 2014
    but did not identify victims of trafficking in this  group.  Inspectors
    were said to be hindered by inadequate staffing. They did not have  the
    legal authority to enter homes thereby preventing them from identifying
    those in domestic servitude [pg.127 AB].

16.   Further evidence is outlined in the expert report  of  Dr  Katja  ?van
    Elliot. She is an Assistant Professor in North African and Middle  East
    Studies at Al  Akhawayn  University  in  Ifrane,  Morocco.  She  has  a
    background in research on the  issue  of  Moroccan  gender  and  family
    relationships. She is currently conducting research on state sanctioned
    violence against women in Morocco. The summary of her experiences  sets
    out  a  number  of  her  articles  and  publications,   which   largely
    concentrate on issues surrounding women's rights in Morocco. The report
    is presented in a way that is  broadly  consistent  with  the  tribunal
    practice direction. While the summary of her experience  and  expertise
    does not disclose any specialist knowledge or experience in relation to
    trafficking of persons I accept that Dr ?van Elliot is an academic with
    relevant knowledge of government and politics in Morocco, and  that  as
    part of her work on women's rights, it is at least likely that she  may
    have developed some knowledge of those issues. As such I  find  that  I
    can place weight on the opinions expressed  in  her  report  as  expert
    evidence.

17.    So  far  as  Dr  ?van  Elliot  makes  comment  on  the  situation  of
    trafficking in  Morocco  she  does  so  with  reference  to  background
    evidence such as the US TIP report. I have already  outlined  the  main
    points drawn from the more recent report above. Where her  evidence  is
    more helpful is in relation to her knowledge of Moroccan government and
    society. She points out that the norm is for women to live  with  their
    families. In considering whether it would be possible for the appellant
    to live elsewhere she states that lower-class  black  women  living  on
    their own in poor neighbourhoods are likely to be viewed as prostitutes
    and may face serious harassment by local people as well as the  police.
    Even if the appellant were to find a job as a domestic  worker  she  is
    unlikely to earn enough to support  herself.  The  additional  need  to
    provide support to her family would compound the problem. She  confirms
    that the appellant's father, as a former construction worker, would not
    receive a pension (this is reserved for public sector workers). Dr ?van
    Elliot points out that, contrary to the assertions made in the  reasons
    for refusal letter, the situation for women's rights is  not  improving
    in practice, particularly for those who come from poor and marginalised
    classes [pg.120 AB].

18.   Dr ?van Elliot states that Morocco is an authoritarian  country  where
    corruption continues to pervade the police force. There  is  a  general
    lack of trust in the authorities. The reality is that police protection
    "is not guaranteed to all citizens, and is  significantly  impacted  by
    one's  social  standing  and  connections."  She  concludes  that   the
    appellant, as a poor black  woman  without  connections,  education  or
    skills, would face "a very hard time" if returned to  Morocco.  In  her
    opinion it is likely that because of her poor background the  appellant
    would be at risk of further exploitation for the  purpose  of  domestic
    servitude. Her anecdotal evidence is that as a  poor  woman  who  would
    most likely work as domestic help she could be taken advantage of by  a
    future  employer  and  may  even  be  re-trafficked.  Dr  ?van   Elliot
    emphasised that it was impossible to overstate how  much  material  and
    social deprivation, as well as skin colour, impact on Moroccan people's
    quality of life and the way in which  law  enforcement  officials  deal
    with them. She concluded that  poor  women,  in  particular,  are  most
    vulnerable to organised crime [pg.123-124]

19.   The evidence shows that the appellant comes from a poor and  therefore
    marginalised section of Moroccan society. Because her family  lived  in
    poverty she was forced to abandon her education and had to  go  out  to
    work from a very young age. The same economic imperatives will  prevail
    if she returns to Morocco. The appellant's account is  consistent  with
    the background evidence. She was forced  to  seek  work  in  the  Saudi
    Arabia. While she was lucky that her experience there was not  too  bad
    the background evidence shows that many Moroccan women, in  particular,
    are at risk  of  exploitation  and  abuse  while  working  in  domestic
    situations in the  Gulf  region.  The  evidence  shows  that  irregular
    migrant communities are particularly at risk of trafficking in  Morocco
    but also supports the assertion that poor  and  marginalised  Moroccans
    are forced into seeking work where they may be at risk of  exploitation
    and abuse.

20.   The appellant's social and economic  background  meant  that  she  was
    amongst those who are most vulnerable to trafficking and  exploitation.
    While there is no suggestion that her family would want to deliberately
    place her in a position of harm the reality of their economic situation
    shows that there is at least a serious possibility that  the  appellant
    would have to seek work in the same way as she did  before,  and  would
    face the same risk of exploitation as before, even if she  returned  to
    live with her family. If she attempted to live away from her family the
    evidence suggests that she would be even more vulnerable to a  risk  of
    serious harm. If this is then  put  in  the  context  of  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's particular vulnerability  and  reliance  on
    high levels of support in the UK then, in my assessment, the likelihood
    of the appellant being at risk of further exploitation reaches the  low
    standard of proof required in an asylum claim.

21.   The background and other  evidence  shows  that,  while  the  Moroccan
    government has made efforts to work towards  improving  the  situation,
    there is still no adequate legal framework, resources  or  training  to
    protection  victims  of  trafficking  or  to  protect  those  who   are
    vulnerable  to  exploitation.  The  appellant's   marginalised   social
    standing  would  make  it  even  more  difficult  to  access   adequate
    assistance from the police  if  required.  Domestic  labour  law  would
    provide no protection if she was forced to return to domestic work.

22.   The appellant does not need to show with any certainty that she  would
    be exploited or re-trafficked but I  am  satisfied  that  the  evidence
    before me shows that there are no good reasons  to  consider  that  the
    serious harm she suffered in the past would not be repeated. I conclude
    that there is at least a real risk of serious harm if the appellant  is
    returned to Morocco at the current time.


DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal

Signed   [pic]   Date 08 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



































ANNEX - error of law decision

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03521/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 13 April 2016                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between


                                     A M
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B. Poynor, Counsel instructed by Bindmans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant has been recognised as a victim  of  trafficking.  As  a
    result of her documented vulnerabilities and the high level of  support
    she is receiving from charities  and  other  agencies  in  the  UK  the
    respondent granted Discretionary Leave to Remain  (DLR)  until  04  May
    2018.

2.    The appellant pursued an 'upgrade appeal' to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    pursuant to section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("NIAA 2002"). The appellant feared that she would be at risk from
    the family who trafficked her to the UK  on  account  of  their  social
    status and influence. It was  also  argued  that  she  would  be  at  a
    generalised risk of re-trafficking on return to her home country.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Bird ("the  judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 09 February 2016. The factual background to the
    claim was not in any real dispute. The judge summarised the issues that
    she was required to determine in paragraph 19 of the decision:

           "The argument  that  I  must  consider  is  whether,  given  the
           appellant's circumstances, namely that she is a former victim of
           trafficking who is in a vulnerable mental state with no  support
           networks in her country, that she will be at risk of  being  re-
           trafficked if returned to [her home country]  and  is  therefore
           entitled to refugee status because she has a  well-founded  fear
           of being persecuted for a Convention reason. In the  appellant's
           case it has been accepted that the appellant is a  member  of  a
           particular social group having been  trafficked  to  the  United
           Kingdom. The only question is whether if returned to  [her  home
           country], there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  the
           appellant will be re-trafficked. The  appellant  says  that  she
           will be because she will be sought out by  her  former  employer
           who has connections in the government in [her home country]  and
           she will therefore be at risk of further ill-treatment."

4.    The judge considered the  circumstances  surrounding  the  appellant's
    trafficking to the UK and whether it was likely that she  would  be  at
    risk on return to her home country. She concluded  that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that there was a real risk, not least because there
    was no evidence of repercussions for her family in  her  home  country.
    Her sister still worked for  a  different  member  of  the  family  who
    trafficked her to the UK [25]. The judge took  into  account  the  fact
    that the appellant came from a poor family and that she had other  work
    in the past both in her home country and in Saudi  Arabia  [26].  While
    she recognised that there was evidence to show that the  appellant  was
    vulnerable she concluded that the appellant would have  family  support
    on return to her home country and would therefore not be at risk of re-
    trafficking [27].

5.    The appellant seeks to appeal the decision on  the  grounds  that  (i)
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to make adequate findings in relation to
    the generalised risk of re-trafficking; and (ii) erred in equating  the
    availability of family support with the test for sufficiency  of  state
    protection.

6.    The appellant does not challenge the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
    relating to risk on  return  from  her  former  employers.  The  appeal
    focuses solely on the findings relating  to  generalised  risk  of  re-
    trafficking. Although the  judge  wrote  a  careful  and  largely  well
    reasoned decision I find that there is some force in the argument  that
    she failed to engage with the evidence  relating  to  risk  on  return,
    which included an  expert  report  and  background  evidence  regarding
    trafficking and exploitation of domestic  workers  in  the  appellant's
    home country. The decision is absent any analysis of that evidence. Nor
    is there any analysis of how and why the appellant  might  have  become
    vulnerable to trafficking in the first place. While the judge  observed
    that she came from a poor family it was  a  material  consideration  in
    assessing whether there was a real risk of her being forced back into a
    situation of  exploitation  due  to  economic  hardship.  The  evidence
    indicated that members of her family were instrumental in  finding  her
    the job and encouraging her to remain in the situation of  exploitation
    even after she expressed  a  desire  to  leave.  The  appellant's  past
    experience of trafficking was material to the assessment of whether she
    would be at risk on return (paragraph 339K immigration rules).

7.    For these reasons I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error on a point of  law.  I  set  aside  the
    decision.

DIRECTIONS

8.    At the hearing it was agreed that if an error of law were  found  that
    the remaking of the decision could be done by way  of  further  written
    submissions. The focus  of  any  remaking  would  be  to  consider  the
    background and other evidence before the tribunal relating to  risk  on
    return. As such the following directions are made:

9.    The  appellant  is  to  serve  any  further  written  submissions  and
    supporting evidence by Friday 06 May 2016 at the latest.

10.   The respondent is to serve any further written submissions  by  Friday
    20 May 2016 at the latest.

11.   If no further submissions are received the tribunal  will  proceed  to
decide the appeal.

12.   Both parties are at liberty to apply.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside and will remake the decision subject to further submissions

Signed   [pic]   Date 21 April 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
