


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03645/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On : 1 April 2016                        |On 13 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                toomaj jahani

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Skyner, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Iran born on 1 July 1980. He arrived  in  the
United Kingdom on 26 September  2014  and  claimed  asylum.  His  claim  was
refused on 9 February 2015 and a decision was made the same  day  to  refuse
leave to enter the UK. The appellant appealed  against  that  decision.  His
appeal was  dismissed  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Permission  has  been
granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to be at risk of persecution in Iran on  the  basis  of
his conversion to Christianity from Islam. He claims  that  his  father  was
executed in 1988 for attempting to leave Iran illegally and  following  that
he was blacklisted. He was arrested  himself  in  2003  when  attempting  to
leave the country and was taken to the Revolutionary Court and then  to  the
Etalaat building where he was interrogated and beaten and then released.  In
December 2013 he informed his family that he was thinking of  converting  to
Christianity and in March 2014 he converted. His  family  members  converted
subsequently. In June (or August) 2014 he attended a  Christian  meeting  in
someone's house which was raided by Sepah officers. He managed to flee,  but
left behind his bag containing his identity and insurance  documents.  These
were found by the officers who then raided his house. He was  not  there  at
the time but his mother told him. He went into hiding for two  months  until
his uncle arranged for an agent to take him to Turkey in August  2014.  From
there he travelled to Germany and then to the UK.

The respondent, in refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  did  not  accept  his
account of having converted to Christianity  given  his  lack  of  knowledge
about the Christian faith. His claim to have been arrested  when  trying  to
leave Iran was  also  rejected,  as  was  his  claim  to  have  been  caught
practising the Christian religion. The respondent did not  accept  that  the
appellant would be at risk  on  return  to  Iran  and  considered  that  his
removal would not breach his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard by  Judge
Malik in the First-tier Tribunal on 8  May  2015  and  was  dismissed  in  a
decision promulgated on 3 June 2015. Judge Malik  recorded  the  appellant's
evidence including his claim that he was baptised in the UK  on  1  February
2015. She also set out the evidence of Reverend John Bradbury, the  Minister
of Farnworth Baptist Church, who supported the appellant's claim,  confirmed
his weekly church attendance and stated that he sincerely believed  that  he
was a genuine convert. The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  claim  was
pursued solely on the basis of his conversion to Christianity,  but  in  any
event she found his account of his arrest in 2003 when attempting  to  leave
Iran to be lacking in credibility and she did not accept that  he  had  been
blacklisted. She found it implausible that the appellant  would  have  taken
his identity and car insurance documents with him,  and  left  them  behind,
when attending a church meeting. She found his  account  of  having  escaped
and remained undetected for two months to undermine  his  account  of  being
pursued by the authorities.  She  did  not  accept  his  account  of  having
converted to Christianity, nor his account of his mother's  conversion,  and
found his account of his departure from Iran to be inconsistent.  The  judge
accepted that the appellant  had  been  baptised  in  the  UK  but  was  not
satisfied that he had not sought to put forward a claim  to  have  converted
to Christianity in order to bolster  a  false  asylum  claim.  She  did  not
accept that the appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  to  Iran  and  she
dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, on  the  grounds  that  the  evidence  of  Reverend  Bradbury  was
material  to  the  question  of  the  appellant's  genuine   conversion   to
Christianity but the judge had assessed his evidence only briefly; that  the
judge had erred in her rejection of  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
blacklisted; and that the judge had failed to give proper  consideration  to
the appellant's explanation for not being able  to  give  the  date  of  his
conversion to Christianity.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  24  June  2015,
primarily with respect to the first ground.

Mr Skyner, in his submissions,  reiterated  the  first  ground.  Mr  McVeety
acknowledged that the judge's findings in regard to the Reverend's  evidence
were brief, but submitted that this  case  differed  from  other  conversion
cases in that the appellant's claim was that he had converted  in  Iran  and
not in  the  UK.  The  judge  had  given  good  reasons  for  rejecting  the
appellant's account of  his  conversion  in  Iran  and  that  had  not  been
challenged in the grounds. Mr Skyner, in response, submitted that the  judge
was still required to give full consideration to the  circumstances  in  the
UK.


I advised the parties that I did not consider there to be any errors of  law
in the judge's decision. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

Judge Malik set out the appellant's evidence at length,  together  with  the
respondent's reasons for rejecting his claim and  the  appellant's  response
to the respondent's concerns. At [15] to [17] she noted his response to  the
respondent's comments about his lack of knowledge  of  the  Christian  faith
and the vague nature of his evidence about when he  converted.  At  [18]  to
[21] she noted the appellant's response to other aspects of his claim  which
the  respondent  did  not  find  credible.  She  also  had  regard  to   the
documentary evidence produced by the appellant in support of his  claim  and
made reference in particular to the medical evidence produced in the  appeal
bundle. Whilst she did not specifically refer to  the  other  documentation,
it seems to me that the  majority  of  the  background  information  in  the
appeal bundle concerning religion in fact related to Judaism rather than  to
Christianity.

The judge then went on,  in  her  decision,  to  give  various  reasons  for
finding the appellant's account  of  his  conversion  to  Christianity,  his
mother's conversion, his attendance at and escape from a church meeting  and
the adverse interest in him by the Iranian  authorities  to  be  lacking  in
credibility. Having, myself,  had  regard  to  the  judge's  record  of  the
appellant's  evidence  about  his  religion  and   his   response   to   the
respondent's adverse findings, it seems to me that the  judge  was  entitled
to reach the adverse conclusions that she did on the basis of  the  evidence
before her. Indeed, aside from seeking,  at  the  end  of  the  grounds,  to
provide an explanation for not being able to give the  exact  date  for  his
conversion to Christianity, the grounds of appeal, as Mr McVeety  submitted,
do not in fact seek to challenge the judge's adverse findings in respect  to
the appellant's conversion and related experiences in Iran.

Having thus, for reasons properly given, found the  appellant's  account  of
his association with the Christian faith and his experiences in Iran  to  be
lacking in credibility, the judge was entitled to approach the  evidence  of
his involvement in the church in the UK on  the  basis  that  she  did.  She
plainly gave full  consideration  to  the  evidence  of  Reverend  Bradbury,
setting it out in detail at [24] and [25], but she was entitled to give  the
weight that she did to his evidence. She did not doubt the sincerity of  the
Reverend but, whilst noting and appreciating the Reverend's own view of  the
appellant's motives, she was nevertheless not obliged to  accept  his  views
and was entitled to draw her own  conclusions  about  the  appellant's  true
intentions and motivation. Thus, whilst the judge's  findings  at  [37]  are
brief, they have to be taken  in  the  context  of  her  assessment  of  the
evidence and her findings as a whole. Accordingly  I  would  agree  with  Mr
McVeety's submission that the judge was entitled to  reach  the  conclusions
that she did in relation to the appellant's interest  in  and  adherence  to
the Christian faith. I find  no  errors  in  the  judge's  approach  to  the
Reverend's evidence and I find no errors of law in the judge's decision.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.









                               Signed                                  Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
