
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03697/2015
     AA/03701/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 May 2015                             |On 15 July 2015                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     P M
                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Zimbabwe born on [ ] 1981 and [ ]  2007,
    respectively.   The  first  appellant  is  the  mother  of  the  second
    appellant who is dependent on her claim.   In  this  decision  where  I
    refer to "the appellant" this it to be taken  as  a  reference  to  the
    first appellant since it is her claim and her  circumstances  that  are
    the focus for the appeal.

 2. Following the rejection of the appellant's claim for asylum, a decision
    was made to remove the appellant and her son under section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The appellants' appeal  against  that
    decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox  ("the  FtJ")  on  6
    October 2015.  He dismissed the appeals.

 3. The appellant's case on asylum is a claimed fear of return to  Zimbabwe
    on account of her political activities.  She claims to be a  member  of
    the Mthwakazi Liberation Front ("the MLF") and is wanted for treason.

 4. The appellant and her husband were attacked when  they  were  at  their
    grinding mill.  The appellant's husband was beaten  and  the  appellant
    was repeatedly raped.

 5. A letter was found at the appellant's house threatening  the  appellant
    with jail and with hanging.  The appellant fled  to  South  Africa  and
    then to the UK, with the assistance of her father.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

 6. It is contended in the grounds that the appellant's account in terms of
    her rape and abduction were not rejected as such  in  the  respondent's
    decision letter and the FtJ did not  take  into  account  that  implied
    acceptance of her account.

 7. Furthermore, it is asserted that the FtJ failed to  take  into  account
    background evidence in relation to the attitude of the  authorities  to
    the MLF.

 8. It is also asserted that in respect of certain factual findings the FtJ
    had failed to have regard to the appellant's evidence, for  example  in
    terms of why she did not claim asylum in South Africa.

 9. The FtJ's assessment of credibility in terms of section 8 of the Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 is  flawed  not
    only in terms of the appellant's explanation as  to  why  she  did  not
    claim asylum in South Africa but also in terms of  when  she  made  her
    asylum claim in Northern Ireland, with the appellant's  evidence  being
    that she went to, in effect, register her  claim  on  the  day  of  her
    arrival.

10. It is further argued that the FtJ's reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    medical report of Dr Kane attracted little weight were flawed.

11. In submissions on behalf of the appellant Mr McTaggart  relied  on  the
    grounds. As regards 'section 8' he  referred  to  the  decision  in  JT
    (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ
    878 to the effect that credibility issues within Section 8 are only  to
    be regarded as potentially damaging to  credibility,  contrary  to  the
    FtJ's conclusions.

12. Furthermore, the appellant's account was that  she  claimed  asylum  at
    'Bryson House' on  her  arrival  in  Belfast,  contrary  to  the  FtJ's
    conclusion that she waited approximately four weeks before  making  her
    claim.  Mr McTaggart submitted that in order  to  undergo  a  screening
    interview the appellant would have needed to go to Bryson House first.

13. The appellant had explained why she  did  not  claim  asylum  in  South
    Africa, as is evident from her  witness  statement  at  [21],  the  FtJ
    stating that the appellant had only said that she  did  not  feel  safe
    there.  Reference was also made to the appellant's asylum interview.

14. So far as the psychiatric report is concerned, the fact that the report
    was not signed was not a basis for the FtJ to have said that it carried
    little weight.  There was no issue as to the signature on  the  report.
    The report not complying with the Istanbul Protocol is not  a  relevant
    consideration given that it was not a 'torture'  report.   Furthermore,
    contrary to what the FtJ said, the report did give  information  as  to
    the appellant's treatment and there was other evidence of the treatment
    she was receiving in any event.

15. Aside from the FtJ  having  failed  to  take  into  account  background
    evidence to the effect that a critic of  the  government  would  be  at
    risk, there was no basis for the FtJ's conclusion at [25] that the  CIO
    and ZANU-PF can be held to account for criminal acts; at least there is
    no reference to the background material upon which that  conclusion  is
    based.

16. Similarly, there was no foundation for the FtJ's  conclusion  that  the
    attack on the appellant had a criminal motivation.

17. In submissions Mr Duffy referred to aspects of the  refusal  letter  in
    which doubt is raised about the credibility of the appellant's claim to
    have been attacked.  It was  not  the  case,  he  submitted,  that  the
    appellant's account was impliedly accepted on behalf of the  respondent
    in the refusal letter.

18. It was accepted that the appellant was a minor member of  the  MLF  but
    such was not a basis upon which she could succeed in her asylum appeal.

19. So far as section 8 is concerned, the FtJ had to begin  his  assessment
    somewhere.  It may be overall that a different judge may have  come  to
    different findings, but  the  FtJ  in  this  case  had  given  adequate
    reasons.

20. In relation to the medical evidence, the report says that the appellant
    has symptoms in keeping with PTSD.  It appeared however, that  she  was
    well adjusted and had good care and support.  The report  did  need  to
    comply with the Istanbul Protocol which it did not.  The report in  any
    event was of limited value in terms  of  the  appellant's  claim.   Any
    error of law on the part of the FtJ in respect of  the  medical  report
    was not material.

21. The background material in relation to the MLF did not indicate that  a
    low level member or supporter such as the appellant would be  at  risk.
    In any event, the respondent's case is that there was  no  attack  upon
    the appellant.

22. In reply, Mr McTaggart referred to the background evidence  that  three
    members of the MLF  were  prosecuted  for  treason,  as  shown  by  the
    document at J1 of the respondent's bundle.  There was evidence that the
    MLF attracted adverse attention from the  authorities.   The  appellant
    was an active  member,  as  disclosed  in  her  interview  and  witness
    statement, she having attended meetings and distributed pamphlets.  The
    FtJ wrongly concluded that the appellant had  exaggerated  her  profile
    and activities in relation to the MLF.   The  MLF  was  a  secessionist
    organisation.  That was why she was targeted.

    My assessment

23. At the conclusion of the hearing I announced to the parties that I  was
    satisfied that there was an error of law in the FtJ's decision such  as
    to require the decision to be set  aside  and  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing.   My  reasons
    are as follows.

24. I agree with Mr Duffy's submission to the effect that so far as section
    8 is concerned, the FtJ had to start somewhere.  What  is  required  is
    that the section 8 consideration be part of the overall  assessment  of
    credibility.

25. However, there are two reasons why in my judgement the FtJ erred in law
    in his assessment of the section 8 issue.   In  the  first  place,  the
    appellant's account was that she first went to Bryson House  where  she
    claimed asylum in Belfast.  That was on the day of  her  arrival  which
    was 12 December 2013.  This is what the appellant said in her screening
    and asylum interviews, and in her witness statement.   Furthermore,  it
    is a matter that  the  FtJ  recorded  as  part  of  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's claim at [7] of his decision.

26. However, at [12], whilst repeating the appellant's claim that she  went
    to Bryson House the FtJ said that the appellant did not make her  claim
    for asylum until 2 January 2014, approximately four weeks  after  their
    arrival.  The refusal letter at [58] makes the point that the appellant
    could have claimed asylum at the port of arrival, which it is suggested
    damages her credibility.  It is not disputed in the refusal letter that
    the appellant did go to Bryson House.  The FtJ  also  referred  to  the
    appellant not making her claim for asylum at the port on  arrival,  but
    he does not appear to have made any assessment of the appellant's claim
    that she 'claimed asylum' at Bryson House.

27. It was acknowledged on behalf of the appellant before me that there  is
    no evidence from Bryson House as to the appellant's arrival there on 12
    December 2013.  It was explained that Bryson House is a  charity  which
    is the first point of contact for potential refugees  and  that  Bryson
    House in turn contact the  Home  Office  which  is  how  the  screening
    interview for the appellant would  have  been  arranged.   Whilst  some
    support for that proposition, which it  would  seem  is  a  'given'  in
    Belfast, would have  been  helpful,  and  whilst  it  would  have  been
    preferable  for  there  to  have  been  evidence  of  the   appellant's
    registering herself, as it were, as an asylum claimant at Bryson House,
    it does seem to me that the FtJ too readily made an adverse credibility
    finding against the appellant on the  basis  that  she  had  her  first
    encounter with the Home Office in terms of claiming asylum  four  weeks
    after her arrival.

28. In relation to the appellant not having claimed asylum in South  Africa
    prior to coming to the UK the FtJ said at [13] that he  had  noted  her
    explanation as to why there was no claim there but stated that she  did
    not address in any meaningful  way  the  issue  that  South  Africa  is
    considered to be a safe country.  He said that she dealt with that by a
    "bland averment" that she did not feel safe there, which he regarded as
    "insufficient".

29. However, in her witness statement at [21] the appellant said  that  she
    did not claim asylum in South Africa because, amongst other things, she
    was in a "bad way" and under the care and  control  of  the  agent  and
    followed his instructions.  In her asylum  interview  at  question  60,
    when asked whether she considered staying in  South  Africa,  she  said
    that she had been told that she was going to Australia.   At  the  time
    she was not thinking straight or thinking at all she  said.   She  said
    that she was going along with what her father said, adding  that  South
    Africa would not have been a safe place because ZANU-PF are able to get
    access to South Africa.  The FtJ's characterisation of the  appellant's
    reasons as stated in his decision does not fully or even  substantially
    reflect the appellant's explanation for not having  claimed  asylum  in
    South Africa.

30. The FtJ at [11] did  direct  himself  that  section  8  issues  may  be
    "potentially  damaging"  to  the  appellant's  credibility,   and   his
    conclusion at [14] was that her failure to claim asylum in South Africa
    and  immediately  upon  her  arrival  in  the  UK  "has   damaged   her
    credibility" under section 8.  I note that at [35] the  FtJ  said  that
    even without the application of section 8 the  appellant's  credibility
    could not be relied on.  However, it is apparent that the FtJ very much
    took into account those section 8 issues to which I have referred.

31. In relation to the claimed attack on the appellant,  the  FtJ  said  at
    [21] that the appellant claimed she had no knowledge of  what  happened
    to her immediately after losing consciousness after she  was  attacked,
    and has no knowledge as to how her father claims to have found her  and
    rescued her.  He said that it seemed strange, if not  incredible,  that
    she did not ask how  she  was  found  and  where  she  was  found.   He
    concluded that those were questions that would  have  been  asked.   At
    [22] he said that the appellant had not provided any explanation as  to
    why she did not ask relevant questions at the time, let alone after she
    presented her claim for asylum when it would have been known that  this
    information would be required.

32. However, the appellant said in her witness statement at [9-11] that due
    to the beating she must have fallen unconsciousness and the next  thing
    when she awoke was that she was at her mother's house.  She  said  that
    she asked her father where her husband was but he did  not  know.   Her
    father had told her that some people  had  seen  them  being  put  into
    vehicles and that they came and told the appellant's  father.   It  was
    then that "they" tried to find them and they found her naked in a  pool
    of blood and there was no sign of her husband.  She was told  that  she
    was taken then straight to her father's house.  This is also in  effect
    what the appellant said in her asylum interview.

33. It is not the case therefore, as the FtJ concluded, that the  appellant
    had no knowledge as to how her father claims to have found and  rescued
    her.  This does not reflect a  true  appreciation  of  the  appellant's
    account on this issue.

34. The FtJ referred to the appellant as being a minor activist  on  behalf
    of the MLF, referring to her activities as being  to  deliver  leaflets
    and speak to people.  He said  that  she  was  not  able  to  give  any
    evidence of attacks upon  other  members  of  the  party,  particularly
    senior members.  Although the appellant had claimed that it was a large
    organisation, the FtJ said that  the  background  information  suggests
    that that is far from the case, and  that  it  is  a  minor  party  and
    appears to have little influence  or  profile.   It  was  against  that
    background that the FtJ assessed her claim to  have  been  attacked  by
    members of ZANU-PF and the CIO, on account of her political  activities
    for the MLF.  The FtJ concluded that the appellant had exaggerated  the
    profile and activities  of  the  MLF  to  lend  weight  to  her  claim.
    Describing the MLF as a minor political institution with little  or  no
    influence the FtJ said that it was "certainly not considered  to  be  a
    threat by ZANU-PF,  the  ruling  party"  and  that  the  objective  and
    background information provided no support to her claim that this party
    attracts adverse attention from any source.

35. Whether or not there is  any  merit  in  the  criticism  of  the  FtJ's
    description of the appellant's profile within  the  MLF,  his  decision
    does not on the face of it  engage  with  the  background  material  in
    relation to the MLF.  That background material is to be found at H1 and
    J1 of the respondent's bundle, aside from the description of the MLF at
    I1.  This latter document is in many respects illegible and in  content
    describes only the background and objectives of the MLF.  The  document
    at H1 appears to be  a  newspaper  article  from  New  Zimbabwe,  which
    describes the MLF as a secessionist group, being further described as a
    "shadowy militant outfit whose aim  is  to  secede  from  Zimbabwe  and
    create a separate state".  The president of the MLF  is  said  to  have
    said that it is a peaceful organisation but that other methods will  be
    used to liberate themselves.

36. The document at J1 appears to come from an online news source,  ZimEye.
    It is very  short  but  the  headline  is  "Mthwakazi,  Siwela  Treason
    Judgement  Postponed".   It  states  that  "The  case  in  which  three
    Matebeleland based citizens Charles Thomas, John Gazi and  Paul  Siwela
    are [illegible] ... dismissed, was once again  re-scheduled".   In  the
    appellant's interview at question 32, when asked to name senior members
    of the MLF, the appellant named Paul  Siwela,  John  Gazi  and  Charles
    Thomas, amongst others.  She said that all of them had been arrested.

37. Whilst it is the case that the background information  put  before  the
    FtJ was very limited, to state that there is no background  information
    indicating that the party attracts adverse attention  does  not  engage
    with the, albeit limited,  background  evidence.   The  FtJ's  decision
    would  appear  to  indicate  that  there  is  a  complete  absence   of
    information about the MLF. Furthermore, at [16] the FtJ said  that  the
    appellant was not able to give any  evidence  of  attacks  upon  other,
    particularly senior, members of the MLF, but this appears  to  give  no
    recognition to the background information that was provided.

38. Whilst there  are  other  aspects  to  the  FtJ's  adverse  credibility
    findings, the FtJ's apparent  failure  to  have  regard  to  background
    evidence in relation to the MLF is a matter that  infects  the  adverse
    credibility findings as a whole.

39. I am similarly satisfied that the FtJ's reasons  for  attaching  little
    weight to the psychiatric report  of  Dr  Kane,  are  not  sustainable.
    Although the copy of the report that was before him was not signed,  it
    does not appear that there was any dispute about the authorship of  the
    report or the expertise of its author.  Dr Kane describes herself as  a
    consultant in general adult psychiatry.

40. The suggestion that the report  does  not  deal  with  the  appellant's
    current treatment is not entirely accurate  since  at  page  5  of  the
    report is recorded the appellant's account of  what  treatment  she  is
    receiving, stating  that  she  consulted  her  GP  and  was  prescribed
    medication.  She went on to  say  that  she  was  referred  onto  NEXUS
    regarding the sexual assault and attended approximately  ten  sessions.
    She said that she had completed her work with NEXUS in June 2015.   The
    appellant attributed her lessening of symptoms to her work with  NEXUS,
    support from GP and involvement in her local church.  It is not true to
    say therefore, that the psychiatric report does  not  "deal  with"  her
    current  treatment.   In  addition,  on  page  6  it  states  that  the
    appellant's GP had prescribed her an anti-depressant.

41. In addition, although the FtJ at [28] appears to be  quoting  from  the
    report of Dr  Kane  stating  that  the  report  only  states  that  the
    appellant's condition "may" be related to PTSD, this  is  not  in  fact
    what the report says.  It states that the appellant "describes symptoms
    in keeping with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder" and then describing the
    symptoms.  It is not the case therefore that the report states that the
    appellant's condition "may" be related to PTSD, thereby suggesting that
    her condition 'may not be' related to PTSD. That her symptoms  are  "in
    keeping" with PTSD is not the same thing as stating that her  condition
    "may" be related to PTSD.  The FtJ's characterisation of the report and
    the misquoting of it, undermines its import.

42. Regardless of whether or not the report should  have  referred  to  the
    Istanbul Protocol, or that it does not firmly state that the  appellant
    is suffering from PTSD, I am not satisfied that the  FtJ  gave  legally
    sustainable reasons for concluding that it is a report that "must carry
    little weight".

43. The grounds before me raise other concerns about  the  FtJ's  decision,
    but  by  the  same  token  the  FtJ's  decision  raises  other  adverse
    credibility  issues.   However,  I  am  satisfied  that   the   adverse
    credibility  findings  are  not  legally  sustainable  overall.   I  am
    satisfied that the section 8 conclusions  are  flawed,  that  in  other
    respects the FtJ has failed to take into  account  the  detail  of  the
    appellant's claim, and that he has not  engaged  with  such  background
    material as there is in relation to the MLF.  I am also satisfied  that
    the reasons given for, in effect, rejecting  the  medical  report,  are
    similarly flawed.

44. Accordingly,  the  FtJ  having  erred  in  law  in  the  assessment  of
    credibility, his decision is to be set aside.  The nature and extent of
    the fact-finding exercise that needs to  be  undertaken  in  the  fresh
    hearing makes it appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal, having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's
    Practice Statement.

45. Accordingly, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard de  novo  before  a  differently  constituted  Tribunal  with  no
    findings of fact to be preserved except that the appellant is, or  was,
    a member of the MLF, as accepted by the respondent.

    Decision

46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge S. T. Fox.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            14/07/16



