
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03492/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 12 November 2015                       |      On 24 November 2015         |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                Mohamed Toure
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Not represented
For the respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mohamed Toure, date of birth 6.4.71,  is  a  citizen  of
    Guinea.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Holt promulgated 13.5.15, dismissing his appeal against the decision of
    the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  13.2.15,  to  refuse   his   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights claims and to refuse leave  to
    enter the UK.  The Judge heard the appeal on 6.5.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson refused to  admit  the  appeal,  it
    being out of time. However, when the application  was  renewed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer  granted  permission
    to appeal on 24.8.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 12.11.15 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. At the outset of the hearing  the  unrepresented  appellant  sought  an
    adjournment to have legal representation. However,  he  has  had  legal
    representation. In their letter of 10.11.15 his former representatives,
    International  Immigration  Advisory  Services,  indicated   that   the
    appellant had informed them "That he does not need  our  representation
    in this appeal and would like  to  appear  himself  in  the  court  for
    hearing." The notice of hearing in the Upper Tribunal was sent  to  the
    appellant by first class post  on  16.10.15.  Thus  he  has  had  ample
    opportunity to obtain legal representation.  He  could  provide  me  no
    satisfactory explanation as to why he had not done so.  I  refused  the
    application.

 6. The solicitor's letter referred to above advised the  Tribunal  that  a
    French interpreter would be required. No interpreter had  been  booked.
    The appellant claimed that his wife would be able to assist him in  the
    appeal but it quickly became apparent to myself  and  to  Ms  Johnstone
    that her understanding of English was little better than  that  of  the
    appellant. I thus put the case back to  the  afternoon  to  see  if  an
    interpreter could be found. One was able to attend and I was  satisfied
    that the appellant and the interpreter understood each other  and  thus
    the appeal proceeded.

Error of Law

 7. For the reasons set out below I find that there was no  material  error
    of law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as
    to require the decision of Judge Holt to be set aside.

 8. In summary the grounds of appeal assert that the judge should have made
    findings in relation to the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  wife,  who
    confirmed that the appellant could not return to  Guinea.  It  is  also
    claimed that the judge failed to deal with private life under paragraph
    276ADE(vi).

 9. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Archer found it  arguable  that
    the judge did not consider private life under paragraph 276ADE or under
    article 8 ECHR adequately or at all. "Once the  judge  found  that  the
    marriage was a sham then the article 8  claim  was  wholly  reliant  on
    private life. The appellant has apparently been in the  UK  since  2003
    and private life merited some consideration."

10. Whilst the  judge  did  not  specifically  address  private  life,  the
    evidence before the judge could not have justified allowing the  appeal
    on the grounds of private life either under paragraph 276ADE or in  the
    alternative article 8 ECHR. As the Rule 24 response of the Secretary of
    State, dated 11.9.15, explains, there was nothing in  the  decision  to
    suggest that the appellant adduced any sufficient evidence to discharge
    the burden of showing an interference with his  private  life.  "It  is
    averred that whilst the determination is silent in  respect  of  276ADE
    and private life, this silence  is  immaterial  in  the  light  of  the
    appellant's failure to put forward a case on that basis."

11. The appellant has an appalling immigration history. He entered  the  UK
    illegally in November 2002 using a forged passport. When refused  leave
    to enter he claimed asylum. His claim was refused in  January  2004  on
    grounds of non-compliance. However,  he  did  not  leave  but  remained
    illegally and went on to establish a relationship with his  wife.  More
    than 10 years after being refused asylum and leave  to  enter  he  made
    further submissions, which were accepted as a fresh claim, but  refused
    by the decision of 13.2.14.

12. There is no explanation at  to  how  addressing  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's wife would or could have made any difference to the outcome
    of the appeal. It is true that she claimed  in  her  witness  statement
    that due to conditions in Guinea he could not go there, but there is no
    explanation of any particular  reasons  why  he  could  not  return  to
    Guinea.

13. It appears that article  8  was  advanced  at  the  appeal  hearing  in
    relation to family life only. The grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not specifically raise private life, referring only to the
    length of time he had been in the UK. I  have  looked  at  the  judge's
    handwritten notes of the hearing and in particular at the record of the
    appellant's representative, Mr Afzal, to Judge Holt, but it is recorded
    only that Mr Afzal relied on the fact that the appellant  had  been  in
    the UK since 2003. Nothing else was submitted about private life.

14. The appellant has been in the UK for some  12  years.  His  immigration
    status has been unlawful and entirely precarious.  He  has  never  been
    allowed entry to the UK. He has never has legal status in  the  UK.  He
    does not meet any of the Rules for  leave  to  remain.  In  particular,
    there is nothing in the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to show
    that there are very significant obstacles to his integration in Guinea,
    as required under paragraph 276ADE.

15. There are no compelling reasons to consider private  life  outside  the
    Rules on the basis of article 8 ECHR and thus no reason for the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to do so. Even if consideration were to be given to
    article 8 ECHR private life, section 117B of  the  2002  provides  that
    immigration control is in the public interest, and that it  is  in  the
    public interest that persons seeking to remain  should  be  financially
    independent and able to speak English. The  appellant  does  not  speak
    English, nor is he financially independent.  117B  also  provides  that
    little weight can be given to  the  private  life  of  a  person  whose
    immigration status is precarious and that little weight can be given to
    a  relationship  with  a  partner  developed  whilst  he  was   present
    illegally. There are therefore very significant public interest factors
    weighing against the appellant.

16. I tried to elicit from the  appellant  what  factors  might  have  been
    raised at the First-tier Tribunal as to the  strength  of  his  private
    life in the UK, or which might be relied on  if  the  decision  in  the
    appeal were to be remade. Other than the fact  of  the  length  of  his
    unlawful presence in the UK and that he had friends in  the  UK,  there
    were no factors in support. There are letters from friends  in  general
    support  of  the  appellant,  but  he  told  me  he  has  no  community
    involvement. He claims not to work, and has engaged in  no  charity  or
    voluntary activities. I struggled to try and find some basis  on  which
    he could mount a claim to have a private life in  the  UK  outside  the
    bare facts of his relationship with his wife. He told me he did nothing
    at all other than stay at home. He did say that his friends had  helped
    him enormously. Despite my attempts to explain to him that this was not
    a rehearing of the appeal and that the judge had found his marriage  to
    be a sham, it was clear that almost all of the focus of his submissions
    was in relation to his marriage, asserting repeatedly that his marriage
    was genuine.

17. In all the circumstances, it is very clear that the matters  complained
    of in the grounds of appeal could have made no difference whatsoever to
    the outcome of the appeal, even if specifically addressed by the First-
    tier Tribunal. There is thus no basis to set aside the decision on  the
    grounds raised.

Conclusions:

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable in this case and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup




