
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03484/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 18 August 2015                    |on 21 August  2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                      YNGRIS COROMOTO SUAREZ RODRIGUEZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Singh, of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Venezuela, born on 19 August  1970.   The
    respondent refused her asylum claim for reasons explained in detail  in
    Annex A to her letter dated 16 February 2015.  Although it was accepted
    that the appellant worked for the state run company PDBSA (Petroleum of
    Venezuela SA) it was not accepted that she was perceived as  a  traitor
    who planned to overthrow the government, that she had  to  escape  from
    the country, or that she had been in a position to betray  or  to  sell
    important confidential information arising from her employment.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge J C Grant-Hutchison dismissed the appellant's
    appeal for reasons explained in her determination dated 29 April  2015.
    The judge also declined to accept that the appellant had  been  accused
    of selling information or of working with the government's enemies  for
    its overthrow.

 3. The judge sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on grounds
    running to 20 paragraphs over 15 pages, which insist that the appellant
    was a credible witness in all respects, and  maintain  that  the  judge
    incorrectly summarised  the  evidence,  and  generally  went  wrong  on
    credibility.

 4. On 28 May 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers granted permission to
    appeal, commenting as follows:

         "It is unfortunate the author of the grounds has not applied his or
         her mind to the question of potential materiality.   For  instance,
         even on their face it is difficult to see that  the  complaints  in
         paragraphs 4 and 5 of the grounds could have any relevance  to  the
         outcome ... it seems to me it is only on page 3 of the grounds that
         one begins to find points that  might  have  some  bearing  on  the
         outcome ...

         ... What is probably crucial ... is whether or  not  the  appellant
         makes good her claim that the police have visited  her  home  since
         she last came to the UK and told her mother that the appellant  had
         escaped taking information with her which she would sell  and  that
         she was a traitor (see the judge's paragraphs 23 and 32.)  It seems
         to me that unless that claim is made out ... there  is  nothing  in
         the rest of the appellant's account that establishes a real risk of
         serious harm on return to Venezuela.

         If the above is right ... the judge's reasons for not accepting the
         above claim (her paragraphs 24-34)  become  determinative  ...  the
         grounds only just establish it as arguable that the judge erred  in
         her paragraphs 24 on.  Specifically,  the  appellant  may  have  an
         argument if paragraph 14 of the grounds is  correct  when  it  says
         that the appellant had in fact said at her interview that  she  was
         considered to be a traitor and involved in a plot to overthrow  the
         government ...

         The appellant should not take  this  grant  of  permission  as  any
         indication that the appeal will ultimately be successful.   It  may
         be as per paragraph 16 of grounds that the appellant  "knows  which
         components and engine parts ... are doing well and which  companies
         they are from" but on the face of it the  appellant's  case  has  a
         fair way to go from that assertion to establishing  entitlement  to
         international protection."

 5. Mr Singh relied on all the grounds.  He submitted that in  essence  the
    judge's summary of the evidence was incorrect, which led the reader  to
    believe  the  appellant  was  not  a  credible  witness.    The   judge
    misunderstood several points.  Although they might  not  separately  be
    significant, in combination they were such that  the  appellant  should
    have been believed and her appeal should have been allowed.

 6. Arriving at paragraph 14 of the grounds, which  led  to  the  grant  of
    permission, Mr Singh confirmed that this is directed against  paragraph
    24(d) of the determination, which says:

         "There is no mention  in  the  said  record  of  interview  of  the
         appellant selling information as part of a plot  to  overthrow  the
         government which I find has  been  said  in  her  interview  record
         simply to embellish her claim.  The appellant  is  asked  ...  what
         happened that made her change her mind  and  she  replied  "when  I
         called my mum to inform her of my safe arrival she told me  to  see
         the news as the situation had become very dangerous  after  I  left
         for the people who stood out against the government."  She is  then
         asked why the government would think  she  is  a  traitor  and  she
         replied ... [also quoted] ... In my view the appellant  is  looking
         at the general situation.  There is nothing in the newspapers which
         directly targets her [or] to show she is wanted as  a  traitor  for
         selling information."

 7. Mr Singh directed attention to Q/A 126  of  the  interview,  where  the
    appellant said that she heard from her mother that a security  official
    told their mother that on return the appellant would  be  arrested  for
    being a traitor, and to Q/A 130, where she said it had been alleged  to
    her mother that the appellant had taken a lot of  information  and  was
    selling  it,  and  that  she  would  be  captured  on  return   through
    immigration.

 8. Having gone through the various grounds, Mr Singh submitted that on all
    the evidence, properly considered, the  appellant's  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

 9. I indicated to the parties  that  having  considered  the  grounds  and
    submissions I was of the view that the appellant's  challenge  did  not
    amount to more than insistence upon the  case  put  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that she  was  bound  to  be  held  an  entirely  credible
    witness, and that no material error in the judge's  resolution  of  the
    case was identified.  The only substantial point  was  that  the  judge
    appeared to have overlooked the passage  of  the  interview  where  the
    appellant did say that  it  had  been  alleged  that  she  was  selling
    information.  Correction of that error would leave the  appellant  well
    short of a realistic case  of  a  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Venezuela, and the determination as a whole was not shown to be legally
    flawed.

10. Mr Mullen then made the following observation.  The first  sentence  of
    paragraph 24(d) makes little sense as it stands.  In the first part  of
    it the judge says that the appellant did  not  mention  the  matter  at
    interview, but in the second part of the sentence she says that it  was
    there, and was an embellishment.  He suggested that the sentence  would
    make perfect sense if the word "no" was deleted - "there is mention  in
    the said record of interview ..."

11. Mr Singh in response (very fairly  and  correctly)  accepted  that  the
    sentence did make more sense without the word "no", and that this might
    be a typographical  error.   Nevertheless,  he  stood  by  his  overall
    challenge.

12. I indicated that the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal would  be
    dismissed.

13. The point on which permission was  granted  at  highest  would  not  be
    enough to overturn the determination, or to reach another result.  I am
    satisfied in any event that, as Mr Mullen observed, this arises from  a
    typographical error.  The sentence makes sense only if the word "no" is
    deleted.  It then becomes self-consistent, and fits with  the  rest  of
    the paragraph.  The judge did take account of the relevant  passage  in
    the interview.

14.  The  appellant's  grounds  and  submissions  do  not  show  that   the
    determination should be set aside for any error in point of law, so  it
    shall stand.


           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           19 August 2015

