
[pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03460/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2015                 |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    A A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia. He  has  appealed  with  the
         permission of the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  Designated
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shaerf, promulgated on 13 November
         2013, dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent to
         remove him to Somalia, having refused his asylum application.

      2. I continue the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. The appeal has a convoluted history. The history up  to  the  point
         that Judge Shaerf heard the appeal in autumn 2013  is  set  out  in
         paragraphs 3 and 4 of his determination.  The  appellant  was  then
         refused permission to appeal by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
         renewed application to the Upper Tribunal was not admitted  because
         it was out of time. The appellant applied for  judicial  review  of
         the Upper Tribunal's decision and permission was granted by Singh J
         on 24 April 2014. The decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  then
         quashed on 19  May  2014.  On  23  April  2015  Mr  Ockelton,  Vice
         President of the Upper Tribunal, granted permission  to  appeal  in
         the light of the decision of the High Court.

      4. The core of the appellant's asylum claim is that he came to the  UK
         from Somalia in May 2007, aged 17. He said he was a member  of  the
         Reer Hamar minority clan. He had lived in the Hamar Weyne  district
         of Mogadishu. He claimed his mother was threatened  and  robbed  in
         1997 and his brother and sister were killed. The appellant fled and
         became separated from his family. He was captured by the Habr Gedir
         together with his maternal uncle. He escaped in June 2006 when  his
         uncle was killed. He stayed with his mother's relatives  in  Medina
         until he left Somalia. His maternal aunt in  the  US  paid  for  an
         agent to bring him to the UK from Ethiopia.

      5. Judge Shaerf heard the appeal over two  days.  In  a  detailed  and
         thorough determination he set out the evidence and submissions made
         to him. At paragraphs 43 to 49  he  considered  the  issue  of  the
         evidence which had been relied on by the respondent as showing that
         the  appellant  had  had  his  fingerprints  taken  in  the  US  in
         connection with the asylum claims he made there  in  2005/2006.  On
         balance, the judge found the fingerprints produced  did  relate  to
         the appellant. He then went  on  to  make  an  adverse  credibility
         finding against the appellant. He  found  the  appellant  was  from
         Mogadishu or Central or Southern Somalia but he was not a  minority
         clan member. His account  of  being  captured  could  not  be  true
         because he had been in the US at the time. He did  not  accept  the
         appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection.

      6. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material  error  of
         law.

      7. Mr Lee highlighted paragraph 10 of the judge's determination  which
         makes clear that the appeal proceeded on the  basis  that  the  key
         issue was the reliability of the fingerprint evidence.  In  effect,
         the appellant's credibility turned on that  finding.  He  submitted
         the judge's approach in respect of that evidence was unfair and for
         that reason the decision was unsafe. It is convenient therefore  to
         set out the evidence, set out the cases relied on  by  Mr  Lee  and
         then examine the judge's approach in the light of  the  submissions
         made.

      8. The reasons for refusal letter, dated 15 January 2011, stated that,
         in view of the appellant's confirmation that he had  applied  under
         the US "asylum lottery" in 2001, a  request  was  made  to  the  US
         authorities as part of a Biometrics Data Sharing programme for  any
         information they had  about  the  appellant.   The  US  authorities
         responded positively. Fingerprints taken from the appellant when he
         claimed asylum in the UK were  compared  with  fingerprint  records
         kept by the US. The UK  fingerprints  matched  those  of  a  Somali
         national who had given a different name and date of birth.  The  US
         authorities  confirmed  the  fingerprints  were  taken   when   the
         individual applied for asylum as the dependant of his mother, which
         was refused on 9 October 2005. He then applied  in  his  right  own
         right, which was refused in  May  2006.  The  reasons  for  refusal
         letter pointed out the appellant had been in the US at  a  time  he
         claimed to have been held  by  the  Habr  Gedir  or  to  have  been
         escaping to stay  with  relatives  in  Medina.  The  evidence  also
         contradicted the appellant's claim to have lost  contact  with  his
         mother in 1997. The appellant denied ever having been in the US.

      9. The following evidence was before Judge Shaerf.

     10. There was a record of the appellant's fingerprints being taken on 7
         May 2007 at Heathrow. The  statement  of  John  Roberts,  a  higher
         scientific officer,  dated  28  February  2013,  explained  he  had
         compared  those  prints  with  a  set  with  the  reference  number
         1085434419  and  found  them  to  have   such   number   of   ridge
         characteristics in agreement to leave him in  no  doubt  that  they
         were made by  the  same  person.  The  statement  of  Kevin  Patel,
         protocol manager for the exchange of data as part of the High Value
         Data Sharing Protocol between Australia, Canada, New  Zealand,  the
         UK and the US, dated 9  May  2013,  stated  that  a  Memorandum  of
         Understanding had been signed between the Home Secretary and the US
         Department of Homeland Security. This enabled the exchange of  date
         between participating countries. Under  its  terms  the  requesting
         country submits anonymised sets of fingerprints  to  the  receiving
         country. Potential matches are examined and verified by fingerprint
         systems and experts. Where matches  are  confirmed  both  countries
         then exchange biographical data. Officials in the US had been  sent
         the appellant's fingerprints, captured on 7 May 2007, on 17 January
         2011.  A  match  was  found  under  reference  1085434419  and  the
         biographical data was provided, including the dates of  his  asylum
         claims in  the  US.  The  US  authorities  also  sent  photographs.
         Finally, the appellant's solicitors obtained an  expert  report  by
         Ronald Cook, dated 1 September 2013. He took a set of  fingerprints
         from the appellant and then compared them to the sets  provided  by
         the Home Office and the US authorities. He found  the  prints  were
         made by the same person in all three cases. However, in relation to
         the set emailed from the US, he noted that no details were provided
         on the fingerprint form to indicate its source or origin.

     11. In YI (Previous claims  -  Fingerprint  match  -  EURODAC)  Eritrea
         [2007] UKAIT 00054, the issue was the treatment of EURODAC evidence
         apparently showing the appellant had been claiming asylum in  Italy
         at a time he said he was undertaking military service  in  Eritrea.
         The Immigration  Judge  had  not  been  satisfied  that  there  was
         sufficient evidence  to  take  the  point  against  the  appellant.
         Upholding the judge's approach, the Presidential  panel  stated  as
         follows:

             "15. Absent such an assessment of the system  in  general,  an
             Immigration Judge, acting fairly, would need to  be  satisfied
             on the specific evidence in each case whether  that  appellant
             had indeed made a previous claim. The evidence could  comprise
             not just fingerprints but other data from the alleged previous
             application, such as for example photographs,  age,  name  and
             claim  details.  General  evidence  might  also  be   properly
             admitted about the reliability of the EURODAC system  and  how
             it operates. We do not seek to be prescriptive about this.  An
             Immigration Judge will also, as a matter of fairness, have  to
             be satisfied that the appellant has had the facility to access
             information about the assertion against him that would  enable
             him, if he so wishes, to make a meaningful  forensic  rebuttal
             beyond mere denial ...

             16.  ... Indeed in all these  circumstances  it  was,  in  our
             judgment, properly open to the Immigration Judge  to  conclude
             that the Respondent was still  essentially  relying  upon  the
             bare EURODAC assertion that there was a match without offering
             any corroborative evidence of it from the Italian  claim.  The
             Immigration Judge was not seeking to prescribe what was needed
             by way of evidence but was rather  drawing  attention  to  the
             sort of evidence that might have been available  but  had  not
             been produced to him.  Indeed  a  photograph  of  the  Italian
             claimant if he resembled the Appellant, on top of the  EURODAC
             fingerprint match, may well have sufficed. ..."

     12. In RZ (EURODAC - fingerprint match  -  admissible)  Eritrea  [2008]
         UKAIT 00007, the EURODAC system was analysed and the conclusion was
         reached that the safeguards  were  such  that  fingerprint  matches
         should be regarded as accurate and reliable absent cogent  evidence
         to the contrary. The reasons the  system  was  found  reliable  are
         explained in paragraph 44, including the following:

             "If  fingerprints  are  submitted  by   the   United   Kingdom
             authorities, the fingerprints are then  visually  examined  at
             IFB initially by a  technician  and  then  by  a  more  senior
             officer. We are satisfied that there are sufficient safeguards
             to identify when and why fingerprints have been taken  and  to
             ensure that the data recorded in and retrieved from Eurodac is
             only used for the purposes set  out  in  the  regulations.  We
             accept that each country  has  an  authority  responsible  for
             monitoring  how  the  information  is  collected,  stored  and
             transmitted and there is also a joint supervisory authority to
             oversee the system on a pan-European level..."

     13. The Tribunal noted that  neither  of  the  experts  who  had  given
         evidence had known of a case of matching prints not coming from the
         same individual.

     14. The case also confirmed the burden of proving a  fingerprint  match
         rested on the respondent and the standard of proof was a balance of
         probabilities. It reiterated the point that fingerprint evidence is
         capable of rebuttal and fairness and natural justice  require  than
         an appellant should have the opportunity of obtaining  and  calling
         his own evidence to rebut evidence relied  on  by  the  respondent.
         There was no requirement for corroboration of fingerprint evidence.



     15. Mr Lee argued that the evidence in this case fell into the category
         of bare assertion by the US authorities and  that  there  were  not
         sufficient safeguards regarding the fingerprint evidence to entitle
         the judge to take the approach to it which he took. The  effect  of
         the MoU was that the respondent had relied upon  "secret  evidence"
         which the appellant had not been given a fair opportunity to  rebut
         with evidence to  show  the  prints  did  not  belong  to  him  and
         therefore that he was not in the  US,  as  he  maintained.  Mr  Lee
         contrasted the state of the fingerprint evidence in this case  with
         the safeguards found in the EURODAC system in  RZ.  The  judge  had
         accepted  the  restrictions  imposed  by  the   MoU   led   to   an
         unsatisfactory situation from an appellant's  perspective  and  the
         letter from Mr Patel failed to allay those concerns.  Mr  Lee  also
         argued the judge's reliance in  paragraph  48  on  the  appellant's
         admission at his  screening  interview  that  he  had  applied  for
         recognition as a refugee by the US was erroneous. The appellant was
         a minor when he was screened and he had not admitted  to  being  in
         the US.

     16. Mr Melvin relied on the respondent's rule 24 notice. He argued  the
         judge was entitled to find the appellant lacked credibility.

     17. Mr Lee  suggested  the  issue  had  such  importance  that  further
         guidance from the Tribunal or courts may be appropriate.

     18. I agree with Mr Lee that the issue is an important one but I do not
         find on the particular facts of this case that  the  judge  made  a
         material error of law. I find the circumstances of the case do  not
         fall into the category  identified  in  YI  and  RZ  in  which  the
         respondent relies on a bare  assertion  as  to  the  provenance  of
         fingerprint  evidence  which  the  appellant  has   not   had   the
         possibility of rebutting. My reasons are as follows.

     19. Firstly, the appellant admitted at his screening interview that had
         been in Egypt in 2001. He was asked at question 7.39 whether he had
         had his fingerprints taken by anyone in the UK before or by  anyone
         anywhere else.  The recorded reply is as follows:  "Egypt,  when  I
         applied for an Refugee to America, 2001". The judge noted that this
         had not been explained by  the  appellant.  Whilst  it  is  not  an
         admission that the  appellant  had  been  in  the  US,  it  was  an
         admission which nevertheless undermined his account of having  been
         held captive by the Habr Gedir in Somalia. I agree with  Mr  Melvin
         that it is not sufficient to rely on the  fact  the  appellant  was
         only 17 years of age at the time he made this admission.  This  was
         plainly something the judge considered and he was entitled to  take
         account of for the reasons he gave in paragraph 48.

     20.  Secondly,  the  US   authorities   sent   photographs   with   the
         fingerprints. These are copied in the respondent's bundle  and  the
         judge noted at paragraph 44 that the appellant had  not  challenged
         the fact these came from the US authorities. His only challenge was
         that  there  were  too  few  safeguards   regarding   the   subject
         individual. The  fact  photographs  were  submitted  alongside  the
         fingerprints and the images resemble the appellant takes  the  case
         towards the category identified in paragraph 16 of YI.

     21. Thirdly, this  is  not  a  case  in  which  the  appellant  had  no
         opportunity to submit evidence in rebuttal. The bare assertion made
         in YI was that matching  fingerprints  were  held  by  the  Italian
         authorities  without  those  prints  being  made   available.   The
         appellant in this case was able to instruct an expert to visit  the
         Home Office to make comparisons. Both the UK and  the  US  sets  of
         fingerprints were made available. As the judge noted in  paragraphs
         45 and 46, the  appellant's  case  was  that  there  was  room  for
         significant doubt about the provenance of the fingerprints  because
         there may have been an administrative error resulting in  the  sets
         of prints becoming mixed up. However, the  appellant's  own  expert
         confirmed that the fingerprints supplied by the US authorities were
         indeed the appellant's. The comparison with the  challenge  to  the
         EURODAC evidence in YI therefore fell away, as the judge noted. The
         inevitable consequence of Mr Cook's evidence was that the appellant
         had had his fingerprints taken by the US authorities. Even if  this
         took place in Egypt, as opposed to the US, it still undermined  his
         case in a significant way.

     22. The judge concluded in paragraph 49 that it was more probable  than
         not that the appellant had been in the US in 2005 and 2006 where he
         had made asylum claims. He was entitled to reach this conclusion on
         the available evidence, even after noting the absence  of  specific
         identification supplied with the US  prints.  He  acknowledged  the
         limitations of some of the evidence in paragraph 43  but  that  did
         not mean he could not reach the conclusion  he  reached  by  giving
         appropriate weight  to  admissible  evidence.  The  effect  of  the
         admission at the screening interview, photographs and the report of
         Mr Cook was  to  overcome  these  concerns.  That  was  a  rational
         decision which it was open to  the  judge  to  reach.  In  focusing
         attention on what was not provided by the US authorities because of
         the restrictions imposed by the MoU,  the  appellant's  submissions
         have lost sight of what was provided.

     23.  I  have  considered  Mr  Lee's  alternative  submissions  on   the
         appellant's claim to humanitarian protection. I raised with him  at
         the beginning of the hearing whether any error on the judge's  part
         with respect to the fingerprint evidence would be material  to  the
         outcome given the change of circumstances in Somalia. I had in mind
         in particular the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu  and  the
         economic improvement.

     24. The judge dealt with this issue on the basis of his  findings  that
         the appellant's account of his clan membership and the dispersal of
         his family had not been truthful. Whilst the situation  in  Somalia
         has changed, as reflected in the more up to date  country  guidance
         of MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442
         (IAC), such that it is no longer the case that there is  a  general
         risk of Article 15(c) harm for the majority of those  returning  to
         Mogadishu after a significant period of time abroad (see the former
         position explained in AMM &  Ors  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;
         returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC)), there are  still
         categories of claimants who might succeed in showing entitlement to
         humanitarian protection. They would include people with no clan  or
         family support, who will not be able to  receive  remittances  from
         abroad and who have no real  prospects  of  securing  access  to  a
         livelihood on return.  Membership  of  a  minority  clan  would  be
         relevant to this. Mr Lee argued there was still scope to succeed on
         humanitarian protection grounds.

     25. However, the consequence  of  my  decision  upholding  the  judge's
         findings on the appellant's credibility is that there is  no  scope
         for the appellant to succeed on humanitarian protection grounds. He
         is a young, healthy man who would be removed to  Mogadishu.  He  is
         not a minority clan member and therefore  he  can  look  to  family
         members and clan members for assistance in securing  a  livelihood.
         He has relatives in the US, possibly including his mother, as  well
         as the UK. He was assisted before he came to the UK by relatives in
         Medina. Without the special features  which  could  take  the  case
         outside the general position for returnees to Mogadishu, the  claim
         cannot succeed. The judge made no error.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.




                               Signed   Date 29 September 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
