
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03194/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Date Sent                    |
|on 2nd August 2013                            |on 6th August 2013           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         ANISA ALI MOHAMMED AL-QADHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mr Cole instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Kelly promulgated following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd  May
        2013 in which he allowed the appellant's appeal on asylum and human
        rights grounds against the direction for her remove to Yemen  which
        accompanied the refusal of her claim for asylum or any  other  form
        of international protection.


     2. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  on  the  basis
        Judge Kelly failed to identify any Refugee Convention  reason.  The
        appellant was found to be at risk from a family in Yemen from which
        the  State  offered  no  protection.  No  defining   factors   were
        identified in order to show that the appellant  formed  part  of  a
        Particular Social Group (PSG) which could not be inferred from  the
        determination.



Discussion



     3. The application was opposed by Mr Cole who submitted  that  it  was
        possible to infer from a reading  of  the  determination  that  the
        Judge had found that the appellant  was  a  member  of  a  PSG.  He
        specifically referred to paragraph 29 of the determination in which
        Judge Kelly states:


              29. However , I am satisfied that the appellant is at risk  of
   being killed in                  revenge  for  the  perceived  slight  to
   Alawi family honour as a result of                 her supposed  'kidnap'
   of Ashraqat.  I am also satisfied  that  the                       Yemeni
   state   would   not   provide   adequate    protection    against    this
   risk, in view of what  is  said  in  the  Amnesty  International  report,
     under the heading of ' harmful traditional practices '-


                       The penal code allows leniency for persons guilty  of
   committing an                    honour crime or violent assaults against
   - or killing a woman,  for                      perceived  "immodest"  or
   "defiant" behaviour. The law does not                       address other
   types    of     honour     crimes,     including     beatings,     forced
   isolation, imprisonment, and forced early  marriage.  [Page  124  of  the
              appellant's bundle of documents]


     4. The finding that the appellant will  be  at  risk  from  a  revenge
        attack is not challenged by the  Secretary  of  State  and  so  the
        appellant is entitled to some form of status. This was acknowledged
        by Mrs Pettersen at the hearing.


     5. Judge Kelly allowed the appeal on asylum grounds but failed to make
        any, or adequate, findings demonstrating how the appellant was able
        to satisfy the test for assessing whether she is a refugee or  not.
        There is no specific mention in the determination of  a  Convention
        reason. I find that in this respect the Secretary of State has made
        out her case. No such reason can be inferred from a reading of  the
        document either. I shall now move on to consider whether such legal
        error is material to the decision to allow the  appeal  on  Refugee
        Convention grounds.


     6. In his submissions Mr Cole referred to the fact that the  appellant
        was a woman and that women could form a PSG. He also submitted that
        it was accepted that the appellant was at risk and that  the  State
        would provide no protection and on  this  basis  she  was  able  to
        succeed under the Refugee Convention. Mrs Pettersen  accepted  that
        in certain circumstances this may  be  the  case  but  that  proper
        findings needed to be made on whether the  appellant  was  able  to
        succeed on this basis or not.


     7. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that:


              "An asylum applicant will be  granted  asylum  in  the  United
      Kingdom if       the  Secretary of State is satisfied that:


              (i)  he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a  port  of
      entry in the              United Kingdom;


              (ii)     he is a refugee, as defined in regulation  2  of  The
      Refugee  or  Person  in           Need  of  International   Protection
      (Qualification) Regulations 2006;


              (iii)    there are no reasonable grounds for regarding him  as
      a danger to the           security of the United Kingdom;


              (iv)     he  does  not,  having  been  convicted  by  a  final
      judgment of a                 particularly serious crime, he does  not
      constitute  danger  to  the                community  of  the   United
      Kingdom; and


              (v)  refusing  his  application  would  result  in  him  being
      required to go             (whether  immediately  or  after  the  time
      limited by any existing leave               to  enter  or  remain)  in
      breach of the Geneva Convention, to a country            in which  his
      life  or  freedom  would  threatened   on   account   of   his   race,
      religion, nationality, political opinion or membership of a particular
                   social group".

     8. The only applicable ground in paragraph 334 (v) would be membership
        of a PSG.


     9.  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
        (Qualification) Regulations 2006. Regulation 6 states:

              (1)  In deciding whether a person is a refugee....


                   (d)      a group shall be considered to form a particular
      social group                  where, for example:


                        (i)   members  of  that  group   share   an   innate
      characteristic, or a                   common background  that  cannot
      be changed, or share a                      characteristic  or  belief
      that is so fundamental to  identity  or                     conscience
      that a person should not be forced to renounce                     it,
      and


                       (ii)     that group has a distinct  identity  in  the
      relevant country,                       because  it  is  perceived  as
      being  different  by   the                                 surrounding
      society;


                   (e)      a particular social group might include a  group
      based on a                common characteristic of sexual  orientation
      but sexual                     orientation  cannot  be  understood  to
      include acts considered to                  be criminal in  accordance
      with national law of the United                      Kingdom;


    10. In relation to the position of women, Mr Cole referred to the  case
        of K and Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46, [A's bundle pp 131  -  161],
        and specifically to paragraphs 102 and 103 of the judgment in which
        Baroness Hale found:


              102.      Of  course,  much  of  the  harm  feared  by  women,
   including FGM, is                perpetrated, not directly by the  State,
   but by non-State agents. In               paragraph  21,  the  Guidelines
   make another important point about                 the causal link ("  by
   reason of") and the ground for the persecution:


                  "in cases where there is a risk of being persecuted at the
   hands of a non-                  State  actor  (eg  husband,  partner  or
   other non-State actor) for reasons which               are related to one
   of  the   Convention   grounds,   the   causal   link   is   established,
   whether or not the absence of State  protection  is  Convention  related.
              Alternatively, where the risk of being persecuted at the hands
   of a non-State                    actor  is  unrelated  to  a  Convention
   ground, but the inability or                            unwillingness  of
   the  State  to  offer  protection  is  for  reasons   of   a   Convention
   ground, the causal link is also established"


              103.     My Lords, each of  the  guidelines  quoted  above  is
   consistent with,                 and in some cases directly derived from,
   the decision of this House                in Islam v Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department; R v Immigration                Appeal  Tribunal,
   Ex p Shah [1999] UKHL 20; [1999] 2 AC 629.  I believe                that
   they  represent  the  correct  approach.  How   then   should   they   be
   applied in the two cases before us?


    11. In Shah and Islam and Others v SSHD HL (1999)  INLR  144  Steyn  LJ
        accepted that women in Pakistan were a social group  based  on  the
        immutable characteristic of gender and the fact that, as  a  group,
        they were unprotected (neither of which characteristics involved an
        assertion  of  persecution  either).  Hoffman  LJ  said   "Domestic
        violence towards women is prevalent in Pakistan.  That is also true
        of many other countries and by itself does not give rise to a claim
        for refugee status.  The distinctive feature of this case  is  that
        in Pakistan women are  unprotected  by  the  state;  discrimination
        against  women  is  partly  tolerated  by  the  state  and   partly
        sanctioned by it".   He went on to point out  that  a  question  of
        causation is also involved.  "Given the central  feature  of  state
        tolerated and state sanctioned gender discrimination, the  argument
        that appellants fear persecution not because  of  membership  of  a
        social group but because of the  hostility  of  their  husbands  is
        unrealistic.  Causation here is made up of  two  elements.   First,
        the threat of violence from the husband, which is a personal affair
        directed towards the  individual:  second,  the  inability  or  the
        unwillingness of the state to do  anything  about  this.  There  is
        nothing personal about this.  The evidence was that the state would
        not  assist  them  because  they  were  women.  It  denied  them  a
        protection against violence which  it  would  have  given  to  men.
        These two elements have to be combined  to  constitute  persecution
        within the meaning of the Convention".  Hope LJ said that the  word
        "social" means that we are being asked to identify a group that  is
        recognised as a particular group by society and as  social  customs
        and attitudes differ from one country to the next, the  context  of
        enquiry has to be  the  applicant's  country  of  nationality.   He
        pointed out that discrimination may set the  group  apart  and  the
        concept of discrimination does not offend against the rule that the
        group must exist independently of persecution because people can be
        discriminated against without being persecuted.


    12. In RG (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 339  the  Court  of  Appeal
        said that for women in a country to constitute a particular  social
        group their circumstances need not match exactly those of women  in
        Pakistan in order to fall within the  Shah  and  Islam  principles.
        Widespread  societal  discrimination   combined   with   inadequate
        protection by the police and the courts  may  suffice  without  any
        disability for women being enshrined in law. In each case the issue
        was fact specific.


    13. The US State Department report, 2012, on Human Rights Practices  in
        Yemen, [A's bundle, pp 105 -  130],  provides  country  information
        relating to the position of women in section 6 under the heading of
        'Discrimination, Societal Abuses, and Trafficking in  Persons',  to
        be found on page 123 of the bundle. The report states that the  law
        provides equal rights and  equal  opportunities  for  all  citizens
        although  the  law  was  not   enforced   consistently   and   that
        discrimination based on race, gender  and  disability  remaining  a
        serious  problem.  It  is   said   that   despite   strong   female
        participation in the revolution, societal  discrimination  severely
        limited women's ability to exercise equal rights.


    14. On page 124 of the bundle under the heading 'Discrimination' it  is
        noted women do not enjoy the same legal status as men under  family
        law, property law, inheritance law and in the judicial system. They
        experience discrimination in areas such as employment, credit,  and
        pay, owning or managing businesses,  education,  and  housing.  The
        discrimination was accentuated by the 65% female literacy rate.


    15. It is also noted [A's bundle p 125] that women  also  face  unequal
        treatment in the courts, where the testimony of one man equates  to
        that of two women.


    16. I find women in Yemen are clearly a  group  of  persons  sharing  a
        common characteristic which, without a fundamental change in social
        mores, is unchangeable - namely a position of social inferiority as
        compared with men. As Lord Bingham stated in K  and  Fornah:  "They
        are perceived by society as inferior. That is true  of  all  women,
        those who accept or willingly embrace their inferior  position  and
        those who do not."  I accordingly find on the  facts  of  the  case
        that the appellant does come within a PSG  and  that  this  is  the
        Convention reason relevant to the facts of this  appeal.  I  accept
        Mrs Pettersen's submission that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
        appellant has been found to be at risk as a result of the fact  she
        is a woman per se, but she was found to face a real risk on  return
        sufficient to warrant a  grant  of  international  protection  from
        which the State will provide no protection for her because she is a
        woman. In this respect the quote referred to in paragraph 102 of  K
        & Fornah above: "where the risk of being persecuted at the hands of
        a non-State actor is unrelated to  a  Convention  ground,  but  the
        inability or unwillingness of the State to offer protection is  for
        reasons  of  a  Convention  ground,  the  causal   link   is   also
        established" is relevant. The guidelines being referred to are  the
        UNHCR  Guidelines  on  membership  of  a  particular  social  group
        published on the 7th May 2002.


    17. I find that the appellant has established the causal  link  on  the
        basis of the unwillingness of the State to offer  protection  based
        on her gender. I find that the appellant  is  entitled  to  refugee
        status as a result and  therefore  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
        appeal should be allowed on asylum grounds has not been shown to be
        infected by any material error.


Decision

    18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no material error  of  law.  The
        determination shall stand.




   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as no application was made for the  same  and
   the facts do        not establish the need for such an order.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 2nd August 2013.












