
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03516/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th August 2016                 |On 10th August 2016                 |
|                                   |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Inayat shah syed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain of Counsel instructed by Leonard & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge  Hindson  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 16th February 2016.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant's asylum, humanitarian protection claim and  human  rights
    claim was refused by the Respondent on 11th February 2015.

 4. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 14th January 2016.  The Secretary of
    State applied for an adjournment  on  the  basis  that  the  Presenting
    Officer did not have the bundles of documents submitted  on  behalf  of
    the Claimant.  This was because of a flood  which  had  destroyed  some
    files, and a further bundle submitted by the Claimant,  had  only  been
    sent to the FtT on 13th January, the day before the  hearing,  and  had
    not been served on the Secretary of State.

 5. The FtT allowed the Secretary of State's Presenting Officer  some  time
    to consider the documents  but  refused  the  adjournment  request  and
    proceeded with the hearing.  The appeal was allowed,  the  FtT  finding
    that the Claimant was entitled to be granted asylum, and that to return
    him to Pakistan would breach Article 3 of the 1950 European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grimmett of  the
    FtT in the following terms;

         2.   It is arguable that the judge erred in refusing an adjournment
             as although he cannot be criticised for refusing to adjourn on
             the basis of the flood in the  Respondent's  offices,  he  did
             note that the Appellant's third bundle of  documents  was  not
             lodged until the day  before  the  hearing.   As  that  bundle
             contained a very lengthy and  detailed  expert  report  it  is
             arguable that the  Respondent  should  have  been  granted  an
             adjournment to consider it fully.

         3.   It is also arguable that the judge's reasons for  finding  the
             Appellant credible on the basis of  "ample  evidence"  without
             specifying the same is inadequate.  The judge  may  also  have
             erred in  not  dealing  with  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
             Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

 7. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.



The Secretary of State's Submissions

 8. Mr Harrison relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal.

 9. Firstly it was contended that the FtT had erred in law  by  failing  to
    consider section 8 of the 2004 Act, which was raised in paragraphs  48-
    50 of the Respondent's reasons for refusal.  These factors should  have
    been taken into account when assessing the Claimant's credibility.

10. Secondly it was contended that the FtT had erred  by  failing  to  give
    reasons or any adequate reasons for findings on material  matters.   It
    was contended that no adequate reasons had been given  as  to  why  the
    Claimant would be at risk of harm from the Pakistani  authorities,  and
    the FtT had not provided any reasons why the report of Dr  Ballard  was
    preferred to the Secretary  of  State's  objective  evidence.   It  was
    further contended that the FtT had not provided  any  reasons  why  the
    Claimant would be at risk from groups  opposing  the  Hazaras  nor  any
    reasons for finding that state protection would not be available.

11. Thirdly it was contended that the FtT had  committed  a  procedural  or
    other irregularity capable of  making  a  material  difference  to  the
    outcome or fairness of the proceedings.   It  was  contended  that  the
    FtT's refusal to grant an adjournment had resulted in unfairness to the
    Secretary of State.  The Presenting Officer was unable to  present  the
    case properly as he was not  given  sufficient  time  to  consider  the
    Claimant's large  bundle.   The  supplementary  bundle  containing  the
    expert report had only been served on the Tribunal the day  before  the
    hearing and not in accordance with standard directions.  As it appeared
    that the expert report was crucial in determining the appeal,  the  FtT
    had  erred  by  not  affording  the  Secretary  of  State  an  adequate
    opportunity to consider that report.



Claimant's Submissions

12. Mr Hussain relied upon a response drafted pursuant to rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 though it  was  accepted
    that the contention that the Claimant's supplementary bundle  had  been
    served five days before the  appeal  hearing  was  wrong.   Mr  Hussain
    accepted that the supplementary bundle containing the expert report had
    only been served on the FtT on 13th January 2016.

13. Mr Hussain submitted that the Secretary of State  was  seeking  to  re-
    argue the case and the FtT had given adequate reasons for findings that
    had been made.  It was not unfair  to  refuse  an  adjournment  as  the
    Presenting Officer had been given some time to consider the  documents.
    Mr Hussain submitted that the section 8 issue  was  not  determinative,
    and contended that the FtT was not required to set out every  piece  of
    evidence.



My Conclusions and Reasons

14. I will deal with the grounds  in  the  same  order  as  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State.  Dealing firstly with section 8 of the 2004 Act,  I
    find the FtT erred in law.  This is because section 8 was raised in the
    refusal decision, and therefore should have  been  considered  in  line
    with the guidance given in JT (Cameroon)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878.   The
    Court of Appeal held in that decision that section 8  factors  must  be
    taken into account in assessing credibility, although the weight to  be
    attached was a matter for the decision-maker.  The error in this  case,
    is simply to make no reference at all to the section 8 issue.

15. Next I consider whether the FtT has  given  adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings made.  I conclude that on this point the FtT has erred in law.
     I set out below the  judicial  headnote  to  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
    decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

16. The reasons of the FtT are contained in paragraphs 31-33,  and  consist
    of eighteen lines.  It is common ground that it  is  not  necessary  to
    rehearse every issue raised in a case, but it is not clear from reading
    the reasons of the FtT, why the appeal was allowed.  The FtT  does  not
    adequately address the reasons given by  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    refusing the appellant's application.  There is no adequate analysis of
    the evidence relied upon by the Appellant.  I find that the  inadequacy
    of reasoning is a material error of law.

17. I also find that the FtT erred in law when considering the  adjournment
    request.  The FtT has not taken into account the  guidance  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) the headnote  of  which
    is set out below;

         If a Tribunal refuses to accede to  an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

18. The FtT accepted that the Claimant's bundles amounted to in  excess  of
    300 pages.  The FtT file indicates that  the  first  two  bundles  were
    served as long ago as April 2015, but the point made by  the  Secretary
    of State was that a file containing these bundles had been  damaged  by
    flood water.  The third  bundle  relied  upon  by  the  Claimant  which
    contained an expert report, and which contained pages 283-349, was  not
    served on the FtT until 13th January 2016.  That was the day before the
    hearing.  It appears that the bundle was  sent  by  fax  commencing  at
    11.56am.  It  is  completely  unsatisfactory  to  serve  a  substantial
    bundle, containing an expert report, by fax at such a late stage.

19. The FtT in considering the adjournment application makes  reference  to
    the length of time that would elapse if the appeal was  adjourned,  and
    makes the point in paragraph  11  that  "excessive  delay  in  repeated
    adjournments must be avoided if at all possible."

20. It is entirely correct that excessive delay and  repeated  adjournments
    must be avoided if possible, but  rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014
    states that the overriding objective of the  rules  is  to  enable  the
    Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.  The guidance in Nwaigwe
    stresses that the test to be applied is that of fairness.  In my  view,
    the FtT did not  apply  that  test  when  considering  the  adjournment
    request by the Secretary of State, who was not  in  possession  of  the
    Claimant's bundles, and in particular when one  of  those  bundles  had
    been served far too late, and contained a lengthy  expert  report  upon
    which reliance was to be placed.

21. For the reasons given above, the FtT  materially  erred  in  law.   The
    decision must be set aside and re-made.

22. I find that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the  FtT  to
    be  heard  afresh  having  considered  paragraph  7.2  of  the   Senior
    President's Practice Statements which I set out below;

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

23. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(a) and (b)  are  met.   No
    findings of fact are preserved.

24. The appeal before the FtT will  take  place  at  the  Bradford  Hearing
    Centre.  The parties will be advised  of  the  time  and  date  in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Hindson.  It is understood that no interpreter will be required, but if
    this is not the case the Claimant must notify the FtT immediately.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.


Anonymity

The FtT made no anonymity direction.  There  has  been  no  request  to  the
Upper Tribunal for an anonymity order, and I see no need  to  make  such  an
order.


Signed                              Date 5th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is  made.   The  issue  of  any  fee  award  will  need  to  be
considered by the FtT when the appeal is heard afresh.


Signed                              Date 5th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
