
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03919/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination sent           |
|On 20 December 2013                           |On 27 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                          Mr JAYAKRISHAAN SIVAPALAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, Counsel, instructed by Ravi Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 27 September 1982, is a citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.  He originally entered this country on 28  October  2008  having
    been granted a student visa, valid  until  31  October  2010.    On  30
    November 2010 he applied for leave to remain  as  a  student  until  30
    November 2011.  Then, on 11 March 2013  (by  which  time  he  had  been
    present in this country without leave for a substantial period of time)
    he applied for asylum.

 2. This application was refused by the respondent on 10 April 2013 and the
    refusal letter is dated the same date.

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Britton, sitting at Hatton Cross on 12
    July 2013.  In a determination signed on 24 July 2013  and  promulgated
    shortly  thereafter,   Judge   Britton   dismissed   the   appeal,   on
    asylum/humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  also  on  human   rights
    grounds.  Essentially, the appeal was dismissed because of the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings, which are summarised at paragraph  56  of
    the determination as follows:

         "Having considered the whole of the evidence in the round,  I  find
         that the core of the  appellant's  account  of  persecution  lacked
         credibility and is a fabrication designed to  gain  access  to  the
         United Kingdom.  Given these conclusions, I find that the appellant
         has not discharged the burden of proof  of  having  a  well-founded
         fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  and   that   the
         appellant's removal would not cause the United  Kingdom  to  be  in
         breach of its obligations under the 1951 Convention."

 4. When considering whether the appellant  was  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection separately from the asylum  appeal,  at  paragraph  57,  the
    judge found as follows:

         "I do not need to repeat the facts.  I find that the  core  of  the
         appellant's account of serious harm on return is incredible and  is
         a fabrication designed to gain entry to the United Kingdom."

 5. The appellant appealed against this decision, and was initially refused
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales  on  20  July
    2013, who, when setting out his  reasons  for  refusing  permission  to
    appeal, stated as follows:

         "...

         2.   In his grounds of onward appeal, the  appellant  asserts  that
             the judge made unsustainable credibility findings.  He  failed
             to engage with the evidence given of why  the  appellant  left
             Sri Lanka  and  with  the  medical  evidence.   He  failed  to
             consider  whether  the  findings   of   the   medical   expert
             corroborate the appellant's account of being  ill-treated  and
             sustaining scarring as a result.   The  judge  has  not  given
             sufficient reasons for rejecting the evidence of payment of  a
             bribe and has failed to give weight to the statement of Mrs S.
             Prabaharan.

         3.    The  judge  found  that  the   appellant's   account   lacked
             credibility. He did not find credible the appellant's  account
             of why he left Sri Lanka.  He took into account  the  doctor's
             report, but did not find that the contents persuaded him  that
             the appellant had  been  tortured.  The  judge  gave  adequate
             reasons for finding that if the appellant had  been  suspected
             of having been involved with an explosion  ...  he  would  not
             have been released within 9 days on payment of a bribe. As  he
             rejected the appellant's  account  in  its  entirety,  he  was
             entitled [to] reject the evidence of Mrs  Prabaharan  who  was
             not present to be cross-examined ... ."

 6. The appellant renewed his appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  was
    eventually granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge  Dawson
    on 24 September 2013 who set out  his reasons in the following terms:

         "Although it has to be said that the core account  is  not  without
         difficulties particularly for the reasons given in the  first  part
         of [53], nevertheless, it is arguable that the judge erred with ...
         regard to the identification details of  Miss  Prabarahan  and  the
         treatment of the evidence of Dr Josse referred to in [51].  Whether
         these are sufficient to undermine the  determination  is  at  least
         arguable and although not without hesitation, I  grant  permission.
         ..."

The Grounds

 7. At paragraph 2 of the grounds, it is asserted baldly that  the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings "are not sustainable  and  that  there  is
    with respect to the IJ an obvious and both material flaw/error  to  the
    determination".

 8. The first ground, which is dealt with at  paragraphs  3  and  4,  takes
    issue first of all with the judge's finding at paragraph  51  "that  if
    the appellant had been tortured as stated in his witness statement [he]
    would have left Sri Lanka at the earliest opportunity, particularly  as
    there was a crackdown on Tamils in 2006".  It is asserted that not only
    did the judge fail to particularise what he meant by a "crackdown"  but
    also this was not supported by the background  evidence,  and  nor  was
    there any evidence from  the  appellant  to  support  this  conclusion.
    Also, it is submitted that the judge had "demonstrably failed to engage
    with the appellant's evidence concerning why he left Sri Lanka in  2008
    and not earlier".

 9. With regard to the adverse credibility findings, it is also  argued  at
    paragraph 4 that the judge had "inadequately engaged with  the  medical
    evidence" which had been  submitted and that this evidence  should  not
    have been excluded  "on  the  premises   that  it  is  based  upon  the
    appellant's testimony".

10. Reliance is placed on  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  R  on  the
    application of AM [2012] EWCA Civ 521.

11. It is submitted that the judge failed adequately  to  consider  whether
    the medical evidence corroborated the appellant's account of being ill-
    treated and having sustained scarring as a result  of  being  arrested,
    detained and ill-treated by the authorities, and that that evidence was
    clinically corroborative  of  his  core  claim,   which  supported  his
    credibility.

12. It is also then asserted that the judge at  paragraph  52  irrationally
    rejected the appellant's  account  of  his  having  been  arrested  and
    detained but released on payment of  a  bribe,  because  "there  is  no
    supporting rationale provided for why the appellant would not have been
    released on payment of a  bribe  (if  his  account  was  taken  at  its
    highest)".

13. Then it is said that when the judge found  at  paragraph  53  that  the
    appellant had provided "conflicting  evidence  as  to  when  he  passed
    information  to  the  Singhalese",  he  had  not  qualified  the   term
    "conflicting", "and thus the appellant is at  a  loss  as  to  why  his
    evidence was conflicting".  It is also said that the assertion that Mrs
    Prabaharan had failed to  provide  any  contact  details  was  "plainly
    inaccurate, as she had provided a copy of her national ID card with her
    statement and that revealed her address".

14. It is said  that  these  adverse  credibility  findings  "tainted  [the
    judge's] assessment of the appellant's risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka",
    and that the authorities "have maintained a continuous adverse interest
    in the appellant and has targeted the appellant's family".

15. Effectively, therefore, the thrust of the challenge made in the grounds
    is to the sustainability of the adverse credibility findings which were
    made.

The Hearing

16. I heard submissions which were made on behalf of both parties  which  I
    recorded contemporaneously.  As these submissions are contained  within
    the Record of Proceedings, I shall not repeat  below  everything  which
    was said to me during the course of the hearing, but shall  refer  only
    to such parts of the submissions as are necessary for the  purposes  of
    this determination.  I have, however, when reaching  my  decision,  had
    regard to everything which was said as well as  to  all  the  documents
    which are contained within the file.

17. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Solomon submitted that, in  a  nutshell,
    the appellant's claim to be at risk was two pronged.  First, he was  at
    risk because of his previous record as a LTTE member or supporter,  and
    the issue here was perception; secondly, he was at risk because of  his
    close association with a high profile LTTE suspect who is named in  the
    determination as Mr Ramasamy and his family name  is  Prabaran.   These
    were the limbs of risk.

18. To flesh out the claim, the appellant was a Sri  Lankan  Tamil  who  in
    2006 was arrested, detained for about eight  days  and  seriously  ill-
    treated, following a bomb explosion.  That was his case,  although,  in
    answer to a question  from the Tribunal, Mr Solomon accepted that  this
    had been  rejected by the judge.

19. It was the appellant's case that as a result of  his  ill-treatment  he
    received the scarring which is referred to in the report from Dr Josse.



20. In terms of Mr Ramasamy,  the  appellant's  claim  (which,  again,  the
    Tribunal noted had not been accepted  by the judge) is that he  and  Mr
    Ramasamy were close friends.  The judge did not accept this association
    was as claimed.

21. The appellant claimed have supplied information to Mr Ramasamy  in  his
    capacity as an employee of a telecommunications company.  In  addition,
    he allowed members of the LTTE to use his  home  and  that  association
    between the appellant and Mr Ramasamy began in 2005 and contused  until
    the appellant's departure in 2008.

22. It was Mr Ramasamy who assisted in the  appellant's  release  following
    his detention in 2006.  The judge had not accepted that  the  appellant
    had been detained in 2006 either.

23. In 2009, Mr Ramasamy was arrested by the authorities and  detained  for
    two years, until 2011.

24. In support of the claim that Mr Ramasamy was a  high  profile  suspect,
    the judge had had before him numerous national and  international  news
    articles regarding the case  which  Mr  Ramasamy  subsequently  brought
    against the Sri Lankan government for the lengthy  detention  and  ill-
    treatment which he suffered, such as from the Independent newspaper  in
    the UK and Amnesty International.

25. Following Mr Ramasamy's arrest in 2009, the  authorities  went  to  the
    appellant's  home in search of him (again, this was not accepted by the
    judge).  Following Mr  Ramasamy's  release  in  2011,  the  authorities
    again, it is said, went in search of the appellant and the  appellant's
    father was arrested.

26. In February 2012, Mr Ramasamy was abducted by men in a  white  van  and
    that led to the various news articles regarding him referred to  above.
    He was abducted two days before his case in Sri Lanka was about  to  be
    heard.

27. It was the appellant's case that following that abduction  his  parents
    received threats and his father was placed on  reporting  restrictions.
    The Tribunal noted at this stage of the proceedings that the  appellant
    had left Sri Lanka in 2008.

28. Having summarised the appellant's case as set  out  above,  Mr  Solomon
    submitted that this had been necessary in order to put  his  challenges
    to the determination in  context.   The  argument  the  appellant  puts
    forward is that he would be seen as a threat to the  unitary  state  of
    Sri Lanka and therefore falls within the UNHCR categories of those with
    more elaborate links with the LTTE.

29. Turning to the grounds of challenge,  first  there  was  a  fundamental
    error in the way the judge approached the supporting evidence.  As  set
    out in the  grounds,  he  does  not  identify  what  the  "conflicting"
    evidence was and his assertion that Mrs  Prabaharan  had  not  provided
    contact details  was  not  correct.   He  was  wrong  to  discount  the
    corroborative evidence of Mrs Prabaharan, as he did at paragraph 53.

30. The Tribunal observed at this point that it appeared from paragraph  53
    that the judge had not been satisfied that Mrs Prabaharan was  in  fact
    Mr Ramasamy's wife because no contact details had been  provided.  This
    was relevant to the issue of credibility, because it was  necessary  to
    know whether or not a woman who was genuinely  Mr  Ramasamy's  wife  in
    fact supported the appellant's claim.  In response to this observation,
    Mr Solomon submitted that a written statement was probative of not only
    the appellant's detention in 2006 but also the association  between  Mr
    Ramasamy  and  the  appellant  and  the  subsequent  interest  of   the
    authorities in the appellant.  She was in Sri Lanka and had given  this
    statement.

31. The Tribunal noted that the judge had not been satisfied that this  was
    genuinely a statement from Mr Ramasamy's wife, and had observed that it
    could have been written by anyone, to which Mr Solomon replied that the
    reasons given for rejecting her evidence was that  no  contact  details
    had been given, which  was  wrong,  because  enclosed  in  the  further
    evidence was  a  national  identity  card  for  this  witness,  plus  a
    translation, which was before the judge, which gives her  name  (albeit
    not her married name) and an address.  If the judge had looked  at  the
    national identity card and had said than he had looked at  it  but  was
    not satisfied because the name and address were  different,  then  that
    finding could not be challenged, but he did not do this.  As  the  sole
    reason for rejecting the statement was a lack of  contact  details,  it
    followed that his reasons for rejecting the corroborative evidence were
    inadequate.

32. This flaw went even deeper  than  that,  because  in  addition  to  the
    witness statement from Mr Ramasamy's wife, the appellant  relied  on  a
    witness statement from his own mother, which was not dealt with in  the
    determination.

33.  At this stage, the Tribunal noted that  this  argument  had  not  been
    contained within the grounds and Mr Jack, on behalf of the  respondent,
    submitted that the  appellant  should  not  be  allowed  to  make  this
    argument.  It was not an obvious point and an  application  would  have
    had to have been made in writing and served to amend the grounds.   The
    Tribunal heard argument on this point.

34. Mr Solomon's submission essentially was that the judge had  simply  not
    dealt with this.  At paragraph  31  he  had  referred  to  the  witness
    statement of the appellant's mother but had failed to engage with  that
    part of her evidence.

35. In answer to an observation from the Tribunal, that  a  judge  did  not
    have to deal with every aspect of every witness's evidence, Mr  Solomon
    replied that that witness's evidence was probative.

36. Mr Solomon then reiterated the complaint made in the grounds  that  the
    judge had not properly considered the  medical  evidence.  The  medical
    evidence was consistent with the account given by the appellant and the
    judge had not given adequate reasons for discounting this evidence.  If
    the judge discounted this evidence  because  he  did  not  believe  the
    appellant, that was not a sufficient reason.

37. It had never been put to the appellant in  cross-examination  that  his
    injuries were caused other than by being inflicted, and so the  judge's
    approach to the supporting evidence fatally flawed the determination.

38. The appellant also relied on the other matters raised in  the  grounds.
    The point  relating  to  the  "crackdown"  on  Tamils  referred  to  at
    paragraph 5 was  that  this  assertion  that  there  had  been  such  a
    crackdown was not supported by any evidence, but was a major factor  in
    his credibility findings.

39. Mr Solomon then turned  to  paragraph  52  of  the  determination,  and
    referred the Tribunal to the submission made  at  paragraph  8  of  the
    grounds, which was that the judge's finding that  the  appellant  would
    not have been released on payment of  a  bribe  was  irrational  and/or
    inadequately reasoned. This was a rather bald statement of  fact  which
    was not supported by background material.

40. Mr Solomon's final point was his first one, which was  that  the  judge
    had not said what the conflicting evidence was that he had in mind.  In
    answer to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Solomon  accepted  that  the
    issue of conflicts had been raised, but this had been dealt with by the
    appellant in cross-examination.  Although there had been  reference  to
    alleged conflicts in the earlier part of the determination,  the  judge
    did not engage with this  in  his  findings.   So  in  conclusion,  the
    judge's reasons for rejecting the appellant's detailed claims were  not
    adequately reasoned.

41. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jack  relied  from  the  start  on  the
    decision  of  the  Presidential  Tribunal  in  Shizad  (Sufficiency  of
    reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85, which was  to  the  effect  that  a
    judge did not have to set out every single point in his determination.

42. Starting with the determination, at paragraph 14,  and  following,  the
    judge outlined the appellant's case.  He went through the evidence  and
    the appellant's claim, and it is clear that he did take account of  all
    the background evidence.  Then at paragraph 17, he makes  reference  to
    the refusal letter and to the fact that the appellant could not say why
    Mr Ramasamy's abduction was relevant to this appellant.   At  paragraph
    19, with regard to that abduction, it is noted that none of  the  media
    documents provided suggested that Mr Ramasamy had been  abducted by the
    Sri Lankan  authorities.   Also  highlighted  was  the  fact  that  the
    "alternative reports on the abduction of Mr  Ramasamy"  suggested  that
    the police suspected he had been abducted by a Tamil extortion gang and
    that a ransom had been  demanded.

43. The judge continued to discuss the respondent's case, as set out in the
    refusal letter and then later on starts dealing with the evidence.

44. At paragraph 30, he deals with Mrs Prabaharan's witness statement,  and
    at paragraph 34 he records that it was the appellant's claim  that  his
    parents were in contact  with  Mrs  Prabaharan.   As  observed  by  the
    Tribunal at this time, the  judge  also  referred  to  the  appellant's
    explanation as to why he did not now have her  telephone  number.   The
    appellant had said that it was his parents who contacted her but he had
    deleted their telephone number when he came to  this country.

45. At  paragraph  53,  the  judge  dealt  with  Mrs  Prabaharan's  witness
    statement.  He noted  that  she  had  not  given  contact  details  and
    therefore it was difficult to verify whether her statement was genuine.
     That statement was actually correct, because if one  referred  to  Mrs
    Prabaharan's witness statement (contained within the appellant's bundle
    submitted under cover of a letter of 6 July 2013) at paragraph 12,  she
    says that "I don't want to disclose my contact  details"  and  on  that
    page there are no contact details.  On the next page is  a  translation
    of what was  said  to  be  an  original  identity  card.  Although  the
    appellant's representatives sought to rely on  this  identity  card  as
    proof that contact details were actually given, the  name  is  not  the
    same, and the address which appears is "153  Canal  Bank  Street".   No
    evidence had been produced  to  show  either  that  the  identity  card
    belonged to this witness or that she was Mr Ramasamy's wife.   Further,
    no evidence had been produced to show that the author  still  lived  at
    153 Canal Bank Street.  There was nothing to link the two.

46. Also, with regard to the judge's finding that there had been a lack  of
    contact details, the appellant's mother's witness statement (at page 13
    of the appellant's bundle) says at paragraph 18 that Mr Ramasamy's wife
    and family had since moved from Canal Road.  So even on  the  basis  of
    the evidence put forward  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  himself,  the
    address at Canal Bank Street would not be a contact  address  for  this
    witness.  Accordingly, there was no erroe in the judge's assessment  of
    that piece of evidence or the weight he placed on it.

47. In the determination, from paragraph 32 through to 35, the judge  dealt
    with the discrepancies in the evidence.  The  discrepancies  were  also
    set out in the refusal letter.

48. It should be noted also that at the end  of  paragraph  49,  the  judge
    stated that "I consider all the evidence as a  whole".   This  Tribunal
    had no reason to doubt that this was correct and he did as he  said  he
    would.

49. Effectively, the judge had decided that very little  weight  could   be
    placed on untested evidence and on the  appellant's  mother's  evidence
    which was likely to be self-serving.

50. The two issues  remaining  concerned  first,  the  medical  report  and
    secondly, the crackdown on Tamils  referred  to  by  the  judge.   With
    regard to the medical evidence, the judge highlighted that  the  doctor
    had not been conclusive in his opinion and that he had  not  given  any
    alternative explanation as to how the injuries might have been  caused.
     It was not necessary (and nor was it laid down by this Tribunal in  RR
    (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 274, for an  applicant  to
    be cross-examined as to various alternative  possibilities,  especially
    in circumstances where  his  case  had  not  been   accepted  from  the
    beginning.  In this case there were any number of  ways  in  which  the
    injuries could  have been caused and as made  clear  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal at paragraph 21 of SS (Sri  Lanka)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  155,  the
    treatment of medical evidence was a  matter  for  the  judge.   If  the
    medical evidence had been  more detailed and  higher  on  the  Istanbul
    Protocol, more reasons might have been  necessary,  but  in  this  case
    where the judge had not  accepted  the  appellant's  account  and  this
    evidence went no further than saying that it was consistent  with  that
    account.  The judge considered the  evidence  in  the  round,  and  his
    reasoning for rejecting the appellant's case was sufficiently reasoned.



51. With regard to the  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  52  that  had  the
    appellant been  suspected of being involved in the explosion  he  would
    not have been released,  even  on  the  payment  of  a  bribe,  it  was
    important to stress that this finding was in the  alternative,  because
    the judge actually stated that "even if  the  appellant  was  detained,
    which I do not accept" before making this finding.  As  the  judge  had
    given adequate reasons for the findings he had made,  this  was  not  a
    material error. Although this phraseology was unfortunate, the  finding
    itself was not necessarily perverse,  but  in  any  event  it  was  not
    material.

52. With regard to the judge's use of the term  "crackdown  on  Tamils"  at
    paragraph 51, one can see from paragraph 33 that it had been put to the
    appellant in cross-examination that in 2006/7 violence  was  increasing
    in Sri Lanka, so there clearly had been reference before the  judge  as
    to this increasing violence. Unfortunately, Presenting Officers do  not
    tend to produce full country information reports, but at paragraph 3.23
    of the COI of 7 March 2012, there is reference to large scale  violence
    occurring in April 2006.  Tribunals see many Sri Lankan cases and it is
    not unreasonable for a judge to take judicial notice of  this.   It  is
    accordingly quite clear what the judge was referring  to,  and  he  was
    entitled to do so.

53. In reply, Mr Solomon submitted, referring  to  the  last  point  first,
    which was the reference to the COI of 7 March 2012, that all  that  had
    been put to the appellant was that in 2006/07 violence was  increasing.
    In answer to a question from the Tribunal  as  to  whether  or  not  Mr
    Solomon would accept there was increasing violence in 2006, he  replied
    that the COI did not refer to a "crackdown on Tamils" in 2006 in terms.

54. With regard to the identity card of  the  lady  who  was  said  by  the
    appellant to be Mr Ramasamy's wife, that card had been copied now.   It
    was from 1991 which was why it was in her maiden name, not her  married
    name. The reasoning which is given now on behalf of the respondent  was
    not given by the  judge.  The judge did not engage with  the  issue  of
    the identity card.

Discussion

55. It is important, when considering an appeal founded  essentially  on  a
    challenge to a judge's findings of fact, including findings with regard
    to medical evidence, to have in mind the observations of the  President
    of this Tribunal in Shizad and also the guidance given by the Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Sri Lanka).  The head note to Shizad is as follows:

         "(1)     Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation
             of the conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal  is
             determined, those reasons need not be extensive  if  decisions
             as a whole make sense,  having regard to the material accepted
             by the judge.

         (2)  Although a decision may contain an  error  of  law  where  the
             requirements to give adequate reasons are not met,  the  Upper
             Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-
             tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of law, the
             fact-finding process cannot be  criticised  and  the  relevant
             country guidance has  been  taken  into  account,  unless  the
             conclusions the judge draws from the  primary  data  were  not
             reasonably open to him or  her."

56. With regard to the consideration of medical evidence, at  paragraph  21
    of the judgment of Stanley Burnton LJ in SS (Sri Lanka) (with which the
    other members of the court agreed) it was stated as follows:

         "Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert  (or
         indeed any) evidence is a matter for  the  trial  judge  ...  .   A
         judge's decision not to accept expert evidence does not involve  an
         error of law on his part, provided he approaches that evidence with
         appropriate  care  and  gives  good  reasons  for   his   decision.
         Ultimately, therefore, there are only two issues as to  the  Senior
         Immigration Judge's treatment  of  the  medical  evidence:  did  he
         address that evidence with appropriate care and did  he  give  good
         reasons for his conclusion?  Those two questions are inter-related.
          It is difficult to conceive of a  case  in  which  a  judge  gives
         adequate reasons for his conclusions on expert evidence yet  he  is
         held to have exercised insufficient care. His  reasons  demonstrate
         his care."

57. Turning now to the present case,  and  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    medical evidence, the judge's findings with regard to this evidence are
    set out at paragraph 51 as follows:

         "... I am not satisfied that the  injuries  stated  in  Dr  Josse's
         report were a result of torture or ill-treatment of any kind.   The
         doctor has to accept the factual account given  by  the  appellant.
         He does  not  cross-examine  the  appellant.   The  doctor  is  not
         conclusive  in  his  opinion  and  takes  into  consideration   the
         surrounding facts.  I am satisfied on the evidence before  me  that
         the appellant was never ill-treated, if he was ever detained, which
         I do not accept."

58. In other words, the judge did not reject the findings which the  doctor
    was able to make, which was that the appellant  had  certain  injuries,
    which were consistent with the appellant's account, but took  note,  as
    he was entitled to do, of the fact that the doctor  did  not  say  more
    than that.   Having considered all the evidence in the round  including
    the medical evidence (as is clear from the last sentence  of  paragraph
    49) the judge was still unable to accept that the account given by  the
    appellant had been true.  In my judgement, the judge's treatment of the
    medical evidence is consistent with the guidance  given  both  by  this
    Tribunal in Shizad and by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS  (Sri  Lanka).
    Contrary to the submissions made by  Mr  Solomon,  the  judge  did  not
    "discount" the medical evidence; he considered it together with all the
    other evidence in the case, in  the  round,  but  notwithstanding  this
    evidence, for the reasons which he gave, did  not  consider  it  to  be
    sufficiently compelling as  to  lead  him  to  accept  the  appellant's
    credibility having considered the evidence as a whole.

59. I turn now to consider what, if made out, would be a  major  plank   in
    this appellant's case, which is the assertion (made at paragraph  9  of
    the grounds  and supported in oral argument) that the  judge's  finding
    at paragraph 53 that "the appellant gave  conflicting  evidence  as  to
    when he said he passed information to  Mr  Ramasamy"  was  inadequately
    reasoned because the judge did not  identify  what  this  "conflicting"
    evidence was.  Indeed, paragraph  9  of  the  grounds  (settled  by  Mr
    Paramjorthy, Counsel then instructed on behalf of the  appellant)  goes
    so far as to assert that "the appellant is at a  loss  as  to  why  his
    evidence was conflicting".

60. In my judgement,  this  statement  is  disingenuous  at  best.   It  is
    entirely clear from the determination what the conflict was said to be,
    and the appellant could not possibly be at  a  loss  as  to  what  this
    conflict is, because it was put to him in  cross-examination  and  this
    part of the cross-examination is referred to at  paragraph  32  of  the
    determination as follows:

         "He was referred to the inconsistency in his evidence  and  in  his
         asylum interview (Q48) where he said in relation  to  Mr  Ramasamy,
         that he had asked for information during 2007.   In  his  screening
         interview (Q4.1) he said it was in 2006."

61. Although at paragraph 32 the judge records the  appellant's  answer  in
    cross-examination (that "he knew about the questions in 2006 but he did
    not start giving information  until  2007")  it  is  nonetheless  clear
    precisely what the conflict was said to be, and  that  this  must  have
    been  what the judge had in mind when he referred at  paragraph  53  to
    the conflicting evidence on this point which  had  been  given  by  the
    appellant.  The judge was not obliged to  accept  the  explanation  for
    this apparent inconsistency which had  been  given  by  the  appellant,
    particularly in light of all the other evidence in this case  which  he
    considered.

62. With regard to the statement from Mrs Prabaharan, it  is  correct  that
    she did refuse to give her contact details in  her  witness  statement,
    and it is also the case that the name on her national identity card was
    not the same as the name on the witness statement (because it  was  not
    her married name).  The most that Mr Solomon could say on behalf of the
    appellant with regard to this latter point was that if  the  judge  had
    said that he had looked at the card but had not been satisfied that  it
    was good evidence of this  witness's  identity  because  the  name  and
    address were different, that finding could not be challenged, but as he
    had not done so, he had not given adequate reasons.  In  my  judgement,
    based on the evidence which was before  him,  the  judge  was  entirely
    justified in reaching  the  conclusions  he  did  with  regard  to  Mrs
    Prabaharan's identity, which is that he could not be satisfied that the
    writer of the witness statement was who she claimed to be.

63. Mr Solomon in argument advanced the proposition that the judge  made  a
    material error by not dealing specifically with  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's mother which was corroborative of Mrs Prabaharan's  witness
    statement.  Not only was this argument not advanced in the grounds (and
    no application has been  made to amend the grounds) but in  any  event,
    as has always been made clear within this  Tribunal,  a  judge  is  not
    required to set  out  specifically  his  findings  on  every  piece  of
    evidence submitted.  What he is required  to  do  is  to  consider  the
    evidence in the round and to give adequate reasons  for  his  findings.
    There is no reason to doubt that the judge did indeed, as  he  says  at
    paragraph 49, consider the evidence "as a  whole"  and,  even  if  this
    argument had been advanced in the grounds, it  would  still  have  been
    rejected for this reason.

64. Mr Solomon's argument that the judge's finding that there had  been   a
    "crackdown" on Tamils in 2006 was unsupported by any evidence is  also,
    in my judgement, an insufficient basis upon which this appeal could  be
    allowed.  It is clear from the country  information  available  on  Sri
    Lanka,  which  is  well-known  to  those  dealing  with  appeals   from
    applicants coming from that country (which would  include  Counsel  and
    judges) that in 2006/07, there was  evidence  of  increasing  violence.
    This was even put to the appellant in cross-examination.  Although,  as
    Mr Solomon stated in argument, the COI may not  refer  in  terms  to  a
    "crackdown" on Tamils in  2006,  nothing  turns  specifically  on  this
    expression.  It is clear that what the judge was saying at paragraph 51
    was that if the appellant had been telling the truth, and he  had  been
    tortured as he said he was in his witness statement, then he would have
    left Sri Lanka at the first opportunity, especially in 2006,  when  the
    situation in Sri Lanka was particularly dangerous for Tamils.  It seems
    clear from the background material that this was a period of  increased
    tension, which would have increased the risk someone  in  the  position
    the appellant claimed he was would in have faced; it is  not  material,
    in my judgement, whether this was referred to as "a period of increased
    tension" or "a crackdown on Tamils".

65. With regard to the judge's finding, at paragraph 52, that even had  the
    appellant been  detained "if he was suspected of being involved  in  an
    explosion he would not have been released, even on  the  payment  of  a
    bribe, and certainly after 8 days", as the Tribunal observed during the
    course of the  hearing,  this  bald  statement  is  neither  adequately
    reasoned nor (taking judicial notice of the abundance of evidence which
    has been  placed  before  differently  constituted  Tribunals  on  many
    occasions) does it accord with reality.   It cannot be said  that  even
    people who have been detained on suspicion of serious offences have not
    on occasion been able to obtain their release from custody in Sri Lanka
    on payment of a bribe, and had this finding been material, I would have
    agreed that the determination would have had to be set  aside  and  the
    decision remade.  However, in my judgement, this  finding,  regrettable
    though it is, was not material, because it is clear that in any  event,
    on the basis of the evidence which was considered, the  judge  did  not
    consider that the appellant had been detained as claimed.

66. A decision on the weight to be given to individual pieces  of  evidence
    is, as the  higher courts have consistently reminded this  Tribunal,  a
    matter to be determined in any individual case by the   judge  who  has
    heard the evidence.  It is only if the findings which are  made  cannot
    be supported by the evidence, or are so inadequately reasoned  that  it
    is not apparent that the judge has given proper consideration  to  that
    evidence, that such findings  can  be  set  aside.   In  my  judgement,
    looking at the determination as a whole, it cannot  be  said  that  the
    judge made findings which were not open to him or that one cannot  see,
    from his determination, what his reason were.

67. Accordingly, this appeal must be dismissed.



Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal by the appellant is dismissed.



Signed:                                 Dated: 14 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


