
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03804/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2016                               |On 1 April 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                    [t c]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Rwegasira (Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors, Harrow
Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on [ ]  1975.   He  arrived
    in this country on 30 August 2000 and applied for asylum on 10 December
    2013.  This application was refused on 10 February 2015.   He  appealed
    against the decision and his appeal came before a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge on 7 May 2015.

2.    Although  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  for
    asylum, concessions were made in the respondent's decision letter.

3.   The concessions made are helpfully summarised in paragraph  27  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge as follows:

         "The respondent accepted that the appellant was a member of the MDC
         and that he had been detained and beaten on two  occasions  because
         of this.  It was also accepted that he had continued his  political
         activities in the UK and says there was a good chance that his name
         would have been brought to the attention of ZANU-PF."

4.   These concessions appear at paragraphs 18, 19 and 25  of  the  decision
    letter.

5.   The First-tier Judge concluded her determination on the  asylum  aspect
    of the case as follows:

         "39. The Respondent  clearly  accepted  in  the  refusal  that  the
             Appellant was a member of MDC and that he  had  been  detained
             and beaten on 2 occasions because of  this  and  that  he  had
             continued his political activities in the UK and so there  was
             a good chance that his name would have  been  brought  to  the
             attention of Zanu PF.  This was not specifically challenged by
             Mr Lawson at the hearing.  The issue before me, then, and  the
             ground for refusal, was the risk on  return  to  Zimbabwe  and
             whether the Appellant could relocate.


         40.  Mr Lawson raised issues regarding the Appellant's credibility,
             concerning, for example, his departure from Harare.   However,
             he has provided no fresh evidence to support these issues over
             and above the points made in the refusal.


         41.  I therefore consider solely the issues of risk on  return  and
             internal relocation.


         42.  I take account of CM (EM Country guidance) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]
             UKUT 00059 in which it was held, restating EM, that there  was
             significantly less politically motivated violence in  Zimbabwe
             and that as a general matter, the return of  a  failed  asylum
             seeker from the UK having no significant  MDC  profile,  would
             result in  that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
             demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF.


         43.   The  issue  here,  then,  is  whether  the  Appellant  has  a
             significant MDC profile, and I note that it has been  accepted
             that he was arrested twice and beaten.  However, I  note  that
             he was able to leave Zimbabwe using his own passport.   In  my
             view it is reasonable to suppose that if his name had been  on
             a list held by the authorities this would have been picked  up
             at the airport and he would, had he been of adverse  interest,
             have been held and prevented from leaving the country.


         44.  I do not consider it credible that CIO officials would be less
             likely to be in attendance at the airport during the  day.   I
             particularly note that the Appellant caught  an  international
             flight during the day and not just  any  international  flight
             but one to the UK, a destination for many asylum seekers  from
             Zimbabwe and a country with which the Zanu PF regime  has  and
             had  a  less  than  happy  relationship.   It  is  reasonable,
             therefore, to suppose that CIO would be  specially  interested
             in passengers travelling to the UK and would be  more,  rather
             than less, likely to be in attendance  at  the  time  of  such
             flights.


         45.  The Respondent also said there was a "good  chance"  that  the
             Appellant's activities in the UK had come to the attention  of
             the Zimbabwean authorities.  However, I remind myself that the
             burden of proof rests with the Appellant, and in my view, even
             at the low standard, he has not provided independent  evidence
             that his activities have indeed brought him to  the  attention
             in the form of,  among  other  things,  photographs  taken  at
             Zimvigils.


         46.  I also do not find it  credible  that  the  authorities  would
             issue a warrant for the Appellant's arrest some years after he
             left  the  country,  given  the  lack  of  evidence  that  the
             authorities knew or were likely  to  know  of  his  activities
             here.


         47.  I also note that the Gweru  branch  of  the  MDC  specifically
             wrote  to  the  Appellant  saying  that  they  had  not  given
             information about him to the authorities.


         48.  I  am  therefore  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  a
             significant MDC profile such that there would  be  a  risk  on
             return.


         49.  CM goes on to state that a  returnee  to  Bulawayo  would  not
             suffer the adverse attention of Zanu  PF  even  if  he  had  a
             significant MDC profile.  However, I note that  the  Appellant
             does not speak  Ndebele  and  is  Shona  and  take  particular
             account of the finding in CM that relocation to  Matabeleland,
             including Bulawayo, may be negated  by  discrimination,  where
             the returnee is Shona.  In my  view  therefore  relocation  to
             Bulawayo would not be an option for the Appellant.


         50.  This consideration is not applicable to Harare, however.   The
             Appellant is a fit man, aged 39, and is well educated.  He has
             no dependants and no-one, then, economically reliant  on  him.
             He has also kept up connections in Zimbabwe, through the local
             MDC branch.  He is, therefore, in  a  good  position  to  find
             employment in Harare.  It would not  therefore,  following  EM
             and CM, be unreasonably or  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
             relocate there.


         51.  I find, therefore, that while the Appellant has a well-founded
             fear of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason,  namely  his
             political opinion, he would not, for the reasons  I  have  set
             out above, be at risk on return and could reasonably  relocate
             to Harare.


         52.  I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.


         53.  On the evidence before me there is no evidence to suggest that
             the Appellant would face a real risk of suffering serious harm
             if he returned to the country of origin.


         54.  I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds."

6.   She went on to dismiss the appeal under Articles 2,  3  and  8  of  the
    ECHR.

7.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal.  Permission  to  appeal
    was refused by the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Upper  Tribunal  granted
    permission on 10 August 2015.   The  Judge's  decision  in  respect  of
    Article 8 is not the subject of challenge.  In granting permission  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge specifically commented on  the  second  ground  of
    appeal where the appellant had taken issue with the Judge's approach to
    the case in the light of  the  concessions  that  had  been  made.   In
    paragraph 25 of the refusal letter the respondent had accepted that the
    appellant was continuing his political activities in  the  UK  "and  as
    such, there is a good chance your name will have been  brought  to  the
    attention of the ZANU-PF".  The Judge it was submitted in paragraph  15
    of the grounds had failed to engage with the question  of  whether  the
    appellant's MDC profile had grown since he left Zimbabwe "such that  he
    was able to leave his country of origin but would not be able to safely
    return".

8.   In ground 1 issue was taken with what the Judge said  in  paragraph  44
    of the determination  about  officials  being  less  likely  to  be  in
    attendance at the airport during the day which appeared to be a finding
    based on assumptions and not on evidence.  Furthermore it was  not  the
    appellant's case that the officials would  be  less  likely  to  be  in
    attendance during the day.  It was his case that he had  been  informed
    that he had the best opportunity of leaving  Zimbabwe  on  a  day  time
    flight.

9.   In ground 3 it was submitted that the appellant  did  not  fall  within
    the general class of returnees identified in CM (Zimbabwe) [2013]  UKUT
    00059.  In ground 4 it was submitted that there had  been  developments
    in the objective evidence since the case of CM which the Judge had  not
    dealt with.

10.  In the respondent's response it was submitted that  what  was  said  in
    the decision letter at paragraph 25 "did not constitute a concession of
    fact but a reason for taking the case at its highest".

11.  It was submitted that the Judge was right to suggest  that  the  burden
    was still upon the appellant to substantiate his claim in the light  of
    TK (Burundi) v Secretary of State [2009] EWCA Civ 40.

12.  It was also pointed out that the Judge had  disbelieved  a  substantial
    part of the appellant's claim as to the relevance of his  profile  some
    fifteen years later.

13.  At the hearing Mr Rwegasira relied on his  skeleton  argument  and  the
    grounds.  He pointed out that the  issues  had  been  narrowed  by  the
    respondent at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.   The  Judge  had  gone
    behind concessions of fact.  The Judge had found it not to be  credible
    that the authorities would issue a warrant for the  appellant's  arrest
    some years after he had left the country.  This was a warrant dated  20
    June 2013.  No specific reasons had been given for her implied  finding
    that the document was fake.  The arrest warrant had not been issued for
    the appellant's sur place activities.  In respect of what was  said  at
    paragraph 47 the authorities would not rely on MDC branches.  There had
    been developments  since  the  country  guidance  case  with  CM.   The
    determination was materially flawed in law and should be  remitted  for
    re-hearing.

14.  Mr Avery submitted that what was said in the decision letter was not  a
    definitive statement and it turned on the  words  "good  chance".   The
    appellant had undoubtedly  left  on  his  own  passport  without  being
    stopped and it would be bizarre to suggest that the officials would not
    be working during the day.  Mr Avery submitted that the Judge  had  not
    accepted the appellant's  account  nor  had  she  accepted  the  arrest
    warrant and it had not been necessary to say whether  the  warrant  was
    false or not.  Even if the appellant had been active in the UK it would
    not necessarily mean that he had a significant MDC profile.  The  Judge
    had been correct to apply the country guidance case and  there  was  no
    reason for not applying it.

15.  In reply it was submitted that the  appellant  was  not  in  a  general
    class of returnees as indicated in the  skeleton  argument  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He had been a longstanding member of the MDC  and
    had met top MDC officials and had  been  arrested  and  beaten  on  two
    occasions and had an outstanding politically motivated  arrest  warrant
    against him.  It was accepted  that  he  had  continued  his  political
    activities in the United Kingdom and had come to the attention of ZANU-
    PF and moreover his family were known for  anti-government  activities.
    The appellant had a significant MDC profile, was known to  ZANU-PF  and
    would attract further  attention  in  Zimbabwe  due  to  his  continued
    political activities upon return.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the Judge's  determination  if  it  was  materially
    flawed in law.

17.  I accept the submission made on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  there
    were important concessions made  by  the  respondent  in  the  decision
    letter.   These  concessions  are  recorded  by  the   Judge   in   her
    determination.  Significantly the Judge does not record any attempt  by
    the respondent to withdraw the concessions that had been made.  In  the
    Rule 24 response reference is made to TK  (Burundi)  but  it  does  not
    appear to me that the circumstances in that case  are  similar  to  the
    circumstances in this case.  Neither party sought to draw my  attention
    to any particular part of TK (Burundi) apart from the point made in the
    refusal notice that the burden rests upon an appellant to  substantiate
    his claim.  It is said in paragraph 16 of the judgment:


          "Where evidence to support an account  given  by  a  party  is  or
         should readily be available,  a  Judge  is,  in  my  view,  plainly
         entitled to take into account the failure to provide that  evidence
         and any explanations for that failure.  ..."


   At paragraph 21 of the judgment Thomas L.J. states as follows:

         "The circumstances  of  this  case  in  my  view  demonstrate  that
         independent supporting evidence which  is  available  from  persons
         subject to this jurisdiction be provided wherever possible and  the
         need for an Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious approach  to  the
         evidence of an appellant where independent supporting evidence,  as
         it was in this case, is readily available within this jurisdiction,
         but not provided.  It follows  that  where  a  Judge  in  assessing
         credibility relies  on  the  fact  that  there  is  no  independent
         supporting evidence where there should be supporting  evidence  and
         there is no credible account for its absence commits  no  error  of
         law when he relies on that fact for rejecting  the  account  of  an
         appellant."

18.  However, in this case the respondent  had  made  clear  concessions  of
    fact.  It was not necessary for the appellant to deal with  the  matter
    which had been conceded.  It  is  always  open  to  the  respondent  to
    withdraw a concession and the principles are summarised in NR (Jamaica)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 856 and CD (Jamaica) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  768  where  the
    Court of Appeal accepted at paragraph 15 the summary in the former case
    in the following terms:

         "A Tribunal can allow a concession to be withdrawn if there is good
         reason in all the circumstances to do so and if it can be done with
         the absence of prejudice.  No principle will govern every case, but
         the most important feature of any decision  is  that  the  Tribunal
         must put itself in a position in which the real issues  of  dispute
         on the merits can be decided, so long as that can be  done  without
         prejudice to one side or the other ...".

19.  Of course in this case there does not appear to have been  any  attempt
    to withdraw the  concession.  Indeed  this  is  not  submitted  by  the
    respondent in her response.  Where an appellant comes to a  hearing  to
    meet a case which includes concessions  he  will  not  be  equipped  or
    prepared to deal with those matters which he understands  are  not  the
    subject of dispute. Unless given fair warning that  the  concession  no
    longer stands he has no chance to  meet  the  case  against  him.   The
    appellant was in effect criticised in paragraph 45 of the decision  for
    not providing evidence of a matter  which  he  was  fully  entitled  to
    expect was not disputed.

20.  I have come to the conclusion  that  the  appellant  has  identified  a
    material error of law in the decision resulting in  the  potential  for
    unfairness.

21.  The respondent in this case in  a  carefully  drafted  decision  letter
    made important concessions of fact.   Such  concessions  are  extremely
    helpful in order to identify the issues which need to be  resolved  and
    therefore greatly assist the Tribunal in reaching its decision.  Where,
    as the representative commented  in  this  case,  the  Judge  "takes  a
    sterner view" than the respondent did  and  goes  behind  a  concession
    properly made by the respondent then it appears to me  that  the  error
    does infect the  decision  and  a  remittal  for  a  fresh  hearing  is
    appropriate.  The other points made by the representative might not  on
    their own  render  the  decision  unsustainable  but  where  an  unfair
    approach is identified it would not be right to let the decision stand.



22.  The appeal is allowed.   The  appeal  will  be  remitted  for  a  fresh
    hearing on all issues save Article 8 as the  findings  in  relation  to
    Article 8 are not the subject of challenge.

23.  Anonymity order made.

Fee Order

24.  No fee has been paid and none is payable.






Signed                                  Date 23 March 2016


G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

