
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03773/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2015                         |On 23rd February 2015         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                        Miss Afusat Olabisi Ibikunle
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Miss Afusat Olabisi Ibikunle a citizen of  Nigeria
    born 14th December 1976.  She  appeals  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg issued on 28th October 2014 dismissing on
    asylum and human rights grounds  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent made on 21st May 2014  to  refuse  to  grant
    asylum and to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 12th December  2014  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holmes.  He said:

         "2.  As set out in ground 2 the decision makes no reference to  the
             evidence of the expert witness on the  issue  of  whether  the
             Appellant's account of inheritance amongst the Yoruba  was  as
             she claimed.  That evidence was material and relevant  because
             it went directly to the core of the issue of  her  credibility
             as her witness: this was one of  only  four  points  expressly
             taken by the Respondent in relation to her  credibility.   The
             Respondent had of course accepted as true a large part of  the
             Appellant's account.

         3.   In the circumstances it is unnecessary to deal in  any  detail
             with each of the  large  number  of  other  complaints  raised
             concerning the  Judge's  approach  to  the  evidence  and  her
             approach to the credibility of  the  Appellant.   All  may  be
             argued."

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim for asylum is that her  father  died
    in January 2001 and she and  her  mother  believed  that  he  had  been
    poisoned by relatives who  wanted  his  land.   She  claimed  that  she
    inherited the land after his  death  although  her  father's  relatives
    carried on growing crops on it.  The relatives began to  threaten  her.
    She claims that  she  entered  a  relationship  and  suffered  domestic
    violence.  The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim on  the  basis
    that it does not engage the Refugee Convention.  The Respondent  raised
    credibility issues.

 4. The grounds seeking permission in this case are unnecessarily  detailed
    and verbose.  Although each ground is given a heading, pointing  to  an
    error of law, it is very difficult to understand exactly what is  being
    said.  The grounds contain great tracts of case law and evidence  which
    in my view are completely unnecessary as well as detailed criticism  of
    many points made by Judge Beg.

 5. I asked Miss Kiai if she could clarify and  summarise  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal for me.  She did so.

 6. Ground 1 is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  breached  the  fundamental
    principles of natural justice in taking points against the  credibility
    of the Appellant's account which had not been taken by  the  Respondent
    and without giving the Appellant any  notice  of  this.   Examples  are
    given of this.

 7. The second ground is that in rejecting the Appellant's  claim  to  have
    inherited her father's land the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  have
    regard to material considerations and/or failed to resolve  a  material
    conflict of evidence before it.  Ms  Kiai  explained  to  me  that  the
    expert evidence was that the Appellant could have in law inherited  the
    land.  This was not addressed at all by the Judge.

 8. The third ground is that the First-tier Tribunal failed to have  regard
    to material evidence, acted unfairly and reached  findings  which  were
    based upon no evidence in relying on the Appellant's delay in  claiming
    asylum as a factor adverse to her credibility.  It  is  also  submitted
    that  an  irrational  approach  was  adopted  to  the  risk  that   the
    Appellant's ex-partner would return to Nigeria.

 9.  The fourth is that  the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  material
    evidence in relation to effective protection  and  internal  relocation
    and erred in her approach to Article 8.  As I said  previously  a  vast
    amount of detail is given.

10.  The  reasons  for  the  decision  begin  at  paragraph   23   of   the
    determination.  Judge Beg noted the two grounds  for  claiming  asylum.
    Firstly the Appellant fears that if returned to  Nigeria  her  father's
    family will target her for the land that they want to take from her and
    secondly her former partner's family will  target  her  or  her  former
    partner may himself return to Nigeria and either  target  her  or  seek
    custody of the children.

11. Judge Beg went on at paragraph 25 to discuss the  Appellant's  evidence
    that she had attempted to contact her mother but the  telephone  number
    no longer works, finding that she had "attempted  to  distance  herself
    from her mother by falsely stating  that  she  had  not  been  able  to
    contact her and that her maternal uncle's  telephone  number  had  been
    changed".  She did not find it credible that relatives  would  threaten
    the Appellant and ask her to sign over the land to them, her reason for
    this being that they would have been well aware that she would  not  be
    able to do that without the title deeds. She noted that  the  Appellant
    had failed to provide specific documentary evidence to confirm that she
    inherited her father's land.

12. The position of Ms Kiai is that in  making  these  findings  the  Judge
    ignored the evidence of  the  expert  that  the  Appellant  could  have
    inherited the land and she had no basis on which to find that the title
    deeds would have been required to sign the land  over  to  the  family.
    She submitted too that in founding on the Appellant's delay in claiming
    asylum, the Judge indulged in speculation, in particular  at  paragraph
    27 when she said that Mr Amusa who gave evidence before her would  have
    been aware of the concept of asylum and would have made enquiries about
    the possibility of the Appellant making a claim  for  asylum  once  she
    told him that she feared returning to Nigeria.  Ms Kiai submitted  that
    this speculation continues in paragraph 28.

13. There was also, before the Judge, evidence of a complaint that had been
    made to the OISC about the Immigration Advisory Organisation  who  were
    advising the Appellant and her abusive former partner in an application
    for further leave to remain made in January 2010.  This shows that  the
    Appellant made an application to regularise her status and that she was
    the victim of seriously negligent advice  and  representation  at  that
    time.  Despite this, Judge Beg said at paragraph 28 that the  Appellant
    was not making a genuine application to regularise her  stay  and  that
    she was not going through the proper channels for applying to the  Home
    Office.  Ms  Kiai's  submission  is  that  these  findings  are  wholly
    unsustainable in the light  of  the  OISC  evidence.   Furthermore  the
    Respondent had never made any claim that a proper application  had  not
    been made.  Judge Beg indeed went so far in paragraph 28 to  find  that
    the Appellant was well aware that she was paying significant  funds  to
    fraudulently obtain leave to remain instead of going through the proper
    channels of applying to the Home Office.

14. With regard to Article 8 it is submitted that there is  no  finding  at
    all as to whether the Appellant's children enjoy family life with their
    father and Judge Beg failed to properly deal with  the  effect  on  the
    children of being removed to Nigeria with their mother.  She failed  to
    take account of the report from the independent social worker  and  did
    not properly assess the best interests of the children.

15. With regard to Article 8 the Judge said that the  Appellant's  children
    are young enough to adapt to life with their mother in Nigeria but with
    regard to their fortnightly supervised contact with  their  father  she
    found that they could keep in contact with them from  Nigeria  as  they
    get older.  The children at the date of the hearing were only 6 and  4.
    The Judge did not consider how this contact could,  at  this  point  in
    time, be maintained given the young ages of the  children  particularly
    the younger one.

16. It was submitted that the issue of the Title Deeds was never raised  at
    the hearing.  The evidence of the expert Victoria Nwogu was that in the
    Yoruba community land would be inherited  by  a  child  rather  than  a
    widow.  Rather than rely on this the Judge relied on her own view, that
    expressed in the refusal letter, that the land would have passed to her
    mother upon her father's death.  No challenge  had  been  made  to  the
    expert report by the Respondent.  No consideration  was  given  of  the
    fact that her ex-husband is subject to a restraining order.   She  thus
    has some protection from him in the UK which  she  would  not  have  in
    Nigeria.  He has no leave to remain in the UK.  There must therefore be
    a reasonable degree of likelihood that he will be removed to Nigeria in
    the foreseeable future.

17. At paragraph 33 of the determination there is  no  indication  that  he
    intends to return to Nigeria and no credible evidence that she would be
    targeted by him if he returned to Nigeria.  It is difficult to see  how
    that can be said when he is subject to a restraining order.

My Findings

18. It is very difficult  to  explain  exactly  what  is  wrong  with  this
    determination because on the face of it it appears that the Judge dealt
    with the evidence before her in  the  proper  way,  taking  account  of
    relevant factors and reached decisions that were open  to  her  on  the
    evidence before her  for  the  reasons  given.   On  closer  inspection
    however it seems to me that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  all  the
    evidence in the round. She appears to have decided that  the  Appellant
    was not credible then looked at some of the evidence with that in mind.
    There is a great deal of speculation and points were taken against  the
    Appellant that had not been raised by the Respondent and were  not  put
    to her  at  the  hearing.  In  assessing  credibility  the  Judge  made
    assumptions that were not supported by the evidence  before  her.   The
    Secretary of State had not questioned the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
    been a victim of domestic violence.  Clearly the findings of the  Judge
    in relation to the children were made on the basis that  their  father,
    with whom they have only supervised contact on a fortnightly basis  for
    two hours at a time, is going to be remaining in the UK but she did not
    consider how contact with him can be maintained and there is some merit
    in the submission that she did not properly consider the best interests
    of the children, particularly given their age, or the consequences  for
    them of their father being removed to Nigeria. As is submitted  in  the
    grounds there are findings that are not supported by reasons  based  on
    evidence and although the Judge said she had taken  the  expert  report
    into account it is arguable that she either misinterpreted it or  chose
    to ignore the information in it. It may be that at the end of the day a
    different Judge will reach the same conclusion but I  find  that  there
    are material errors of law in the determination and  in  light  of  the
    fact that I am not satisfied that the Appellant had her appeal properly
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal, it seems to me that it should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a  Judge
    other than Judge Beg.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
law and is set aside with no none of the findings  of  fact  preserved.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date: 19th February 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

