
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03577/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 September 2014                            |On 10 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                TA (LEBANON)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jane Elliott-Kelly, Counsel, instructed by
                    Harding Mitchell Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as
    otherwise requiring international protection.

 2. The appellant is a Palestinian  national,  although  he  was  born  and
    raised in Lebanon.  He came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student  in
    November 2010, and claimed asylum on 13 October 2011.  The basis of his
    claim was that he had a well-founded fear of persecution in Lebanon  at
    the hands of Hezbollah and/or Hamas.

 3. The claim was rejected by the respondent,  and  the  appellant's  first
    appeal against the refusal of asylum was dismissed by Judge Abebrese on
    25 April 2012.  He found the appellant not to  be  credible.   However,
    the appellant successfully  challenged  Judge  Abebrese's  decision  on
    error of law grounds.  In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal
    Judge Peter Lane observed  that  it  was  highly  arguable  that  Judge
    Abebrese had failed to make to findings on core issues of the claim and
    had applied the wrong standard of proof.  With  the  agreement  of  the
    parties, Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic found an error of  law,  such  that
    the determination should be set aside, and remitted the appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full re-hearing de novo.

 4. The appeal was listed for hearing before Judge Andonian in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House on 1 July 2013.  Judge Andonian  received
    oral evidence from the appellant and  from  a  relative,  M  E.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 16  July  2013  Judge  Andonian  gave  his
    reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  asylum  claim   on   adverse
    credibility grounds.

 5. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and the error of law hearing took place  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gleeson.  At the outset of  the  hearing,  Judge  Gleeson  queried  the
    destination cited on the removal directions.  Whereas the appellant had
    been born in Lebanon, the removal directions said the  destination  for
    removal  was  the  Palestinian  authority.   Judge  Gleeson  apparently
    indicated that  she  considered  this  rendered  the  removal  decision
    unlawful.   The  Presenting  Officer   left   the   hearing   to   take
    instructions, and on return announced that the removal  decision  would
    be withdrawn.

 6. The Secretary of State did not just withdraw the removal decision,  but
    also the decision refusing the appellant's asylum claim.  She issued  a
    fresh Reasons for Refusal Letter rejecting the appellant's asylum claim
    on 21 May 2014.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant's appeal against the fresh refusal of  his  asylum  claim
    came before Judge Aujla sitting  at  Taylor  House  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 2 July 2014.  Mr Palmer of Counsel appeared  on  behalf  of
    the appellant, and Mr Carroll of Counsel  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  The judge received oral evidence from the  appellant.   In
    his  closing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Caroll
    submitted that the  determination  of  Judge  Andonian  should  be  his
    starting point under Devaseelan.  The evidence presented to him was the
    same as that presented before Judge Andonian, and there was  no  reason
    to re-open the findings that he had made.  The respondent's decision to
    withdraw the original decision letter and to issue a fresh decision did
    not affect the findings made by Judge Andonian.

 8. Mr Palmer in reply submitted it was unsafe to rely on the determination
    of Judge Andonian as permission to appeal  against  this  determination
    had been granted.  The decision on which his  determination  was  based
    had gone, and his determination should  therefore  not  be  treated  as
    valid.  The respondent had not relied on the findings of Judge Andonian
    in the fresh refusal letter.

 9. The judge's findings are set  out  in  paragraphs  33  onwards  of  his
    subsequent determination.  He resolved the issue of the status  of  the
    determination of Judge Andonian in favour of Mr Caroll.  He agreed with
    Mr Carroll's arguments, and rejected those of Mr Palmer.  At  paragraph
    36, he said the appellant had provided  no  new  credible  evidence  to
    displace the findings made by Judge Andonian.   His  determination  was
    not set aside, and therefore it stood.  If the appellant had wanted the
    determination set aside, he had the option of opposing the respondent's
    decision to withdraw the first decision before Judge Gleeson, or  later
    judicially reviewing the same to force the Upper Tribunal to  determine
    the substantive appeal against the  determination  of  Judge  Andonian.
    Returning to the  comments  made  by  Judge  Chohan  in  his  grant  of
    permission, even if some of the findings made by Judge  Andonian  could
    be regarded as unsustainable on account of the  country  material,  the
    adverse credibility findings that he made against the appellant on  the
    basis of the factual matrix put before him by the appellant  could  not
    be undermined by the country material.  To  that  extent  therefore  he
    parted company with Judge Chohan.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

10. On 12 August 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever granted permission to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         The judge took the view that as the decision of Judge Andonian  had
         not been set aside that he was entitled to use  that  determination
         as his starting point.  It could be argued that the decision by the
         respondent  to  withdraw  the  refusal  letter  and   the   removal
         directions to the Palestinian authority effectively  brought  those
         proceedings to a close and the issue of a new  refusal  letter  and
         new removal directions to a different country brought about a fresh
         case essentially.  In those circumstances it  is  argued  that  the
         decision  of  Judge  Andonian  had  no  relevance  to   these   new
         proceedings.  The only relevance may have been whether or  not  the
         appellant provided a consistency of evidence  as  between  the  two
         hearings.  It can also be argued that it would be inherently  risky
         even to rely upon the earlier decision as a starting point  if  the
         judge was making findings of fact, credibility and risk  on  return
         to a different country.  Whilst the position and indeed the  rather
         regrettable history of this  case  is  not  entirely  clear  it  is
         arguable that the judge may have made a  procedural  error  of  law
         even though the case appears at all times to be largely credibility
         based.

The Error of Law Hearing

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Deller informed me that he agreed with the
    error of law challenge made by the appellant.  After reviewing some  of
    the key documents, and  receiving  further  submissions  from  both  Mr
    Deller and Ms Elliott-Kelly, I was satisfied that an error of  law  was
    made out, and that I should remit the appeal for a de novo  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  My reasons for so finding are set out below.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

12. The concession made by Mr Deller was not determinative of the  question
    which I had to decide, and I was  initially  reluctant  to  accept  his
    concession.  For it is by no means obvious that the judge has  made  an
    error of law in circumstances where  (a)  the  determination  of  Judge
    Andonian has not been set aside on error of law  grounds  and  (b)  the
    judge has given reasons as to why he does not regard the  determination
    of Judge Andonian as being unsafe.

13. But a case such as this turns on its own facts.  While it may not be  a
    general Rule that Devaseelan should be disapplied  where  the  previous
    determination has been the  subject  of  an  unresolved  error  of  law
    challenge, I am persuaded on the facts of this particular case that the
    judge was wrong to treat  Judge  Andonian's  determination  as  a  safe
    starting point.  Furthermore, the judge  did  not  in  the  event  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting Mr Palmer's submissions to the contrary,
    having regard to the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal and having
    regard to the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  given  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan on all grounds raised.

14. Judge Aujla was entering into dangerous and  undesirable  territory  in
    effectively challenging Judge Chohan's grant  of  permission.   He  was
    performing the reviewing function that would  have  been  performed  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson if the error of law hearing before her had
    not been aborted.  On that  ground  alone,  it  was  procedurally  more
    appropriate for the judge not to treat Judge  Andonian's  determination
    as his starting point.

15. In addition, as set out in paragraph 9 of Ms  Elliott-Kelly's  skeleton
    argument, the judge did not  in  any  event  engage  with  all  of  the
    original grounds of appeal.  Judge Chohan only commented on  the  first
    ground, which was that Judge Andonian had failed to  consider  properly
    the situation in Lebanon and the standing  of  Hezbollah.   The  second
    ground was that the judge's findings on credibility were so extreme  as
    to be irrational; and the third ground was  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider properly the corroborative value of the evidence given by M E.



16. In conclusion, I find that it was a  procedural  irregularity  for  the
    judge to treat the adverse credibility findings of  Judge  Andonian  as
    his starting point.  He could take into account the evidence  that  was
    put before Judge Andonian, and he could compare it  with  the  evidence
    that was put before him.  But it was procedurally unfair for the  judge
    to proceed on the premise that the adverse credibility findings made by
    Judge Andonian could be safely adopted as his starting point.





Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that it should be set aside and  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
Taylor House for a de  novo  hearing  before  any  judge  apart  from  Judge
Abebrese, Judge Andonian and Judge Aujla.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

