
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03535/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Determination promulgated
On 25 September 2014   On 11 December 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mihert Welday
                          (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dixon of Counsel instructed by Blavo & Co.


                         DETERMINATION: ERROR OF LAW

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M R
    Oliver promulgated on 28 July 2014, allowing Ms Welday's appeal against
    the Secretary of State's decision dated 12 May 2014 to remove her  from
    the UK following the refusal of her application for asylum.

 2. Although before me the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Welday is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    Ms  Welday  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellant claims to be a national of Eritrea, born on 5 April 1992.
    Her  nationality  is  disputed.  Her  claimed  immigration  history  is
    summarised at paragraphs 9-10 of the Respondent's 'reasons for  refusal
    letter' ('RFRL') dated 9 May 2014: it is  unnecessary  to  repeat  that
    history here - I make reference to it as is incidental for the purposes
    of this document. For the moment, suffice to  say  that  the  Appellant
    claimed asylum on 22 November 2013 based  on  fears  arising  from  her
    religion (Pentecostal Christian).

 4. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in the RFRL of 9 May 2014. A Notice of Immigration  Decision  dated  12
    May 2014 was served in consequence.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

 6. The Appellant's appeal was  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    reasons set out in the determination promulgated on 28 July 2014.

 7. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on 12  August  2014.
    In granting permission Judge Cox said, in part, "Brevity is  a  virtue,
    so long  as  material  issues  between  the  parties  are  covered  and
    resolved. I do not think the Judge  adequately  achieves  that  in  his
    findings at [39] and [40]. There is arguably a failure to give adequate
    reasons...".

 8. The Appellant filed a  Rule  24  response  resisting  the  Respondent's
    challenge on 27 August 2014.

Error of Law

 9. As noted above, the Appellant's claimed Eritrean nationality  has  been
    disputed by the Respondent.

10. In this context  the  Respondent  placed  particular  reliance  upon  a
    'Linguistic Analysis Report' prepared by Sprakab  (Respondent's  bundle
    annex C). The conclusion of the report, stated to  be  reached  with  a
    "very high" degree of certainty, was that  the  Appellant's  linguistic
    background was assessed to be 'Ethiopia'. The  Report  also  commented,
    amongst other things, that the Appellant's linguistic level in  Amharic
    was 'Native level', that  "Her  speech  did  not  display  features  of
    Tigrinya which is commonly occurring among  Eritreans",  and  similarly
    that she had "mastered Amharic to the level of a mother tongue speaker.
    Her speech did not display any  features  of  Tigrinya,  which  can  be
    expected among Eritreans".

11. At paragraph 21 of the RFRL  the  Respondent  inaccurately  stated  the
    conclusion of the report  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  linguistic
    background in these terms: "The results assessed you to be with a  very
    high degree of certainty to be  from  Ethiopia".  The  report  did  not
    express any such conclusion  or  otherwise  make  any  assertion  about
    nationality or origin. It confined itself, appropriately, to linguistic
    background. Whilst this may in some instances coincide with nationality
    and/or origin, it is a different concept and not  inevitably  congruent
    with, or probative of, nationality.

12. Be that as it may, and in my judgement for  present  purposes  of  more
    significance, at paragraph 22 of  the  RFRL  the  Respondent  made  the
    following observation:

"It would be expected that as the daughter of Eritrean  parents  -  even  if
    brought up in Ethiopia, your speech  would  display  some  features  of
    Tigrinya."

13. The Respondent also made the  following  more  general  observation  at
    paragraph 17 of the RFRL - which is in accordance with the  observation
    I have made at paragraph 10 above:

"Although it is noted that background evidence states that Amharic  is  also
    spoken in Eritrea, it follows that, it is accepted that no findings can
    be made regarding your nationality based solely upon the languages that
    you speak. However, this information must be considered in  the  round;
    along with all other credibility points  and  material  facts  of  your
    case."

14. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to demonstrate
    in his reasons that he has engaged  adequately  with  the  Respondent's
    case on an issue that is a key - and indeed near determinative -  issue
    in the appeal.

15. Paragraph 39 of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is,
    in part, in the following terms:

"The appellant remained consistent  throughout  in  her  story  and  it  was
    hardly surprising that someone who spent very little  time  in  Eritrea
    even cumulatively and grew up largely outside Eritrea would speak in  a
    way not typical of  Eritrea.  ...  The  findings  as  to  language  are
    problematic. It was  specifically  accepted  in  the  refusal  that  no
    findings could be made  regarding  the  appellant's  nationality  based
    solely on the language that she spoke. The refusal went on, however, to
    state that the results of the language analysis "assess you to be  with
    a very high degree of certainty from Ethiopia". This is inconsistent. I
    have to make an assessment which in the absence of documentary evidence
    is largely based on credibility. I find her to be credible and that she
    has shown to the lesser standard that she may very well be of  Eritrean
    nationality."

16. The Judge was correct to identify that there was an  inconsistency,  or
    tension, in the Respondent's reasons -  an  inconsistency  that  in  my
    judgement arises because of the error in paragraph 21 of the  RFRL,  to
    which  I  have  referred  at  paragraph  11  above.  However,  such  an
    inconsistency in the Respondent's reasoning did not in itself undermine
    the validity and contents of the Sprakab report itself.  Nor  does  the
    inconsistency affect the coherence of  the  Respondent's  reasoning  at
    paragraph 22 of the RFRL (quoted at  paragraph  12  above).  The  Judge
    quite simply fails to engage with this latter point. The reader of  the
    determination is left with no understanding of why the Judge considered
    the Appellant demonstrated  no  trace  of  exposure  to  Tigrinya.  The
    Respondent's case in this regard  was  not  as  limited  as  the  Judge
    suggests: this was not merely a case  of  speaking  in  a  manner  'not
    typical of Eritrea', but there being displayed no features of  Tigrinya
    notwithstanding the Appellant's claim to have  been  born  to  Eritrean
    parents in Eritrea, and though departing at the age of 1  for  Ethiopia
    to have also spent about one year there  when  about  8  years  old  in
    2000/2001, and to have spent some further time there in 2009/2010.

17. I note that the Appellant has suggested some reasons as to why she does
    not speak Tigrinya or display any characteristics of Tigrinyan  speech:
    note for example her account of her history set out  at  paragraphs  27
    and 35 of the determination, and the matters advanced at paragraph  33.
    Mr Dixon sought to emphasise such possible explanations before me.

18. The difficulty in that regard is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    does  not  in  his  reasons  engage  with  such  matters  or  otherwise
    demonstrate his reasoning process.  It  is  not  sufficient  simply  to
    state, as the Judge in effect does, that he believed the  Appellant.  A
    conclusion on credibility necessarily had to be informed by an analysis
    of the evidence and the competing arguments of  the  parties.  Such  an
    analysis is missing in respect of the implications of the  contents  of
    the Sprakab report.

19. I have reminded myself of what has been said in Budhathoki (reasons for
    decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC):

"It  is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for   First-tier   Tribunal
    judgments to rehearse every detail or issue  raised  in  a  case.  This
    leads to judgments becoming overly long  and  confused  and  is  not  a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary for
    judges to identify and  resolve  key  conflicts  in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can
    understand why they have won or lost."

20. Further I note  the  observation  by  the  Tribunal  comprised  of  the
    President Mr Justice McCloskey and Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  in  MK
    (duty to give reasons) [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)  at  paragraph  11  "The
    duty [to give reasons] is contextually sensitive."

21. The context in this case was  a  core  issue  of  dispute  between  the
    parties that went  to  the  heart  of  the  Appellant's  claim.  In  my
    judgement the reasons do not explain why the Respondent's argument  was
    rejected.

22. I find that the Judge erred in law accordingly, on  a  material  matter
    that went to the heart of the Appellant's claim and credibility.

23. The effect of the error is that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    must be set aside.  In  such  circumstances  it  is  not  necessary  to
    consider the further grounds of challenge advanced by the Respondent.

24. A rehearing of the appeal with all issues at large is required, and the
    appropriate forum is the First-tier Tribunal. It is  not  necessary  to
    make any specific Directions for the further  conduct  of  the  appeal.
    Both parties are at liberty to file any  further  evidence  upon  which
    they seek to rely up to 7 days prior to the re-listed hearing.


Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained an error of law
    and is set aside.

26. The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 December 2014
