
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03388/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2014                             |On 9 December 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    J.a.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A White, instructed by Messrs J.M. Wilson

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction is made pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of documents or information relating to the proceedings  or
    any other matter likely to lead members of the public  to  be  able  to
    identify the claimant or any members of his family.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department is the appellant  before
    the Upper Tribunal, and JA is referred to herein as the claimant.

 3. The claimant entered the United Kingdom on 27 December 2011 and made an
    application for asylum on the same date.  The Secretary  of  State  did
    not determine this application until 8 May 2014, on which date  it  was
    refused. On the following day the Secretary of State made a decision to
    remove the claimant from the United Kingdom, a decision  against  which
    the claimant brought an appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson allowed this appeal on Refugee  Convention
    grounds in a decision of 31 July 2014.

 4. The claimant's case before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  in  substance
    that he is a Sudanese national of non-Arab ethnicity  and  that,  as  a
    consequence, he would be at risk of being  persecuted  if  returned  to
    Sudan.  The First-tier Tribunal accepted this was  so  and  it  is  the
    reasoning underpinning such acceptance that  forms  the  basis  of  the
    Secretary of State's challenge before the Upper Tribunal. Permission to
    bring such challenge was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Reid  in  a
    decision of 20 August 2014.

 5. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal can  be  summarised  in  the
    following terms:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself in law by reversing  the
         burden of proof in relation to the claimant's ethnicity, so  as  to
         place such burden on the Secretary of State.

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in requiring the Secretary  of
         State to put forward  a  specific  alternative  to  the  claimant's
         assertion as to his ethnicity;

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal's conclusion in relation to the  claimant's
         ethnicity is irrational, there being no evidence before the  First-
         tier Tribunal to support its findings.

 6. It was accepted by the Secretary of State that  the  claimant  is  from
    Sudan. The issue in dispute before the First-tier Tribunal was  whether
    the claimant is of non-Arab ethnicity.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal provided eight paragraphs of reasoning for  its
    conclusion on this issue.  The focus of the Secretary of State's  first
    ground  relates  to  the  reasoning  found  in  paragraph  26  of   the
    determination[1]:

         "The  respondent  does  not  provide  any  alternative  reason  for
         concluding that [JA] is not a  'non-Arab':  the  respondent  simply
         relies on the burden of proof being on the appellant and concluding
         that it is not established that he is non-Arab.  It is accurate  of
         course for the appellant to have to prove the facts of his case  to
         the lower standard and if he does not then his claim  is  not  made
         out.  But the fact there is no evidence of a  specific  alternative
         proposed by the respondent is a factor to consider  when  assessing
         whether [JA] has discharged the burden on him.  Part of the  reason
         given by [JA] as to why he is  African  is  his  appearance  (Q16).
         This is not disputed by the respondent.  Another reason  in  answer
         to the same question at interview is 'Where we resided, an area  in
         Darfur called Hay-Zabita'.  Again  this  is  not  disputed  by  the
         respondent."

 8. It is said in the grounds, and maintained by Mr Smart before  me,  that
    the terms of paragraph 26 are demonstrative of the Tribunal placing the
    burden of proof  on  the  Secretary  of  State  on  the  issue  of  the
    claimant's ethnicity. In  my  conclusion  this  submission  is  plainly
    misconceived.

 9. The Tribunal repeatedly directs  itself  throughout  the  determination
    that the claimant bears the burden of proving his case,  including  his
    ethnicity (as to which see for example  paragraphs  9,  22  [under  the
    heading 'The Law'], 23, 26, 27, and 32 of the determination).  What  is
    said in paragraph 26 of the determination is  not  a  reversal  of  the
    burden of proof, but an identification of the fact  that  although  the
    Secretary of State disputes the claimant's evidence  and  although  the
    burden is on the claimant to make out his case that he is not  of  Arab
    ethnicity, the Secretary of State does not proffer any  alternative  to
    the claimant's assertions in this regard.

10. The Tribunal was not here requiring the Secretary of State  to  proffer
    an alternative, but merely highlighting the fact  that  no  alternative
    had been proffered.  This is an entirely accurate statement of the case
    as it was put before the First-tier Tribunal and in my  conclusion  the
    Tribunal were perfectly entitled to treat the absence of an alternative
    suggestion by the Secretary of State as to the claimant's ethnicity  as
    a relevant matter when coming to its  conclusions  on  this  issue.  I,
    therefore, reject the assertions made in the Secretary of State's first
    two grounds.

11. Turning then to the final ground, i.e. that the  Tribunal's  conclusion
    on the issue of the claimant's ethnicity is irrational given  that,  on
    the claimant's own account, he is unable to say with  confidence  which
    ethnicity he is.

12. It is said by Mr Smart that the Tribunal reached its conclusion "on  no
    evidence at all".  This  though  is  simply  inaccurate.  The  Tribunal
    provided the following rationale in its  determination  for  concluding
    that the claimant had made out his case to the  relevant  low  standard
    that he is of non-Arab ethnicity;

      i) The claimant's own  evidence  has  consistently  been  that  he  is
         African, although he does not know what tribe he belongs to because
         of the circumstances in which he grew up, including  the  death  of
         his parents when he was young [25];

     ii) The claimant asserted that he  is  African  in  his  appearance,  a
         matter which has not been disputed by the Secretary of State [26];

    iii) The claimant identifies himself as non-Arab because of the area  in
         Darfur where he resided [26];

     iv) The claimant  has  submitted  all  the  evidence  at  his  disposal
         including memories of wedding ceremonies connected  to  his  ethnic
         origin [27];

      v) Although there were some inconsistencies in the claimant's  account
         of the circumstances which pertained in Sudan, his evidence in this
         regard is credible and truthful [28 - 32]

13. I find that these are lawfully adequate and sufficient reasons for  the
    conclusion reached by the First-tier Tribunal that the claimant is  not
    of Arab ethnicity. It was not necessary for the  purposes  of  deciding
    the appeal for the Tribunal to  conclude  exactly  what  ethnicity  the
    claimant is, it  sufficed  that  he  is  not  of  Arab  ethnicity.  The
    Tribunal's conclusion in this regard is  not  irrational  or  perverse,
    given the evidence (including the claimant's  own  evidence)  that  was
    before it. The  Secretary  of  State's  third  ground  amounts,  in  my
    conclusion, to no more than a disagreement with the Tribunal's findings
    and does not disclose an error of law capable of affecting the  outcome
    of the appeal.

14. Given the Tribunal's conclusions as to the claimant's ethnicity, it was
    plainly open it to allow the  appeal  following  the  country  guidance
    decision of AA [2009] UKAIT 00056, which both parties agreed was to  be
    followed.

15. For these reasons I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    does not disclose an error of law capable of affecting the  outcome  of
    the appeal and, consequently, it is to remain standing.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 26 November 2014





                           -----------------------
[1] This paragraph being anonymised only for the purposes of the Upper
Tribunal's recitation of it.

