
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03850/2015
                                                               AA/03820/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Thursday 5 May 2016                       |On Thursday 12 May 2016       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MRS C W
                                  MISS N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sadiq, Legal Representative

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by the First-tier Tribunal.   However,  this
is a protection based  claim  and  also  involves  a  young  child.   It  is
therefore appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the  First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in  this  particular  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
         appeals against a decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ennals
         promulgated on 6 May 2015 ("the Decision") allowing the Appellants'
         appeals on asylum grounds.

      2. The Appellants are a Sri Lankan Sinhalese mother and daughter.  The
         core of their claim for asylum arises from  the  First  Appellant's
         husband  (and  Second  Appellant's  father's)  assistance  to  LTTE
         members who were accused of carrying out a bombing in Sri Lanka  in
         2008.  The Respondent does not dispute that the  bombing  on  which
         the Appellants rely did occur although does  not  accept  that  the
         First Appellant's husband was involved.

      3. The First Appellant says that she was arrested  by  the  police  in
         April 2008.  She was staying with her mother and  daughter  at  her
         husband's house.  She says that her husband was  renting  rooms  to
         three Tamil  men.   They  were  arrested  in  connection  with  the
         bombing.  She says her husband  also  was  arrested  for  providing
         assistance to them.  As a result, police  searched  the  house  and
         found materials linked to the bombing and she was arrested on  that
         account.

      4. The First Appellant says that she was tortured and raped during her
         detention which endured for fourteen months until her relatives had
         her released on payment of a bribe. Thereafter, she remained at the
         house of an agent for two months  before  arriving  in  the  UK  in
         August 2009 as a visitor.  There was some discrepancy  between  the
         dates given for her arrival.  She is said to  have  stated  on  one
         occasion that she arrived in 2007 which  would  have  preceded  the
         bombing in 2008.  She did not claim asylum until January 2012.  The
         Respondent, whilst accepting that she had been  broadly  consistent
         in the core and detail of her account held  against  her  both  the
         difference in dates of arrival and the delay in claiming asylum.

      5. The Respondent takes issue with two findings made by the Judge when
         finding the First  Appellant  credible  and  says  that  those  are
         material because the Judge has failed to give adequate reasons  for
         finding her account credible.  Permission to appeal was granted  to
         the Respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Tiffen on 2 June  2015.
         This appeal comes before  me  to  determine  whether  the  Decision
         contains a material error of law and, if so, to  either  remit  the
         appeals or re-make the Decision.

    Submissions

      6. Mr McVeety relied on the Secretary of State's grounds as set out in
         the application for permission to appeal.   The  two  issues  which
         arise are the Judge's findings in  relation  to  the  date  of  the
         passport on which the Appellants travelled and how they managed  to
         leave Sri Lanka  and  the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
         scarring which it is accepted the First Appellant  has  on  various
         parts of her body.

      7. Mr McVeety submitted that, the Judge having directed himself to the
         difficulties with the First Appellant's account in relation to  the
         first issue needed to make a  finding  about  why,  notwithstanding
         this difficulty, he accepted that the First Appellant was credible.
          The Appellants did not provide medical evidence  about  the  First
         Appellant's scarring in the form of a medical report.   Mr  McVeety
         submitted that it was not therefore open  for  the  Judge  to  make
         findings about how the scarring was caused.

      8. I raised with Mr McVeety in the course of submissions whether there
         was an  error  in  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  background
         material and the application of the country guidance case of GJ and
         others (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319
         (IAC) ("GJ") particularly when read in conjunction with MP  and  NT
         (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 829 ("MP (Sri Lanka)").  The Judge had regard at  [27]  to
         the OGN of July 2013 but appeared not to have  had  regard  to  the
         later COIR report of 2014 (which was in  the  Appellant's  bundle).
         Mr McVeety very fairly accepted however that this was not  a  point
         taken in the Respondent's grounds and did not seek  to  pursue  it.
         He submitted though that this might be relevant in the event that I
         found the errors of law for which the Respondent contends.

      9. Mr Sadiq urged me to find either that there is no error of  law  or
         that any error is not material.  He pointed to the section  of  the
         Decision setting out the Judge's consideration of the evidence  and
         his  findings.  He  submitted  that  the  Respondent's   criticisms
         amounted to cherry picking of two  elements  only  of  the  overall
         findings and, read in context, the finding in the Decision that the
         First Appellant is credible were open to the Judge.

     10.  In  relation  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  background
         material, Mr Sadiq submitted  that  this  was  not  raised  in  the
         Respondent's grounds and that, in any event,  there  was  no  error
         when [27] to [29] of the Decision were read as a whole.

    The Decision

     11. The section of the Decision dealing with the Judge's findings is at
         [18] to [26] of the Decision.  As the Judge  rightly  records,  the
         main challenges to the First Appellant's credibility raised by  the
         Respondent in the refusal letter were the differences  in  date  of
         arrival and the delay in seeking asylum.  The  Respondent  accepted
         that the First Appellant's account was  consistent.   I  note  also
         from the Decision that there is a difference in the date  given  at
         [9] for the marathon of 4 June 2008 and  the  date  given  for  the
         arrest of April 2008 but I think it likely that this arises from  a
         transposition of the date in the Respondent's refusal letter  which
         would appear to be an error.   The  Appellant's  statement  clearly
         stated that the date was 6 April 2008 and not 4 June 2008.

     12. In relation to the passport issue, the submissions and evidence  in
         that regard are set out at [19] to [21] of the Decision as follows:-



             "[19]     Mr Dillon argued that the CID would not have allowed
             the appellant's husband to call her, which would warn  her  of
             the danger.  Her  response  to  question  100  in  her  asylum
             interview made clear that he spoke  quietly  to  her,  and  it
             sounded as though the  phone  was  snatched  from  him.   That
             implies that the call was not sanctioned  by  those  detaining
             him.  Mr Dillon also  questioned  if  she  had  been  released
             without  restrictions  why  the  authorities  would  still  be
             interested in her?  I will consider that point later on.

             [20]      Her evidence was that her  uncle,  who  had  paid  a
             bribe, met her with an agent, who then arranged everything  to
             do with  her  departure.   Mr  Dillon  pointed  out  that  her
             passport, which it was said the agent had obtained, had a date
             of issue of 2005, and so could not have been obtained  by  the
             agent at that time.  That is perplexing.  It could be that  if
             the agent was obtaining a passport by corrupt means, he  would
             ensure an issue date far enough in the past to avoid  alerting
             anyone looking at the document.  It could perhaps be that  the
             passport was in fact hers, and had been obtained  without  her
             knowledge, or memory, some years previously. It could also  be
             that this point undermines the whole of her story.

             [21]       Mr  Dillon  also  makes  the  point  that  if   the
             authorities had been interested in her, firstly they would not
             have released her, even with a bribe, and that she would  then
             have been put on a 'watch  list'  at  the  airport  of  wanted
             people.  She  had  left  the  airport  without  problem.   The
             appellant could not answer this point as she consistently said
             that the agent had arranged everything."

     13. The Judge addresses the issue of the delay in the Appellants' claim
         for asylum at [22] of the Decision.  He did  not  accept  that  the
         delay  in  making  the  claim   damaged   the   First   Appellant's
         credibility.  There is no challenge to this aspect of the Decision.
          At [23] he deals with evidence from friends in  the  UK.   As  the
         Judge notes, however, those persons did not  give  evidence  before
         him  and  in  any  event  could  not  assist  in  relation  to  the
         credibility of the First Appellant's account save that  they  could
         support the consistency of the core of it (which was not challenged
         in any event).

     14. At [24] to [25] of the Decision,  the  Judge  turns  to  the  other
         evidence relied  upon  by  the  Appellants  including  the  medical
         evidence.  This is the basis of  the  second  of  the  Respondent's
         challenges. Having noted some evidence from the  First  Appellant's
         GP that she was taking sleeping tablets (which  he  records  as  of
         limited value in assessing credibility but not  inconsistent),  the
         Judge goes on to deal with the scarring issue as follows:-

             "[24]     Of more use is a report dated 26 January  2012  with
             someone  described  as  an  asylum  nurse  practitioner.   The
             nurse's name is not clear, and there is no information  as  to
             her qualifications.  The form refers to extensive scarring  to
             her chest and back, and also her arms and  legs,  said  to  be
             consistent with reports.  Regrettably no details are given  of
             the 'reports' which the scars are said to be consistent  with,
             and there is no indication of whether the term is used in  the
             way defined in the Istanbul Protocol.  There  is  no  detailed
             medical report available.

             [25]      However I was handed by Mr Dillon the originals of a
             collection  of  photographs  taken  of  the   scars   on   the
             appellant's  body.   These  show  very  significant  scarring,
             especially on the appellant's back,  but  also  on  her  arms,
             shoulders, chest and ankles.  I am in no position to determine
             accurately the cause of these scars, but I cannot conceive  of
             how they could have been caused other than by the  intentional
             infliction of  severe  violence.   I  find  these  photographs
             particularly significant.  There is no suggestion of any other
             cause of the scars than  that  contained  in  the  appellant's
             account of events."

     15. The Judge then  reaches  the  following  conclusion  based  on  his
         findings:-

             "I have considered all  the  evidence  before  me.   I  cannot
             explain why the appellant was allowed to  leave  the  country,
             nor the question  of  the  date  of  issue  of  the  passport.
             However I am satisfied to the lower standard of proof that her
             account is true and that she was indeed detained and  tortured
             by the Sri Lankan authorities as she  claims.   Indeed,  I  am
             satisfied on the balance of probabilities, although that is  a
             higher standard than required."

    My decision and reasons

     16. I am satisfied that the Decision contains errors of  law  and  that
         the errors are material.  I accept Mr Sadiq's submission  that  the
         Judge did not go so far as to reach a finding that the cause of the
         scarring was the torture which the First Appellant claimed to  have
         suffered.  However, it does appear on the face of the Decision that
         the Judge has placed heavy reliance on the photographic evidence of
         the scarring without the benefit of any further medical evidence as
         to the nature and possible alternative causes of that scarring. The
         Judge describes  the  photographs  as  "particularly  significant".
         However, although they  are  capable  of  showing  that  the  First
         Appellant had suffered injuries and that at least some of those (ie
         on her back) must have been caused by another  person,  they  could
         not be significant without further  evidence.   I  agree  with  the
         Respondent that the finding that the photographs  were  significant
         corroboration of the First Appellant's account without more was not
         open to him on the evidence.

     17. Further, and in any event, there is also a material error of law in
         relation to the issue of how the Appellants were able to leave  Sri
         Lanka and, more crucially, whether they were  of  interest  to  the
         authorities at that stage  or  would  be  of  interest  on  return.
         Although  the  Judge  says  at  [19]  that  he  will  consider  the
         submission later in relation to why the  authorities  would  remain
         interested  in  the  First  Appellant  given  her  release  without
         restrictions and the fact that she was  able  to  leave  Sri  Lanka
         without challenge, he does not address that in his findings on  the
         evidence.

     18. I would not  have  found  an  error  in  relation  to  the  Judge's
         consideration of the passport based on its date.  There may be  any
         number of reasons why a false or forged document would not  bear  a
         recent date and that  does  not  undermine  the  First  Appellant's
         credibility (particularly where the Respondent does not  apparently
         challenge her account that the passport was procured  by  an  agent
         and she knew nothing about it).  However, the issue of how she  was
         able to leave Sri Lanka is relevant to the question of whether  she
         remained of interest to the authorities then or now.  Even  if  the
         Judge was entitled to accept the First Appellant's account  of  her
         detention and torture, it was incumbent on him to  make  a  finding
         about how she would  be  able  to  leave  Sri  Lanka  if  she  were
         genuinely of interest to the authorities.  That he  has  failed  to
         do.

     19. Insofar as the Judge intended that issue to  be  addressed  by  his
         findings in relation to the background  material  and  the  country
         guidance case at [27] to [29] of the Decision, I am satisfied  that
         there is a material error in that  analysis.   In  particular,  the
         Judge has considered that risk against the background  of  the  OGN
         issued in July 2013 and has failed to note the COIR of  2014  which
         was before him.  Had he done so, he would have been alerted to what
         was said by the Court of Appeal in MP (Sri  Lanka)  concerning  the
         risk to those who  are  family  members  of  someone  suspected  of
         terrorism.  The final sentence of [27] of the Decision  appears  to
         be at odds with what is said in MP (Sri Lanka) (see  in  particular
         [19] and [20] of that judgment).

     20. I note also that the Judge may have misunderstood what is  said  in
         GJ concerning detention by the authorities.  At [29] he appears  to
         view GJ as support  for  a  submission  that  a  person  previously
         detained by the security services would be at risk  now.   However,
         that is not what is said in GJ.   The country guidance accepts that
         there would be a  real  risk  of  ill  treatment  for  someone  now
         detained by the security services.  However,  as  is  said  in  the
         headnote to GJ "an individual's past history will be relevant  only
         to the extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as
         indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the
         Sri Lankan Government".  There is  no  suggestion  that  the  First
         Appellant had any interest in Sri Lankan politics in  the  past  or
         has taken any active interest in any activities against the  regime
         whilst in the UK.

     21. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there  are  material
         errors of law in the Decision.  Both  representatives  were  agreed
         that, if I were to find material errors of law the appeal should be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to the Practice
         Direction and since the issues in relation to which  I  have  found
         errors of law to exist require further findings on  credibility,  I
         am satisfied that the appeal should be remitted.  I do not preserve
         any findings.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision involved the making of material  errors  of
law.  I therefore set  aside  the  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Ennals promulgated on 6 May 2015.  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing by a Judge other than Judge Ennals.


Signed      [pic]      Date 9 May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
