
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03355/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2017                         |On 23rd January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                             DUNCAN JUNIOR SASA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mozam of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    (DRC) born on 2nd May 1982, who applied  for  asylum  on  20th  January
    2015.  That application was refused for  the  reasons  set  out  in  an
    Asylum Decision dated 23rd February 2015.  The Appellant appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 20th January 2017.  He decided to dismiss  the
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds for
    the reasons given  in  his  Decision  dated  30th  January  2017.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on  11th  October
    2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant claimed that he was at risk on return to the DRC  because
    he was a freelance photographer who had taken photographs of  political
    demonstrations.  As  a  consequence  the  Appellant  was  arrested  and
    detained during which time he was ill-treated.  The  Judge  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal because he found the Appellant's claims  lacking  in
    credibility.  The Judge decided  to  attach  no  weight  to  an  arrest
    warrant and a newspaper article  produced  by  the  Appellant,  and  he
    considered an expert report of Alex Ntung.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Mozam argued that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to these conclusions.  He referred to the grounds of application
    and submitted that the Judge had erred in law in not  dealing  properly
    with the newspaper article  contained  in  the  Appellant's  Bundle  of
    Documents.  The Judge had not analysed the substance of the article and
    although he had dealt with one newspaper article at paragraph 19 of the
    Decision, he had made no mention of this  newspaper  article.   Indeed,
    the Judge had failed to deal in detail with other evidence contained in
    the Bundle such as the business card and the photographs.  Further, the
    Judge had failed to consider the Appellant's account of his escape from
    detention in  the  light  of  the  objective  evidence.   Bearing  this
    evidence in mind, it was not implausible that  the  Appellant  had  not
    been guarded.  The Appellant had given  a  consistent  account  of  his
    escape.

 5. Finally, Mr Mozam argued that the Judge had given insufficient  reasons
    for failing to accept the evidence  of  the  expert  witness  who  gave
    evidence about the documentary evidence such as the arrest warrant.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni submitted that there had been no such errors  of
    law.  She referred to the Rule 24 response and  pointed  out  that  the
    Judge had stated in  the  Decision  that  he  had  considered  all  the
    evidence before him in the round.  It may be the case that he  had  not
    dealt with one of the newspaper articles contained in  the  Appellant's
    Bundle, but it was not a material error of law  not  to  refer  to  one
    small item of evidence.  Most of the documentary evidence contained  in
    the Appellant's Bundle added little weight to his claim.  The Judge had
    dealt in detail with the contents of the expert report  concerning  the
    arrest warrant and had given sufficient reasons for finding the  report
    unreliable.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The Judge dismissed the appeal because  he  did  not
    believe the Appellant's account of why he feared returning to the  DRC.
    That was a decision open to the Judge on the evidence  before  him  and
    which he fully explained.  The Judge  noted  the  lack  of  documentary
    evidence in support of  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  had  been  a
    freelance photographer, and  the  Judge  explained  why  he  found  the
    Appellant's account of his  escape  from  detention  implausible.   The
    Judge did not need to refer to any objective evidence to come  to  that
    conclusion.  The Judge dealt with the expert report of  Alex  Ntung  in
    some detail at paragraphs 15 to 18 inclusive of the Decision.   It  was
    open to him to find the  evidence  of  the  expert  not  conclusive  as
    regards the arrest warrant, and the  Judge  adequately  explained  this
    conclusion at paragraph 18 of the Decision.  It may be  the  case  that
    the Judge failed  to  deal  specifically  with  one  of  the  newspaper
    articles contained in the Bundle, but if this is an  error  of  law,  I
    find it not to be material when considering the other reasons given  by
    the Judge for finding the Appellant lacking in credibility.

 8. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the  Judge.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date 22nd January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
