
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03184/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 19th April 2016                            |On 14th September 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Hajigul [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Abu Reza (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mathews, promulgated on 21st September 2015, following a  hearing
    at Stoke-on-Trent on 3rd September 2015.  In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on 10th
    January 2000.  He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, dismissing his claim for asylum under  the  Refugee
    Convention, and his claim for humanitarian protection  under  paragraph
    339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he was an unaccompanied minor, who  could
    not  be  returned  to  Afghanistan  because  reception  facilities   in
    Afghanistan were inadequate.  His claim was  that  his  father  was  an
    former member of the Taliban but this was several years ago.  He had no
    recollection of his father.  He had  no  recollection  of  his  brother
    either, but encountered him by chance in  this  country.   About  seven
    years ago, the Taliban approached the Appellant seeking revenge because
    they thought  that  the  father  had  taken  weapons  from  them.   The
    Appellant was taken by force from his home and forced to  wear  suicide
    bomb jackets for the  targeting  of  Taliban  enemies.   The  Appellant
    claimed that the Taliban would beat him  for  his  failure  to  provide
    further bomb vests and repeat the process.  After four  such  occasions
    the Appellant at his mother's insistence  was  helped  to  leave  by  a
    former friend of his father.  The Appellant has now lost  contact  with
    his family in Afghanistan since his arrival in this country.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge rejected the Appellant's claim on the basis  that  there  had
    been a delay in approach by the Taliban in his  various  accounts,  the
    repeated refusal to comply with threats of retribution from  them,  and
    the delay in seeking protection if the family were subject  as  claimed
    to risks from the Taliban (see paragraph  24).   The  judge  held  that



         "This Appellant came from a relatively prosperous  family,  settled
         in their own property  and  land.   I  find  that  his  mother  and
         siblings have remained in Afghanistan as he said.  I  do  not  find
         that he is unable to contact them should he so  wish,  or  that  he
         would be unable to  return  to  the  family  home  in  Afghanistan"
         (paragraph 27).

 5. The core question, as highlighted by the Appellant himself, was that he
    was an unaccompanied minor who would  face  difficulties  in  returning
    back, and the judge held that the main question before him was that any
    steps could be taken to locate the Appellant's family  (paragraph  32).
    The judge gave specific consideration to the case of  AA  (Afghanistan)
    [2013] UKUT 00312.

 6. The judge went on to conclude that it had been held in the  authorities
    that Regulation 6(1)  of  the  Asylum  Seekers  (Reception  Conditions)
    Regulations 2005 impose on the Secretary of State a duty  to  endeavour
    to trace the members of a minor asylum  applicant  family  as  soon  as
    possible following submission  of  the  asylum  claim.   A  failure  to
    discharge that duty may,  depending  on  the  facts,  also  engage  the
    Secretary of State's duties under Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.  Such  a
    breach did not, however, vitiate an ensuing asylum decision.   Instead,
    it  was  incumbent  on  the  Tribunal  to  evaluate  the   effect   and
    consequences in the fact sensitive context  under  consideration.   The
    judge referred to the analogous situation  in  Jabarkhail  [2013]  EWHC
    1798 in which it was held that the  Secretary  of  State's  failure  to
    comply with this statutory duty to endeavour to trace the family of  an
    unaccompanied minor when  he  claimed  asylum  upon  his  arrival  from
    Afghanistan did not cause him such prejudice as it would be  unfair  to
    now remove him to Afghanistan.

 7. The judge also had regard to the Appellant's additional claim  that  he
    would be at risk as a young man and in need of humanitarian  protection
    if returned to Kabul.

 8. The judge, however, went on to conclude that, "I stress that my finding
    above is that the Appellant has a settled family and  a  home  area  in
    which he had no adverse experiences as claimed" (paragraph  37).   This
    being so, the judge held that the  Appellant  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof that he was at risk  by  reason  of  having  failed  to
    produce a proper evidential basis for  such  a  risk  in  any  capacity
    (paragraph 39).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  made   adverse
    credibility findings based on inconsistencies but he did not go to  the
    core of the Appellant's claim.  He failed to take into account the fact
    that the Appellant's age was as a minor.  Explanations had  been  given
    in the witness statements at the hearing.  The Respondent's failure  to
    trace the Appellant's family  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
    Reference had been made by the judge to outdated case  law  and  recent
    objective  evidence  had  not  been  taken  into  account   about   the
    deteriorating situation in Kabul.

10. On 16th October 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 19th April  2016,  Mr  Reza,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant as his solicitor, relied upon  the  grounds  of
    application.  He said that there were three main issues.  First,  there
    was the issue of consistency.  The Appellant, however, was only 14 when
    he was interviewed as a minor, and he was asked about  events  when  he
    was much much younger, aged around 7 years.  His  explanation  had  not
    been given the credit that was due to him.  Second, the judge  accepted
    that the Home Office had failed in their  tracing  duty  and  also  had
    breached Section 55  of  the  BCIA  2009  in  failing  to  protect  the
    Appellant's "best interests".  Third, there was a failure  to  consider
    updated information with respect  to  the  deteriorating  situation  in
    Kabul, which had been placed  before  the  judge,  and  the  judge  had
    wrongly relied upon the objective evidence in 2007, and  yet  much  had
    moved on since then.

12. For his part, Mr Parkinson  submitted  that  the  judge  was  aware  at
    paragraph 15 that the Appellant was a minor and had made this clear  at
    paragraph 9 of the determination very early on as  well.   He  had  not
    applied it to a high standard.  He was entitled to reach  the  findings
    that he did.  At paragraph  24  he  had  stated  that  the  Appellant's
    account "lacked plausibility".  The Presenting Officer  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that the Secretary of State had undertaken a tracing  duty,
    but this had been known to the Appellant's side, and  no  requests  had
    been made for an adjournment to ask the Secretary of State to carry out
    the  tracing  responsibility.   In  the  circumstances  the  judge  was
    entitled to proceed.  The judge referred  to  AA  (Afghanistan)  [2013]
    UKUT 00312, where the Supreme Court made it  clear  (at  paragraph  73)
    that the Appellant can ask the Respondent  to  carry  out  the  tracing
    obligation, and apply for an adjournment at the hearing.  This had  not
    been done.  It could  not  just  be  assumed  that  the  Appellant  was
    credible.  The judge had found him not to be credible.

13. Second, given that the Appellant has a parent living in Afghanistan, no
    prejudice had been caused to him by failure to trace.   The  judge  had
    referred to the correct  country  guidance  case  in  AK  (Afghanistan)
    [2012] and this does not accept that even in  the  provinces  that  are
    worse affected by the violence, that the  Appellant  cannot  return  to
    those provinces.

14. In his reply, Mr Reza submitted that at  paragraph  9  of  the  witness
    statement, there is a clear mention of the fact  that  the  family  had
    moved to Kunduz and  so  even  if  AK  (Afghanistan)  [2012]  had  been
    followed, it was clear that the Appellant  could  not  be  returned  to
    Kabul.  Given that the Appellant was cooperating with the  authorities,
    it was incumbent upon them to now carry out a tracing duty  to  see  if
    they could relocate his mother and siblings there.

15. Second, the Appellant had furnished two witness statements.  The  judge
    had only referred to the first one.  The second one was in response  to
    the refusal letter and it gave  explanations  as  to  why  the  refusal
    letter was wrong.  No reference was made  to  this  witness  statement.
    This too was an error of law.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

17. First, the judge has not found the Appellant's claim  to  be  credible.
    The judge has rejected the claim that the Appellant's father  had  been
    targeted by the Taliban for having taken weapons, or that he  had  been
    forced to wear a suicide vest and had refused to do so.   Instead,  the
    judge  had  concluded  that  the  Appellant  came  from  a  "relatively
    prosperous family, settled in their own property and  land"  (paragraph
    27).  This meant that there simply was no basis for a claim of a  well-
    founded fear of persecution.

18. Second, as far as the "tracing duty"  was  concerned  under  Regulation
    6(1) of the Asylum Seekers (Reception Conditions) Regulations 2005, the
    Appellant did  not  apply  for  an  adjournment,  even  though  he  was
    represented legally at the time, when he appeared before the judge, and
    no request was made for the Secretary of State to carry out her tracing
    duty.  That would have been no  difficult  a  matter  in  circumstances
    where, as the judge had found, the Appellant's family was well  settled
    in their own property and land and, "the Appellant has a settled family
    and a home area in which he had  no  adverse  experiences  as  claimed"
    (paragraph 37).

19. In these circumstances, the failure  of  the  judge,  to  consider  the
    second witness statement,  or  to  not  consider  the  more  up-to-date
    country guidance evidence about the deteriorating situation  in  Kabul,
    cannot amount to an error of law, given the findings that the judge had
    made on these two specific matters.

Notice of Decision

20. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th September 2016
