
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03300/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 August 2016                             |On 22 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                Ms Nadia [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Eaton of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the  decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Spencer  ("the  Immigration  Judge").   In  a
    decision promulgated on 11 July 2016 the  Immigration  Judge  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  her
    international protection.  The appellant had previously  been  detained
    under the Fast Track procedure but complains that there were procedural
    irregularities in the statement taken whilst she was in detention.

2.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen  (Judge  Dineen)  thought  that
    the grounds raised in an application for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal dated 25  July  2016  were  at  least  arguable  in  the
    following respects:

    (1)  it was arguable that the appellant had correctly submitted in  her
         grounds that no weight should be placed on a statement made  whilst
         in detention;


    (2)  it was also arguable that an adverse credibility finding, based on
         the original statement in interview  which  should  not  have  been
         admitted, should also not be allowed to stand since that  statement
         should not have been given weight;


    (3)  it was also arguable in that it was not a legitimate criticism  of
         the appellant, for the purposes  of  section  8(5)  of  the  Asylum
         Treatment of Claimants Act 2004 ("2004 Act") that she had failed to
         make her asylum claim before being served with a notice  curtailing
         her leave since this may have been based on a  misunderstanding  of
         the facts;


    (4)  finally, it was arguable that the Immigration Judge had  taken  an
         approach  to  internal  relocation  without  reference  to  country
         guidance and, in particular, the head note in the leading  case  of
         SM (no reference given). Having been accused of adultery, which was
         a criminal offence in Pakistan, it was arguable that the  appellant
         will be  subject  to  adverse  forces  from  her  parents  and  her
         husband's parents.   It  was  thought  by  Judge  Dineen  that  the
         Immigration Judge had erred in finding that the appellant had  made
         no claim to being assisted by a Mr Umair.

The Hearing

3.   On 10  August  2016  Directions  were  sent  out  of  a  standard  type
    indicating that the Upper Tribunal would  not  entertain  evidence  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).  A notice of hearing  accompanied
    those directions indicating that the hearing was set for 31 August 2016
    at 10.00am.

4.   Both parties  were  represented  at  the  hearing.   Full  details  are
    contained in the Tribunal file.

5.   Mr Eaton went straight to the grounds.  First, he drew my attention  to
    the fact that in paragraph 35 of the Immigration Judge's  decision  the
    Immigration Judge had found the appellant to be  "broadly  consistent",
    although he went on to point out certain specific  concerns  about  her
    evidence.   The  Immigration  Judge  was  criticised  for  finding  (at
    paragraph 38 of his decision) that  Section  8(5)  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  applied.  The
    appellant had separated from her husband in May 2014 and her leave  was
    curtailed in August 2014. The Immigration Judge had been wrong to  find
    that the appellant would necessarily have been aware of the curtailment
    of her leave on the basis that  she  "must"  have  realised  that  this
    followed from her separation from her husband.  That  section  provides
    that a failure by a claimant to make an asylum claim  or  human  rights
    claim before being notified of  an  immigration  decision,  unless  the
    claimant relies wholly on matters arising after the notification, would
    be a matter justifying an adverse credibility finding.  Apparently, the
    Immigration Judge here found that the appellant's credibility had  been
    damaged and he had rejected her evidence that she did not  realise  her
    visa would or may be affected by the separation.  The Immigration Judge
    found that she was "an intelligent lady" who ought to have  been  aware
    that her separation would affect her entitlement to remain in  the  UK.
    It had been accepted that she was entitled to enter the UK  because  of
    her relationship with Mr Abbas.  The Immigration Judge found  that  the
    appellant chose not to investigate her immigration status  and  Section
    8(5) was therefore engaged.  It was  submitted  that  the  respondent's
    criticism of the appellant in paragraph 31 of the refusal was that  the
    appellant should have contacted the Home Office not that  she  knew  or
    ought to have known of a  formal  termination  of  her  leave.  It  was
    submitted that was not the situation Section 8(5) was aimed at.

6.   In addition, it was argued that the appellant was at risk on return  to
    Pakistan as she could not return to her  parents'  or  her  parents-in-
    law's homes. She should, therefore, have been recognised  as  having  a
    genuine fear of return, following the  breakdown  of  her  relationship
    with Kazam.  However, the respondent had gone on to find that following
    a breakdown of the relationship with Kazam she had deliberately delayed
    her asylum claim and this was the type of  behaviour  which  should  be
    considered under Section 8(2).  It was submitted  that  this  was  also
    incorrect.  There was no evidence that the appellant  had  deliberately
    delayed in bringing forward her claim to asylum after  the  curtailment
    of leave decision had been served.  Having found that no curtailment of
    leave decision was had been served, Section 8 (5) could not  be  relied
    on at all, Mr Eaton submitted.  The most that could be  said  was  that
    this was a late claim.

7.   Mr Eaton's second ground for attacking the decision of the  Immigration
    Judge  also  related  to  paragraphs  35-37  of  his   decision.    The
    Immigration Judge found that accusations of adultery had been made  but
    that they were private accusations, in the sense  that  they  were  not
    made public whilst she was in Pakistan.  The  Immigration  Judge  found
    that she had given inconsistent accounts and that the  appellant  would
    not be shamed in public in Pakistan as the  accusations  would  not  be
    evade  public.  According  to  the  Immigration   Judge,   any   public
    accusations of adultery would have been referred to by the appellant in
    her interview.  Mr  Eaton  was  critical  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
    findings in relation to the adultery allegations. He pointed  out  that
    in paragraph 11 of her witness statement the  appellant  says  that  in
    June 2013 her partner abused her and cursed her "in  public".   Kazam's
    own father had accused the appellant of having an affair  with  someone
    and she  had  been  publicly  named  and  shamed.   No  police  or  law
    enforcement agency could do anything to prevent her  suffering  inhuman
    punishment.  She had been treated as an adulterer.  Mr  Eaton  drew  my
    attention to the fact that the key difference between the first alleged
    adultery and the second is that, in relation to the  second,  this  was
    made public in 2014.  Hence, the appellant was potentially guilty of  a
    criminal offence, with much more serious consequences.

8.   Mr Eaton  than  went  on  to  outline  ground  2,  that  is,  that  the
    Immigration Judge erred  in  his  approach  to  the  appellant's  first
    witness statement, which had been  drafted  at  a  time  when  she  was
    unlawfully detained. I  was  referred  to  the  leading  case  of  Lord
    Chancellor v Detention Action [2015] EWCA Civ 840 in which the Court of
    Appeal had found the Fast Track rules to be  unfair  and  unjust.   The
    appellant had previously been detained and the respondent's Fast  Track
    procedure.  The appellant had also been interviewed by the  respondent.
    Following the judgment in the  above  case,  her  detention  was  ruled
    unlawful.  I was referred to the judgment and specifically the judgment
    of the Master of the Rolls in where he suggested (at paragraph 45) that
    in his view the time limits  that  have  been  set  for  applicants  to
    provide evidence un support of their claims,  made  it  impossible  for
    there to be a fair hearing of their appeals in the  significant  number
    of cases.  The safeguards which the respondent and the Lord  Chancellor
    relied on were insufficient.  The system was  therefore  "structurally"
    unfair and unjust.  The scheme did not adequately take account  of  the
    complexity and difficulty of many asylum appeals, the  gravity  of  the
    issues  raised  and  the  measure  of  the  task   that   faces   legal
    representatives in taking instructions from their clients  who  are  in
    detention.  A lawful scheme must properly  reflect  both  the  need  to
    allow an appellant to put his case  and  process  that  application  as
    quickly as possible  consistent  with  fairness  and  justice.   I  was
    referred to paragraph 36 of  the  decision  in  this  case,  where  the
    Immigration Judge had relied on certain answers the appellant had given
    to questions asked whilst she was in detention.  He was, in Mr  Eaton's
    submission, wrong to have done so.

9.   Next, Mr Eaton expanded on his submissions in  relation  to  ground  3.
    This states that the Immigration Judge erred in relying on Section 8(5)
    of the 2004 Act when he stated  that  the  appellant  had  damaged  her
    credibility by failing to make an asylum claim before being notified of
    the curtailment of leave decision.  It is "trite" in  Mr  Eaton's  view
    that a statutory provision should be construed narrowly.   If  she  was
    never aware that her leave had been revoked or curtailed how could she,
    in Mr Eaton's submissions, be said to have  acted  in  a  manner  which
    damaged her credibility.

10.  The  final  ground,  ground  4,  related  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    approach to internal relocation. In SM (lone women - ostracism)  [2016]
    UKUT 67 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  a  "single  woman"  in
    Pakistan without children is "ostracised" by family members. This makes
    it "difficult" for her to relocate  and  it  may  be  unduly  harsh  to
    require her to do so therefore. It is a question of fact in  each  case
    whether it would be unduly harsh to require the appellant to  relocate.
    The case of SM was the most recent case that Mr Eaton had been able  to
    find on the matter.  In the head note it highlights the difficulties in
    internal relocation.  The "first mistake" the Immigration  Judge  made,
    he submitted, was to limit his assessment to the home area when in fact
    the appellant had been alleged to have  committed  a  criminal  offence
    which may  be  punishable  throughout  Pakistan.   The  Federal  Police
    Service had connections  throughout  the  country  and  would  probably
    arrest her on arrival at the airport.  Her  family  had  supported  the
    Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and family members in Islamabad would  be
    informed what had  happened.   The  appellant  was  an  adulteress,  or
    suspected adulteress, and would be treated accordingly.

11.  Ms Pettersen, on the other hand, thought that the respondent's  refusal
    was sound and the Immigration Judge  had  correctly  decided  that  the
    appellant had failed to establish that  she  had  done  anything  which
    would offend  against  the  Islamic  principles  under  which  Pakistan
    society operates.  As far as the allegation of adultery  was  concerned
    the appellant's father-in-law did not appear to know that  she  was  in
    England.  It was not clear that any accusation  of  adultery  had  been
    made and the Immigration Judge had been correct to find  that  she  did
    not qualify for asylum/human rights'  protection.   There  had  been  a
    failure to refer to  any  earlier  incidents  when  the  appellant  had
    originally been spoken to.  The Immigration  Judge  had  not  erred  in
    finding that the appellant did not qualify as a  refugee  /  person  in
    need.

12.  I was referred to certain criticisms by the  Court  of  Appeal  of  the
    system of asylum detention but the Immigration Judge had  not  recorded
    any submission or answer in interview which would be inadmissible.   In
    the absence of such submission, the Immigration Judge was  entitled  to
    consider the interview, giving it such weight as  he  saw  fit.     The
    grounds of appeal appeared to be wide ranging.   The  judge  had  taken
    into  account  the  allegation  of  adultery  in  2014.   However,  the
    Immigration Judge had correctly applied Section  8  of  the  2004  Act,
    albeit that the wrong sub-section (sub-section (5)) had  been  referred
    to.  This was a late claim and its  lateness  damaged  the  appellant's
    credibility. The Immigration Judge had made clear findings and come  to
    clear overall conclusions at paragraphs 43-44. It  was  not  reasonably
    likely that the appellant would  face  continuing  hostility  from  her
    family members.  There was no real risk of harm and  she  could  safely
    relocate to another part of Pakistan.  There was no material  error  of
    law identified and the criticisms really amounted to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement  with  the  FTT's  conclusions,  which  were  robust   and
    sustainable.

13.  In  response,  that  the  appellant  submitted  that  the  respondent's
    criticism of ground 4 (the internal relocation ground) was based  on  a
    false premise.  The appellant did not accept that she would necessarily
    be safe anywhere in Pakistan.  It was accepted that adultery raises the
    possibility of a criminal charge in  Pakistan  and  the  appellant  was
    subject to this risk.  The Immigration Judge, having  wrongly  rejected
    her appeal, I was invited to remit the matter back to the FtT.

14.  Both sides seemed to agree that fresh findings would be necessary if  I
    was to find a material error law in this case.

Discussion

15.  The appellant is a Pakistani citizen born on 13 January  1986.   On  29
    November 2010, she married Kazam Roza Abbas, a Tier 4 Migrant,  also  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  Abbas was studying in the UK.  The appellant came
    to the UK as the spouse of a person present and settled here. Her leave
    was subsequently curtailed, it would seem, because of her  relationship
    breaking down. Notice of the appellant's curtailment of leave was given
    on 8 August 2014 and on 4 February 2015 she was served with Form IS151A
    informing her that her immigration status was such that she was  liable
    to detention and removal. The appellant then applied for asylum on  the
    basis that her in-laws spread word about the community that she  is  an
    adulteress.

16.  An initial appeal went to Yarl's Wood, but  that  her  detention  there
    was subsequently found to be unlawful.

17.  At the hearing before me on 31 August 2016 the  appellant  argued  that
    the Immigration Judge had been wrong to attach  significant  weight  to
    the appellant's delay in claiming asylum.  Section 8(5) of the 2004 Act
    provides that a failure by a claimant to make an asylum claim or  human
    rights claim before being notified of an immigration  decision,  unless
    the claimant relies wholly on matters arising after  the  notification,
    must be considered by the deciding authority as a matter  damaging  the
    claimant's credibility.  It was pointed out  in  the  oral  submissions
    made by Mr Eaton that in fact the appellant had  raised  concerns  over
    the conduct of her in-laws  prior  to  being  notified  of  an  adverse
    immigration decision (i.e. the decision to curtail her leave).  It  was
    argued that the Immigration Judge had been wrong to even refer to this.

18.  It is not clear when the appellant is said to  have  been  notified  by
    her father-in-law that she had been accused of adultery.  It seems that
    she was warned by her sister in April 2015  that  if  she  returned  to
    Pakistan she would need to go into hiding.

19.  There seems to have been an argument as to the extent to which  it  was
    proper for the Immigration Judge to take account of certain  admissions
    made in interview but, as the respondent pointed  out  at  the  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal,  the  Immigration  Judge  had  rejected  the
    appellant's account of having been alleged to have been an  adulteress.
    At paragraphs 35-36 the Immigration  Judge  rejected  her  account  and
    there  appears  to  have  been  no  submission  before  him  that   the
    Immigration Judge had been wrong to take account of all or part of  the
    interviews.  The Immigration Judge found  numerous  inconsistencies  in
    the evidence (see for example paragraph 37 of his decision).  It  seems
    that although the evidence as a whole was consistent  it  was  severely
    lacking in detail.  In such circumstances  the  Immigration  Judge  was
    entitled to reject it.

20.  It is not clear from the chronology presented to me that the  appellant
    did notify the respondent at the earliest opportunity of her  potential
    claim based on the allegations of adultery.  I consider that these  are
    serious allegations and that in Pakistan she would have faced a  degree
    of discrimination, indeed, it would be reasonably likely to  cross  the
    threshold for  persecution  in  certain  circumstances.   However,  the
    question is: whether those circumstances existed here? The  Immigration
    Judge fully  considered  the  objective  evidence  and  the  case  law,
    including the leading case of SN and HM.  His decision appears to  have
    been thoroughly reasoned and to have considered the appellant's account
    against that background evidence. The Immigration Judge concluded  that
    the appellant would not be personally at risk, for the reasons he gave.

21.  It submitted that her father-in-law was "connected with the FIA",  part
    of the Federal Police Service.  It was alleged  that  given  his  high-
    level connections there would be no safe place where she could  go  and
    therefore  there  was  no  realistic  internal  flight  alternative  to
    claiming asylum/international human rights protection.  It was said  as
    well that the appellant had family  members  in  Islamabad,  presumably
    from her husband's side.

22.  The finding that the appellant  could  relocate  within  Pakistan  also
    appears sound, despite these submissions.  The Immigration Judge  found
    the appellant to be a highly intelligent and well educated lady who had
    demonstrated her ability to find employment, access health care and  so
    forth whilst she had been in the UK.  In his view, she would be able to
    relocate to a safe place in Pakistan.  At paragraph 45 of his  decision
    the Immigration Judge took account of the  difficulties  in  relocating
    but concluded that it was not unduly harsh to require her  to  relocate
    to an area (which, he concluded  existed)  where  she  would  not  fear
    persecution.

Conclusion

23.  A technical deficiency exists in relation to the treatment  of  Section
    8(5) of the  2004  Act.  However,  as  the  respondent  submitted,  the
    decision overall was sound.  It  took  account  of  the  correct  legal
    principles and applied those principles to the findings made.  There is
    no material error of law in the decision of the FTT.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any material  error
of law and accordingly this appeal  is  dismissed.  The  FTT's  decision  to
dismiss the appeal against the respondent's decision stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
