
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03975/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                                    H R O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Saeed of counsel instructed by Aman Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. An anonymity order was in place previously. Pursuant to  Rule  14  of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/269)  I
       make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
       otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of  publication
       thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellant.
       This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure
       to comply with this direction could give rise to  contempt  of  court
       proceedings

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of HO  ('the  claimant')  who
       appealed against a decision taken on 23 February 2015  to  refuse  to
       grant him asylum.

Background Facts

    3. The Nationality of the claimant is in dispute. The Secretary of State
       has not challenged the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  that  the
       claimant  is  an  undocumented  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.  The  issue  of  the
       claimant's Nationality remains in dispute however as the Secretary of
       State maintains that even if the claimant is  a  National  of  Kuwait
       that  is  not  inconsistent  with  his  obtaining  Iraqi  Nationality
       subsequently. The claimant had applied for a visa to come to  the  UK
       using an Iraqi passport in support of the application.

    4. The claimant claimed asylum under paragraph 334  of  the  Immigration
       Rules HC395 (as amended).  That application was refused on the  basis
       that the Secretary of State did not accept that the claimant  was  an
       undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon. The Secretary of State  considered  that
       the claimant was an Iraqi National and that he did not face a risk of
       persecution on return to Iraq. The Secretary of State considered that
       there was no reasonable degree of likelihood that the claimant  would
       be at risk of serious  harm  so  did  not  qualify  for  Humanitarian
       Protection or that there would be a breach of Articles 2 or 3  if  he
       were to be returned to Iraq. The Secretary of State  also  considered
       private and family life under the Immigration  Rules  and  considered
       that the claimant failed to meet the requirements of the  Immigration
       Rules.  The Secretary of State did not consider that there  were  any
       exceptional circumstances that warranted  consideration  outside  the
       Immigration Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    5. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
       promulgated on 30 September 2015, Judge  C  M  Phillips  allowed  the
       claimant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  claimant
       is an undocumented Kuwati Bidoon and found that he is  not  an  Iraqi
       National. The judge's findings were based on an overall evaluation of
       the evidence. This evaluation included taking into consideration  the
       claimant's mental health condition when assessing evidence  contained
       in the record of his interview with the Home Office, the  documentary
       evidence of the claimant's residence and employment in Kuwait and the
       evidence that other family members, including the claimant's son  and
       grandson, had been granted refugee status in the UK on the basis that
       they  are  stateless  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.  With  regard  to  the   Iraqi
       passports, which were not produced, the judge found  that  there  was
       sufficient evidence to countervail against  the  passports  which  he
       found were part of deceptive applications for entry clearance.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    6. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal.  On 23  October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ransley
       granted the Secretary of  State  permission  to  appeal.   Thus,  the
       appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

    7. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred in finding that the
       Iraqi passports used by the claimant and  his  wife  used  to  obtain
       entry  clearance  and  subsequently  travel  to  the  UK  are   false
       passports. The judge did not have the original passports  before  him
       to make such a finding as they were not  produced  by  the  claimant.
       Neither was there any expert evidence that the Iraqi  passports  were
       false especially in light of the fact that the British Embassy abroad
       accepted that they were genuine when granting entry  clearance,  that
       the UK Border Force accepted that they were genuine when allowing the
       claimant entry to the UK and  the  Home  Office  maintain  they  were
       genuine when accepting the asylum claim.

    8. It is asserted that it was for the claimant to prove by reference  to
       cogent evidence that the Iraqi passports were false. The Secretary of
       State relies on the case of RP  (Proof  of  forgery)  Nigeria  [2006]
       UKAIT 00086.

    9. Although the claimant provided evidence placing him in Kuwait in 1969
       none of that evidence is inconsistent with  the  claimant  moving  to
       Iraq in 1991 and obtaining Iraqi citizenship.

   10. The claimant served a Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008) response in which  it  was  asserted  that  the
       passport could not be produced because it was kept by the agent  (q28
       of the wife's screening interview), there  is  no  evidence  of  what
       checks were undertaken at the British Embassy. There is  no  evidence
       of any checks undertaken by the UK Border  Force  when  the  claimant
       arrived in the UK.

   11. In her oral submissions Ms Everett relied on the grounds  of  appeal.
       She submitted that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for  her
       findings on Nationality  and  in  not  giving  adequate  reasons  for
       rejecting the Secretary  of  State's  evidence.  The  passports  were
       accepted as genuine by the Entry Clearance Officer and the UK  Border
       force and the Home Office. Evidence that the  claimant  had  been  in
       Kuwait does not undermine the proposition that the claimant had  gone
       on to gain Iraqi nationality. The judge makes findings in relation to
       the claimant's son's appeal; setting out that  the  evidence  of  the
       claimant's son was accepted by an experienced adjudicator  (paragraph
       74 of the judge's decision). On the basis that the claimant's son  is
       an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon the judge finds that the  claimant  is
       also. She asserted that this is insufficient to support the view that
       the Iraqi passport was false. The claimant has  been  in  Iraq  since
       1991 and is married to an Iraqi National. However,  the  judge  found
       that the claimant's son lied about his lack of  knowledge  about  the
       Entry Clearance application and the false passports used to make  the
       application to come to the UK. The judge made findings that  the  son
       had lied about the claimant's visa application. She submitted that it
       is essential to the core of  the  claim  that  the  claimant  can  be
       returned to Iraq. The application made to the Entry Clearance Officer
       was unsuccessful because the son could not maintain the claimant.  Ms
       Everett submitted that it would be accepted in  law  that  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer applies the civil standard of proof on the  balance
       of probabilities and will be required to decide whether  all  aspects
       of the application are  truthful.  Ms  Everett,  in  response  to  my
       question, indicated that she did not know what the protocol  was  for
       undertaking checks and did not have any specific evidence as to  what
       checks  had  been  undertaken  in  relation  to  this  claimant.  She
       submitted that there is only usually a reference to the  validity  of
       the documents when the checks indicate that there is a concern.

   12. Ms Everett submitted that in the absence of seeing the originals  and
       having expert evidence to suggest they passports were false the judge
       erred in making the finding that she did. In  answer  to  a  question
       from me Ms Everett indicated that she did not think that the passport
       had been checked by the home office.

   13. Ms Everett submitted that even on the evidence taken at  its  highest
       and accepted by the judge the evidence is not inconsistent  with  the
       claimant moving to Iraq and gaining Iraqi nationality.

   14. Ms Everett submitted that part of the remit of  the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer is to  check  the  validity  of  documents  and  undertake  a
       verification that the person is who they say they are and what  their
       nationality is.  She  submitted  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
       applies a higher standard - the civil balance of probabilities  which
       is a higher standard than applied in asylum claims.

   15. Mr Saeed relied on the  Rule  24  response.  He  submitted  that  the
       passports used to travel to the UK may not have been the passports in
       support of the visa application as the claimant  did  not  know  what
       passports were used to travel to the UK - they were presented by  the
       agent who subsequently  retained  the  passports.  In  answer  to  my
       question Mr Saeed indicated that, despite the claimant's wife,  being
       an Iraqi National and therefore  not  seemingly  to  require  a  fake
       passport when applying for a visa, the  position  of  the  claimant's
       wife was that a fake passport was used by her in support of the  visa
       application.

   16. He submitted that the passports were not available so  the  photocopy
       is the best that we have. All the judge can do in such a situation is
       weigh up all the evidence and decide if it is sufficient to discharge
       the burden of proof. The only challenge to the judge's  findings  can
       be if they are perverse. The Secretary of State has  not  shown  that
       the decision is perverse. He asserted that the Secretary  of  State's
       grounds were  essentially  an  attempt  to  re-argue  the  case.  The
       Secretary of State does not know what checks were undertaken  by  the
       Entry Clearance Officer. That evidence would have been useful.  There
       is no mention in the reasons for refusal letter  that  the  passports
       were checked by the Entry Clearance Officer. The First-tier  Tribunal
       had to decide the case on the information before it.  The  judge  was
       entitled  to  take  into  consideration  the  determination  of   the
       claimant's son and of the grandson whose case was  decided  in  2010.
       There were no inconsistencies in the evidence given by the son before
       the First-tier Tribunal in 2004. He said that his father  was  living
       in Iraq. In the event that a claimant cannot provide the originals of
       a document the situation, if the Secretary  of  State's  argument  is
       accepted, is that  the  claimant  can  never  be  believed  that  the
       documents are false. The claimant is suffering from dementia and  the
       judge was entitled to take  that  into  account  when  assessing  his
       evidence when answering questions in his asylum interview.

Discussion

   17. The central plank of the  appeal  is  that  the  judge  rejected  the
       Secretary of State's arguments that the Iraqi passports were  genuine
       in the absence of any proof by the  claimant  to  the  contrary.  The
       Secretary of State argues that the burden is on the claimant to prove
       that the passports were false. The burden, in the appeal  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal, on the claimant was to demonstrate that he had a
       well-founded fear  of  persecution  such  that  he  was  in  need  of
       International Protection. The validity  or  otherwise  of  the  Iraqi
       passports were but one element to be considered  by  the  judge.  The
       Secretary of State's case is that whether or not the claimant  is  an
       undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon it is very likely that the  claimant  has
       obtained Iraqi citizenship given that the has  lived  in  Iraq  since
       1991. The use of an Iraqi passport to support a visa  application  is
       cogent evidence of that assertion.

   18. The First-tier Tribunal judge deals with this issue at paragraph  75.
       The First-tier Tribunal judge sets out:

           'Against the weight of the documentary evidence showing that the
           appellant's residence and employment in  Kuwait  and  the  other
           evidence including that of the witness that the appellant  is  a
           stateless Kuwaiti Bidoon as well  as  the  evidence  that  other
           family members including the witness  and   grandson  have  been
           granted status on the basis  that  they  are  stateless  Kuwaiti
           Bidoons, I find that there is sufficient  satisfactory  evidence
           to countervail against the Iraqi passports, which  I  find  were
           part  of  deceptive  applications  for  Entry  Clearance,  which
           applications were organised by others on behalf of the appellant
           and his wife..'

   19. The judge correctly set out, at paragraph 49, that  the  core  issues
       were if the appellant has Iraqi nationality and if not  if  he  is  a
       Kuwaiti Bidoon.  However,  the  judge  then  proceeded  to  determine
       whether or not he was a Kuwaiti Bidoon first. Having  found  that  he
       was a Kuwaiti Bidoon the judge appears to take all the evidence  that
       supported  that  finding  as  satisfactory  evidence  to  countervail
       against the weight of the Iraqi passports. It is  arguable  that  the
       judge erred in that she does not appear, in this paragraph, to engage
       with the arguments that notwithstanding a finding that  the  claimant
       is  Kuwaiti  Bidoon  he  could  have   obtained   Iraqi   nationality
       subsequently. The paragraph could be  read  as  indicating  that  the
       judge considered that having proved  he  was  a  Kuwaiti  Bidoon  the
       claimant has satisfied the judge that therefore  the  passports  must
       have been false. This analysis is supported by the judge's commenting
       paragraph 56 wherein she states

           'The fact that the appellant has claimed to be an Iraqi national
           in an applications for entry clearance and he provided an  Iraqi
           passport in support of  his  nationality  means  that  in  these
           circumstances the burden of proof to prove that  he  is  Kuwaiti
           and not Iraqi must fall upon the appellant who asserts that  the
           passports and details that the provided to the  Entry  Clearance
           Officer were false.'

   20. The judge also does not engage with the Secretary of State's argument
       that the passports were accepted to be genuine by the Entry Clearance
       Officer. I find that there was an error of law in  the  approach  the
       judge took to determine the  issue.  The  judge  failed  to  consider
       whether or not despite a finding that  the  claimant  was  a  Kuwaiti
       Bidoon  he  may  nevertheless   have   obtained   Iraqi   nationality
       subsequently.

   21. However this is not necessarily a material error of law. Reading  the
       decision as a whole it  is  clear  that  the  judge  also  took  into
       consideration that the claimant's evidence given in interview was not
       reliable as a result of him suffering from Dementia (paragraph 68 and
       69). The judge gave detailed reasons for this finding. He  considered
       the visa application evidence at paragraphs 50 - 56 and made  adverse
       findings  against  the  witness  regarding  his  purported  lack   of
       knowledge of the  use  of  the  documents  in  support  of  the  visa
       application.

   22. I drew attention to  both  parties  the  comment  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal judge regarding the claimant's visa  application  (paragraph
       51 of the decision). The judge notes that the  details  on  the  visa
       application show that the claimant stated that  he  was  born  in  Al
       Basrah, Iraq. I indicated that it appeared that  this  would  support
       the judge's finding that the visa  application  was  based  on  false
       information. If the claimant had  obtained  Iraqi  nationality  after
       moving there in 1991 there would be no need to lie about his place of
       birth. The Secretary of State has not appealed  against  the  judge's
       finding that the claimant is a Kuwaiti Bidoon. Ms  Everett  indicated
       that there was not much that she  could  say  about  that.  Mr  Saeed
       submitted that this was not picked up by the Entry Clearance  Officer
       which indicated that there may be things that were not checked.

   23. Although in the grounds of appeal it  was  asserted  that  the  Iraqi
       passports were checked on 3 occasions and found to be genuine  it  is
       not  clear  that  the  same  passports  used  to  support  the   visa
       application were used to enter the UK. Ms Everett accepted  that  the
       passports were not checked by the Home  office.  There  therefore  is
       only the assertion that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  checked  the
       validity of the passports. The Secretary of State  had  not  provided
       any specific evidence as to what checks had been undertaken. The visa
       was refused for financial reasons. I accept  that  the  Secretary  of
       State will not and ought not to be required to reveal methods used to
       undertake checks.  Whilst  it  might  be  the  case  that  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer will apply a  rigorous  approach  to  ensuring  the
       validity of documents and this  will  no  doubt  be,  as  Ms  Everett
       submitted,  a  core  component  of  their  role  in  assessing   visa
       applications, they are not  infallible.  I  accept  that  due  weight
       should be  afforded  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  expertise.
       However as a matter of logic  if  the  claimant  had  acquired  Iraqi
       nationality subsequent to his move to Iraq in 1991 there  would  have
       been no need to indicate that he was not originally  from  Kuwait  on
       either his passport application or his visa application.

   24. Although the approach of the judge was in error I  consider  that  it
       was not material to the outcome of the appeal. There is some doubt as
       to what checks were undertaken on the passport  with  regard  to  the
       visa application and it would appear that false information was given
       in relation to the place  of  birth  in  the  visa  application.  The
       decision reached by the judge was one that was open to her to come to
       on the evidence.

Decision

   25. There was no material error of law such  that  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 17 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

