
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03913/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd February 2016                |On 4th April 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     MAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Bhachu of Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 20th November 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Reid  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal G Clarke  who  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds against the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  to  grant
    asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection to  the  appellant,  a
    female adult citizen of Sudan.

 3. The grounds of application submitted that the judge had failed to  have
    sufficient regard to the country guidance  set  out  in  AY  (Political
    parties, SCP, risk) Sudan CG [2008] UKAIT 00050.  That  decision  found
    that, in general, it  would  be  difficult  for  ordinary  members  and
    supporters of the SCP or any other political party to establish a claim
    for asylum except where they were engaged in specific activities likely
    to bring them to the adverse  attention  of  the  authorities  such  as
    active  and  effective  local  democratic  activity  or   support   for
    particular human rights activities.

 4. The  grounds  also  pointed  out  that  the  judge  had  made  negative
    credibility findings from paragraphs 74 to 89 of the decision rejecting
    the core of the appellant's account finding, in paragraph 85, that  the
    appellant had engaged in low  level  activities  although  her  younger
    brother was "much more involved and had  been  detained  since  January
    2015".  However, the judge found that the  appellant  was  at  risk  on
    account of her brother's activities.  The judge failed to give reasons,
    based on objective evidence, for finding  that  siblings  of  political
    activists were at risk when the appellant  was  only  involved  in  low
    level activity herself.

 5.  In  granting  permission  Judge  Reid   thought   that   the   judge's
    consideration of the claim in the light of the country guidance did not
    adequately reflect the finding that the appellant was involved  in  low
    level political activities nor had the judge given adequate reason  for
    the appellant's brother's activities putting her at risk.

Error on a Point of Law

 6. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Parkinson pointed  out  that,  in
    addition to the grounds, fresh country guidance was being  prepared  by
    the Tribunal.  (This is, I note, under appeal references  AA/04799/2011
    and AA/00746/2013 where a decision was reserved on 4th November  2015).
    He also confirmed that the respondent relied  upon  the  grounds  which
    made it clear that the judge's findings were inconsistent with existing
    country guidance in AY which had found that only prominent  politicians
    with a significant profile were at risk and  there  was  no  indication
    that family members of active politicians were targeted.

 7. Ms Bhachu submitted that the judge had not challenged  the  appellant's
    claim to be associated with Al-Muatamr Al-Sha'bi (the People's Congress
    Party).  My attention was drawn to paragraph 5 of her skeleton argument
    in which she referred to  paragraph  50  of  AY  where,  amongst  other
    points, the Tribunal stated that the fact that an activist is  involved
    in low or middle level political activity  does  not  necessarily  mean
    that they will not be at risk of persecution.  She contended  that  the
    judge had based his finding on the fact that  the  appellant  had  been
    actively involved with the party, demonstrated and  spoken  with  other
    women  about  policies.   She  also  drew  attention  to  the   judge's
    conclusions in paragraph 93 which set out  three  reasons  for  finding
    that, despite low level activity, the appellant would be of interest to
    the Sudanese authority including her brother's activities  and  because
    of country background information post-dating the decision in AY.   She
    argued that the core of the appellant's claims had been accepted.



Conclusions

 8. At the end of the hearing  and  after  I  had  given  the  matter  some
    consideration, I announced that  I  was  satisfied  that  the  decision
    showed errors on points of law such that it should be re-made.  I  also
    concluded that, in accordance with paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
    Statements of the Senior President of Tribunals dated 25 September 2012
    it would be appropriate for the matter to be reheard by the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting either at Nottingham or Stoke Centres.  I now give  my
    reasons for those conclusions.

 9. It is clear, from the content of paragraphs 85 to 90, inclusive, of the
    decision that the judge made adverse credibility findings  in  relation
    to significant aspects of the appellant's claim to be at  risk  because
    of political activity.  Whilst the judge was entitled to conclude  that
    the appellant  was,  nevertheless,  involved  in  low  level  political
    activity, the country guidance did not  show  that  a  person  in  that
    category, alone, would be at  real  risk  of  serious  harm.   Although
    paragraph 5 of Ms Bhachu's skeleton refers to paragraph 50 of AY, where
    the possibility that low or mid level political activities might put  a
    person at risk, the remainder of that paragraph shows that the Tribunal
    assessed the real risk as involving those actively engaged in  building
    up grassroots, democracy,  working  in  support  of  human  rights  and
    involved  in  open  criticism  of  the  regime's  core   ideology   and
    philosophy.  The credibility findings in this case did not point to the
    appellant being involved in such activity.

10. Although the judge suggested,  in  paragraph  93,  that  the  political
    situation in Sudan had been deteriorating,  no  reference  is  made  to
    specific objective material which would enable  a  departure  from  the
    country guidance in AY.  Further, the  judge  does  not  refer  to  any
    objective material to support the conclusion  that  family  members  of
    activists, such as the appellant's brother, would be at risk.

11. Thus, the findings of the judge are materially  flawed  such  that  the
    appeal should be heard again by the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  fresh
    findings of fact can be made and conclusions  drawn  in  the  light  of
    country guidance.  As it appears that fresh country guidance is on  the
    point of release by the Upper  Tribunal  it  is  appropriate  that  the
    hearing of this appeal should be delayed  pending  the  publication  of
    that guidance.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material errors on  points  of
law such that it is set aside and it is to  be  re-made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Anonymity

As the appeal involves the interests of a lone female, I make the  following
direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

OTHER DIRECTIONS

 1. The fresh hearing will take place either at  the  Stoke  or  Nottingham
    Hearing Centres on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

 2. The rehearing of the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal should not  take
    place until the Upper Tribunal has published further  country  guidance
    under references AA/04799/2011 and AA/00746/2013  unless  such  country
    guidance is inordinately delayed.

 3. An Arabic interpreter  will  be  required  for  the  hearing  which  is
    estimated to take three hours.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

