
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03757/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st August 2016                   |On 5th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                 RAPHAEL [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji of Counsel instructed by Braitch
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent, I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 23rd May 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio gave  permission
    to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Matthews in which he dismissed the appeal on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds but allowed it on human rights  grounds
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse the application by the
    appellant, a male citizen  of  Nigeria,  for  international  and  human
    rights protection.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. Judge Adio gave permission on the basis that it was arguable  that  the
    judge should not have allowed the appeal on human rights grounds  under
    the Immigration Rules by applying the provisions of paragraph EX.1.  of
    Appendix FM because the eligibility Rules under  Appendix  FM  excluded
    the application of EX.1.

 4. It should be noted that, at paragraph 90 of  the  respondent's  refusal
    letter of 13th January 2015, it is erroneously  stated  that  paragraph
    EX.1. applied to the appellant's circumstances as a parent of a British
    citizen when, in fact, that paragraph could not apply to the  appellant
    by virtue of  paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.3.(b)(ii).   That  was  because  the
    parent of the appellant's child should not be his partner.  Judge  Adio
    applied that error to his grant of permission, but also suggested  that
    there was an arguable error because the  appellant  was  also  excluded
    from the application of paragraph EX.1. because  he  had  come  to  the
    United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  and  was  now  an  overstayer.    That
    restriction appears in  E-LTRPT.3.2.(b),  save  where  paragraph  EX.1.
    applies, which it does not.

 5. At the hearing before me both Mr Dhanji and Mr  McVeety  accepted  that
    paragraph EX.1. should not have  been  applied  by  the  judge  to  his
    decision although, clearly, he had been misled by paragraph 90  of  the
    refusal.

 6. For the sake of completeness, Mr Dhanji indicated that  representatives
    "interim" Rule 24 response should not be taken into consideration as it
    was not properly directed to the relevant issues in the application.

 7. Mr McVeety also helpfully indicated that, on the basis that the  matter
    would have to be re-made on human rights grounds,  there  had  been  no
    consideration of Article 8 issues  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  by
    consideration of the existence of compelling circumstances  and/or  the
    application of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 8. In these circumstances, particularly bearing in mind that it was  clear
    that the judge had been misled into erroneously  considering  paragraph
    EX.1., I indicated that I was satisfied that  the  decision  showed  an
    error on a point of law in relation to the  human  rights  claim  only.
    The dismissal of the asylum and humanitarian protection appeal was  not
    the subject of the application and so could stand.

Re-Making the Decision

 9. Having made the finding in  the  preceding  paragraph,  I  heard  brief
    submissions from both representatives about  Article  8  issues  taking
    into consideration that it was agreed that both the appellant's partner
    and his daughter, born on 12th July 2012, are British citizens.

10. Mr McVeety reminded me of the  correct  approach  to  consideration  of
    relevant issues under Section 117B by reference to MA (Pakistan) [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 concerning whether or not whether it would  be  reasonable
    to expect a child to relocate.  Mr McVeety conceded that this  was  the
    same test as that set out in EX.1.  In  that  respect  he  also  agreed
    that, applying that test, it would not be possible to force either  the
    appellant's  wife  or  child  to  go  to  Nigeria.   Nevertheless,   in
    conclusion, requested that  I  should  consider  the  appellant's  poor
    immigration history.

11. Mr Dhanji thought that the appeal could be decided in  the  appellant's
    favour as compelling circumstances already existed as identified by the
    First-tier Judge  when  considering  essentially  the  same  test.   He
    specifically drew my attention to paragraphs 44 and 47 of MA  in  which
    the Court of Appeal considered there to be powerful reasons why, having
    regard to the best interests of a child  as  a  primary  consideration,
    that, if the child is a citizen of UK, he or she should be  allowed  to
    stay and have their position legitimised if it would not be  reasonable
    to expect them to leave, even though the effect  is  that  possibly  an
    undeserving family can remain with them.

Conclusions and Reasons

12. At the end of the hearing, and after I had considered the matter for  a
    few moments, I announced that I would allow the appeal on human  rights
    grounds.  My reasons for doing so now follow.

13. My approach to the human rights element  of  this  appeal  follows  the
    guidance of the Court of Appeal in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    requiring the identification of compelling or exceptional circumstances
    for consideration of Article 8 issues outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    If such circumstances are  identified  then  the  five  stage  approach
    recommended in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 can be  applied,  particularly  to
    consider the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's  decision  to  the
    legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

14. The Rules do not allow  for  consideration  of  the  reasonableness  of
    expecting the appellant's partner and his daughter  to  go  to  Nigeria
    because of the conclusion, in the Rules in  E-LTRPT.2.3.(b)(ii),  which
    excludes the application of EX.1.   The  parent  with  whom  the  child
    normally lives is the  partner  of  the  appellant.   However,  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act does allow for consideration of the  same  test
    where an appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a child who is a British citizen.  This highlights an area of  the
    Immigration Rules which does not cater for the situation  which  arises
    in  this  appeal  yet  which  statute  acknowledges  is   relevant   to
    consideration of the public interest.  That,  in  my  view,  creates  a
    compelling  circumstance.   Additionally,  however,  there  are   other
    factors which also serve to  identify  compelling  circumstances.   The
    appellant's partner is British with a British mother and  a  father  of
    Jamaican origin.  She is reluctant to go to Nigeria,  a  country  about
    which she knows little and has never visited.  The  child,  whose  best
    interests are a primary consideration, is British and, at  4  years  of
    age, needs the care of her mother.  Neither of them can be compelled to
    leave the United Kingdom nor is there any wish to do  so.  Mr  MCVeety,
    for the respondent, agrees with that.

15. Further, it is not in issue that the appellant and his partner  have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship. The evidence, already examined  by
    the First-tier Judge, shows that  the  appellant  fully  exercises  his
    parental responsibilities and all the parties live together  under  the
    same roof.  Additionally, as the passage in MA referred to by Mr Dhanji
    makes clear, a poor immigration history does not, necessarily, override
    the best interests of a child who is  a  British  citizen.   All  these
    factors, together, lead me to conclude that it is  appropriate  that  I
    should consider the human rights element of  this  appeal  outside  the
    Rules  having  regard  to  the  Razgar  five  stage  approach  and  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

16. Looking at the best interests of the appellant's  4  year  old  British
    child with whom he has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship,
    I conclude that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  that  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom for  reasons  I  have  already  identified  as
    compelling  circumstances.   Thus,  on  the  basis  that  it   is   the
    proportionality element of the Razgar five stage tests that I  have  to
    consider in this case, I reach the  conclusion  that  the  respondent's
    decision is not  disproportionate  having  regard  to  the  appellant's
    partnership with a British  citizen  and,  particularly,  his  parental
    relationship with his British child.  I do not regard  the  appellant's
    immigration history as outweighing the best  interests  of  the  child.
    Although the appellant was an overstayer after the expiry of his  visit
    visa on 28th January 2011, he subsequently made  two  applications  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his family and private  life  and  also
    claimed asylum.  He has, at least, made some attempts to regularise his
    position even if his asylum claim has been dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appellant's  asylum
and humanitarian protection claims does not show an error on a point of  law
and shall stand.  The decision in relation to the human rights appeal  shows
an error and is set aside.  I re-make the human rights appeal  to  allow  it
on that ground.



Anonymity

An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal nor was  such
a direction requested before me.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

