

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: AA/03162/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 15 December 2015                    |               On 18 January 2016     |
|                                       |                                      |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                                      AM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Loughran, Counsel for Elder Rahimi Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant was born on 6 December 1981 and is a citizen of Pakistan.
     She appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 16  February
    2015 refusing her application for a variation of her leave to enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds that it would  be  contrary
    to the United Kingdom's obligations under the United Nations Convention
    and Protocol relating to the  status  of  refugees  or  unlawful  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as incompatible with her  rights
    under the European Convention on Human Rights for  her  to  be  removed
    from or required to leave the United Kingdom.  She had previously  been
    granted discretionary leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  for  six
    months as she was awaiting the result of the trial of her  husband  who
    was charged with matrimonial rape.   He was found guilty and received a
    five year sentence.   The Appellant's application for  a  variation  of
    leave is on the grounds that  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the
    previous grant of leave subsist or she qualifies for different  reasons
    either under Humanitarian Protection or the Home Office  Asylum  Policy
    Instruction on Discretionary Leave.  Her appeal was heard by  Judge  of
    the First Tier Tribunal, K S H Miller on 8 July 2015 and was  dismissed
    in a Decision promulgated on 20 August 2015 on all grounds.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Cruthers  on  14  September
    2015.  The permission states that the following grounds are arguable.

           1) When the First Tier Judge rejected certain  elements  of  the
              account given  by  the  Appellant  the  Judge  did  not  make
              sufficient reference to the fact  that  she  should  probably
              have been assessed to be a vulnerable witness.

           2)  Elements of the Judge's assessment run contrary to  warnings
              given by the Higher  Courts  against  assessing  plausibility
              etc. from a primary male/western/British perspective.

           3) The Judge should have explained  further  why  he  considered
              that the Appellant did not meet the relevant test set out  in
              Paragraph 276 ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  (assuming  that
              Paragraph 276ADE was argued for the Appellant at the  Hearing
              on 8 July 2015).

 3. There is a Rule 24 response opposing the permission.  This states  that
    the Appellant was tendered for cross-examination and appeared  to  give
    evidence without any difficulty.   It is unclear whether it was  raised
    at the outset that the Appellant was  vulnerable  or  sensitive.    The
    First Tier Judge  ought  to  have  regard  to  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance to that effect if it was raised.  The response states that the
    Judge was entitled to make adverse credibility findings and  has  given
    adequate reasons for his credibility findings and the grounds of appeal
    fail to identify which section of paragraph 276 ADE is relevant to  the
    Appellant's appeal.

The Hearing

 4. I asked if the Appellant's vulnerability was raised at the  First  Tier
    Hearing and was referred to the skeleton argument which was before  the
    First Tier Judge.   In paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 thereof it is stated  that
    the Appellant is a victim of domestic violence and rape and her  mental
    health issues are referred to, as is the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No. 2 of  2010  and  Practice  Direction,  First  Tier  and  Upper
    Tribunal "Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive  Witnesses"  of  30
    October 2008.  Paragraph 4 states that this applies to this appeal.   A
    direction for anonymity was requested and was granted.

 5. Counsel submitted that the fact that the Rule 24 response asks  whether
    a vulnerability issue was raised, demonstrates that the  Decision  does
    not make this clear.

 6. Counsel made her submissions,  referring  me  to  the  letter  from  St
    George's NHS Trust, stating that  the  Appellant  suffers  from  severe
    depression and anxiety and PTSD.  She submitted  that  the  First  Tier
    Judge did not consider the Practice Direction  or  the  guidance  which
    should have been considered in these circumstances.  She submitted that
    extracts of the guidance are in the skeleton argument which was  before
    the First Tier Judge.  She submitted that these extracts  are  relevant
    to the First Tier Hearing and the Appellant's giving  of  evidence  and
    the assessment of that evidence but there is no mention of  it  in  the
    Decision.  She submitted  that  when  the  Appellant's  credibility  is
    considered the Guidance should have been referred to.  She referred  to
    Paragraph 30 of the Decision which refers to the Appellant's depression
    and Counsel submitted that what the Appellant was  suffering  from  was
    not just depression but severe anxiety  and  the  Judge  did  not  give
    proper regard to that.  She submitted that the way that the Judge dealt
    with her vulnerability was such that he made a material error of law.

 7.  With  regard  to  plausibility,  Counsel  submitted  that  the   Judge
    characterised the Appellant's  conduct  without  considering  that  the
    Appellant had been a victim of domestic violence.  I  was  referred  to
    Paragraph 25 (vii) of the  Decision.   This  refers  to  the  Appellant
    stating:- "I've not been informed that my family in Pakistan have  been
    contacted by Fariukh (her abuser) or his family.  I have not  asked  my
    family about this."  Counsel submitted that the Judge  was  considering
    this based  on  Western  culture  not  the  culture  in  Pakistan.  She
    submitted that it is not implausible that  this  Appellant  waited  two
    months before applying for asylum as she had suffered domestic violence
    and matrimonial rape.  She submitted that the diagnosis was before  the
    First Tier Judge and he has clearly failed to consider  the  impact  of
    the trauma suffered by the Appellant but has  used  his  own  prism  of
    reasonability.

 8. I was referred to a previous Determination relating to  this  Appellant
    by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Braybrook which was promulgated  on
    21 August 2012.   At Paragraph 12 thereof that Judge found that a delay
    in claiming asylum had not damaged the Appellant's credibility  in  the
    circumstances and yet First Tier Tribunal Judge Miller has contradicted
    this.

 9. Counsel submitted that First Tier Tribunal Judge Miller's  approach  to
    the country expert evidence  amounts  to  an  error  of  law.   Counsel
    submitted that Judge Braybrook in the  previous  decision  accepts  the
    severe ill-treatment which the Appellant suffered  and  yet  the  First
    Tier Judge Miller when considering the expert report finds that some of
    this does not go to the Appellant's claim.  He refers to the  Appellant
    being well educated and so finds that the  expert  report  relating  to
    women and education does not apply in  this  case.   He  also  did  not
    accept that the attack on the Appellant in Pakistan had anything to  do
    with her husband.  Counsel submitted that the entirety  of  the  expert
    report has been rejected but the expert gave a  detailed  approach  and
    made multiple findings in the general attitude to  women  in  Pakistan.
    She submitted that much of the expert report is relevant and it was  an
    error of law for the Judge to dismiss it in its entirety.

10. Counsel then referred to Article 8 of ECHR  and  Paragraph  27  of  the
    Decision and the way the  Judge  deals  with  the  stigma  of  being  a
    divorcee in Pakistan.  The Judge states that he does not  believe  that
    any stigma which attaches,  would  be  so  significant  as  to  warrant
    protection under the Geneva Convention  or  ECHR.    Counsel  submitted
    that this is an error of law.

11. With regard to Paragraph 276 ADE, Counsel submitted that there are very
    significant obstacles to this Appellant reintegrating in Pakistan.  She
    submitted that it must be an error  when  the  Judge  states  that  the
    requirements of Paragraph 276 ADE  have  not  been  satisfied  and  she
    submitted that no explanation has been given of why he finds  this.  He
    has not expanded on this in any way.  She submitted that  at  Paragraph
    33 the Judge states: "Many people come to the United Kingdom and decide
    they like living here so this Appellant does  not  wish  to  return  to
    Pakistan".  She also submitted that the Appellant came  to  the  United
    Kingdom to join her husband.  She co-operated with the police, she gave
    evidence at her ex-husband's trial and so she  helped  the  public  but
    none of this is considered by the Judge when Article 8 is  dealt  with.
    She submitted that when public interest considerations  are  looked  at
    this should have been taken into account.

12. I was asked to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    Judge's determination.

13. The Presenting Officer made his submissions, submitting that the  grant
    of permission is extremely cautious.  He  submitted  that  to  say  the
    Appellant was a vulnerable witness and the Judge did not take this into
    account, is not sufficient.  What has to be said  is  whether,  by  not
    taking this into account or at least not mentioning it, did this have a
    practical effect on his decision?

14. I was referred to Paragraph 25 of the Decision relating to credibility.
     He submitted that the grounds do not explain what is  wrong  with  the
    Judge's findings of credibility because  of  her  vulnerability,  which
    have affected his decision.  He submitted that at Paragraph  25(i)  the
    Judge finds the Appellant wants to return to her family.  This  was  in
    her statement of 7 August 2012.  He found that there is an  about  turn
    in her evidence at Paragraph  25(v)  when  she  states  that  Fariukh's
    family are not bad people as she is now stating that she  fears  return
    because of the possibility of an honour killing.  He submitted that the
    Judge at that Paragraph states: "It is not believed that  this  is  the
    case or that her family would be encouraging her to return to  Pakistan
    if they thought she was likely to be at any risk from her ex-husband or
    his family."   At  Paragraph  25(viii)  the  Judge  does  not  find  it
    credible that the Appellant would have  claimed  asylum  in  a  country
    where her ex-husband knows she is likely  to  be,  if  she  is  not  in
    Pakistan.  He submitted that the Judge's credibility findings would not
    be any different whether the Appellant is vulnerable or not vulnerable.

15. He submitted that nothing has been submitted by Counsel stating to what
    extent the Judge's findings are unfair and  what  difference  it  would
    have made if the Presidential Guidance on vulnerability had  been  made
    more of, by the Judge.  He submitted that the credibility findings  are
    material  whereas  the  Presidential  Guidance  in  relation   to   the
    credibility findings are not material and there is nothing  to  suggest
    that the Judge used a prism of reasonability through his own eyes.

16. The Presenting Officer referred to Paragraph 25(vii)  and  delay.    At
    Paragraph 25(vii) of the Decision the Judge  refers  to  the  Appellant
    being an intelligent  well  educated  woman.   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that as an intelligent well educated woman she is well  aware
    of what happened in the previous Determination by judge  Braybrook  and
    so has altered her story.

17. With regard to the expert report,  he  submitted  that  the  Judge  has
    engaged with the pertinent parts of the report  and  has  distinguished
    the Appellant's claim from the case put  forward  by  the  expert.   He
    submitted that what the Judge has done has analysed the  expert  report
    and made reference to the parts which he does not believe apply to this
    Appellant.  Because the Appellant is well educated  the  expert  cannot
    say that her ex-husband and his family are likely to carry out  revenge
    on the Appellant or her family.   The  Judge  states  that  the  expert
    cannot know that the Appellant's family would hastily get her  "married
    off" to shed the stigma of her being a divorcee.  He submitted that the
    Judge has found that the Appellant's family has supported  her  through
    all her problems and  the  Judge's  dealings  with  the  expert  report
    contain no error at all.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge is aware of the medical
    evidence.  He refers to it at Paragraph 29 and states:- "I am surprised
    that there is  not  more  detailed  medical  evidence  available."   At
    paragraph 30 of his Decision the judge refers to the case of AEFE  (Sri
    Lanka) 2002 UKIAIT 05237 relating to reports on  depression  and  notes
    that the report was prepared by a CBT  Service  and  not  a  consultant
    psychologist or psychiatrist.  He does  not  find  that  on  return  to
    Pakistan the Appellant's mental  health  will  deteriorate.   He  finds
    there is no evidence of this and finds that she can  access  medication
    or therapy there and will be supported by her family.

19. With regard to Article 8  and  Paragraph  276  ADE  he  submitted  that
    Paragraph 33 contains no error and clearly the terms of  Paragraph  276
    ADE cannot be satisfied.

20. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has properly considered
    the case relating to the medical evidence and the expert  evidence  and
    there is no error of law in the Determination.

21. I asked Counsel if her argument relating to Paragraph  276  ADE  is  in
    connection with the difficulties  she  believes  this  Appellant  might
    have, integrating into Pakistan and she said that is the case.

22. Counsel responded to the Presenting  Officer's  submissions  submitting
    that when credibility was assessed by the Judge, had her  vulnerability
    been properly considered,  less weight would have  been  given  to  her
    credibility and perhaps less  weight  would  have  been  given  to  the
    Appellant's family's support.  She submitted that although  the  family
    states they are supportive they will want to marry her off.  I  put  to
    her that that is surely supposition on the part of  the  Appellant  and
    the expert.  Counsel submitted that the  Judge  did  not  consider  the
    culture in Pakistan and the stigma.

23. She submitted that with regard to credibility it cannot  be  right  for
    the Judge to state that it is not credible that the Appellant would not
    ask her family about her ex-husband's  family  getting  in  touch  with
    them.  She submitted that this is the Judge's perception and he has not
    considered the culture or the trauma the Appellant has suffered.  There
    is also the fact that the  Appellant  did  not  claim  asylum  for  two
    months.  She submitted that again the Judge has not paid regard to  the
    domestic abuse and marital rape.  She submitted that these omissions by
    the judge have impacted on his consideration of the claim.

24. With regard to the change in the Appellant's  evidence,  she  submitted
    that any changes are due to the fact that her  circumstances  have  now
    changed.  She is divorced and her husband has been imprisoned for rape.
     She submitted that she states that her family has always supported her
    but the family support will mean that they wish her to marry  to  avoid
    the stigma.

25. She submitted that the Judge failed to consider her reactions  and  her
    mental state as a victim of abuse and rape and if she did not  ask  her
    family whether they had been approached by her ex-husband's family that
    might well have been because she does not  want  to  think  about  that
    aspect of her life, or discuss it.

26. Counsel submitted that one of the Judge's findings was the rejection of
    the expert report.  He found that on certain premises the  report  does
    not apply to the Appellant.  He refers  to  the  Appellant  being  well
    educated and he also states that the attack on the Appellant  may  have
    had nothing to do with her  husband.   She  submitted  that  the  Judge
    reached incorrect findings because he failed  to  consider  the  expert
    report properly.

27. I was asked to read the report.  In  this  the  expert  refers  to  the
    attitude  towards  women  in  Pakistan.   The  COI  report  and   other
    background evidence is referred  to,  and  she  submitted,  that  clear
    findings are made which are relevant to the Appellant.   She  submitted
    that revenge by her ex-husband's family is likely in Pakistani  culture
    and the honour code has to be taken into account.  I  was  referred  to
    the country guidance on women in Pakistan and  arranged  marriages  and
    she submitted that this report should have been  given  weight  by  the
    Judge and not to do so is an error.

28. Counsel  submitted  that  this  Appellant  suffers  from  PTSD,  severe
    depression and severe anxiety.  She submitted that the  Judge  did  not
    look at this and her other evidence cumulatively and did  not  properly
    understand  her  situation.    She  submitted  that  he  has  not  made
    sufficient findings on the very significant obstacles to her  returning
    and re-integrating into Pakistan.  She will be a divorcee and a  victim
    of domestic violence whether her family support her or not.

29. I was asked to find that  there  are  errors  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision.

Decision and Reasons

30. I have to decide if the Judge made a  material  error  of  law  in  his
    decision promulgated on 20 August 2015.

31. It is clear that the Judge has considered the Appellant's mental health
    and the evidence about this on file.  This is referred to at  Paragraph
    29 of his decision.  The Judge makes an Anonymity Direction on  request
    as did the previous Judge in his Determination.   The Judge  refers  to
    the medical evidence but states that he is surprised there is not  more
    detailed evidence available. This is a relevant point.   He  refers  to
    depression and PTSD and also her inability to sleep but  he  refers  to
    her having no suicidal thoughts  and  no  plans  to  act  on  any  such
    thoughts.  He refers to the report by the  CBT  therapist  and  to  the
    uncertainty of the asylum decision attributing to her  depression.   It
    is true that the skeleton argument  which  was  before  him  refers  in
    particular to the Appellant being a vulnerable  and  sensitive  witness
    but the Judge is aware of the factors contributing to her vulnerability
    and has still found the Appellant to lack credibility. Counsel has  not
    explained to me how the Judge's  decision  would  differ  had  he  made
    specific reference to her vulnerability or how his  assessment  of  her
    credibility would be any different.  The Judge has noted that  she  was
    raped by her husband and he was sentenced to five years imprisonment as
    a result.  The Judge has given weight to objective indications of  risk
    rather than her state of mind.   It  seems  that  at  the  Hearing  the
    Appellant gave her evidence well.  There are no clear discrepancies  in
    her evidence but the Judge does not believe what she said.  It  is  not
    an error not to mention the  Practice  Direction  or  the  Presidential
    Guidance note in the Decision.   Had  he  not  considered  the  medical
    evidence before him that would have been an error but that is  not  the
    case.  I find that the fact that her vulnerability is not specified  in
    the decision has had no practical effect on the  judge's  decision.  He
    was aware of her circumstances.

32. With regard to plausibility the Appellant has changed her story because
    her husband has now been convicted  of  matrimonial  rape.   The  Judge
    finds that this is the case, but  the  Appellant's  family  has  always
    supported her and wishes her to return home.  She now states  that  she
    does not want to return home because her family will force her  to  re-
    marry but there is no evidence of this apart from her oral evidence and
    what the expert states and the Judge has rejected much (but not all) of
    the expert evidence.  As stated by the  Judge  the  Appellant  did  not
    think her ex-husband's family were bad but she has changed her evidence
    and is now stating that she fears them on return.

33. The Judge refers to Devaseelan 2000 JUKIAT 00702 but accepts that there
    is now new evidence and a different situation to consider.

34. At Paragraph 24 of the decision the Judge refers to the differences  in
    the Appellant's claim now.  Her husband has been convicted  of  marital
    rape, they have been divorced and  there  is  evidence  of  her  mental
    health issues.   This paragraph states that the question is whether the
    Appellant can safely return to Pakistan today.  The Judge  states  that
    it is clear that the Appellant's parents will support her and want  her
    to return to Pakistan to be with them.   The Appellant does  not  state
    that her ex-husband's family have changed from being good  people.  The
    Judge clearly believes that she has mentioned honour  killings  because
    she wishes to remain in the United Kingdom.  This is not something that
    was considered before.  The judge also states logically that her family
    would not have encouraged her to return to  Pakistan  if  they  thought
    this was likely.

35. With regard to Devaseelan  the  Judge  goes  along  with  the  previous
    Determination, that the attack on the Appellant was a  random  robbery.
    She was not being specifically targeted by her husband or  his  family.
    The Judge finds that the Appellant is intelligent and well educated and
    that this had an effect on her claiming asylum when she did.

36. At Paragraph 26 of the Decision the Judge again refers to  credibility.
    He does not believe  that  the  Appellant  has  presented  an  accurate
    picture about the attitude of her family or Fariukh's family. He points
    out that the families live around three hour's drive from each other.

37. There is then  the  expert  report.  I  find  the  Judge  has  properly
    considered this.  He has noted  matters  which  do  not  apply  to  the
    Appellant.  He finds the expert's statement that her family  is  likely
    to hastily get her married off if she returns to Pakistan  unlikely  as
    there is no evidence to support this.  He has considered the stigma  of
    the Appellant being a divorced woman in  Pakistan  and  finds  she  has
    changed and exaggerated elements of her claim to  try  to  give  her  a
    better claim.

38. I find that the Judge has properly considered the expert  evidence  and
    dealt with it accordingly.

39. The grounds of application state that the Judge has not  completed  his
    argument about Paragraph 276 ADE of the Rules.  The section  which  the
    Appellant's representative refers to is  whether  the  Appellant  would
    have difficulty re-integrating into Pakistan. The Judge finds that that
    is not the case.  He finds that she can return and live with her family
    in safety.  He finds that  her  mental  health  will  probably  improve
    because her family is there.  He gives  proper  reasons  based  on  the
    evidence before him for these findings.

40. As he finds that that is the case the terms of the paragraph 276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied and he finds that there is no
    good argument for considering the claim outside the Rules.   He  refers
    to the Appellant not wishing to return to Pakistan. He comments that it
    would not be unduly harsh for her to return and states  that  the  fact
    that she does not want  to  return  does  not  outweigh  the  need  for
    effective immigration control and public interest.  It was put to me by
    Counsel that because the Appellant co-operated and  helped  the  Police
    with their enquiries, relating to her rape, this should be  taken  into
    account in any proportionality assessment.  Public interest is still an
    issue. Even when this is  taken  into  account,  in  a  proportionality
    assessment, public interest must succeed.

Decision

41. I find that there is no material error of law in the First Tier Judge's
    Decision dismissing the appeal, promulgated on 20 August 2015.

42. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
