
[pic]


Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: AA/03951/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    AA/03950/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 25 September 2014                            |10 October 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

|AA                                       |First Appellant |
|SA                                       |Second Appellant|


                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms A. Benfield, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Allen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are both citizens of Sri Lanka and are husband and wife.
     They were born respectively on 14 March 1985 and 12 May  1988.   In  a
    letter dated 27 May 2014 the respondent refused their  separate  claims
    for asylum in the United Kingdom and on 6 June 2014 gave directions for
    their removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The appellants claim to be  refugees  whose  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach our obligations under the  Refugee  or  Person  in
    Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 ("the
    Qualification Regulations"), which I have taken into account.

 3. Alternatively the appellants claim that they are entitled to be granted
    Humanitarian Protection  in  accordance  with  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended), which I have taken into account.

 4. The appellants also claim that their removal from  the  United  Kingdom
    would  breach  our  obligations  under  the  1950  Convention  for  the
    Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms  ("the   1950
    Convention") with particular reference to Articles 2, 3 and 8 thereof.

 5. The first appellant was born in Valvettithurai in Sri  Lanka  which  is
    the birth place of Velupillai Prabaharan, the leader of the LTTE.   The
    town  was,  throughout  the  conflict  in  Sri  Lanka,  the  focus   of
    hostilities between the LTTE and the Sri  Lankan  Army.   He  left  Sri
    Lanka for south India in 1986 when he was 1  year  old.   This  was  by
    reason of the conflict in  the  region.   Some  three  years  later  he
    returned with his family to Sri Lanka due  to  the  discrimination  and
    hardship the family endured at the hands  of  the  Indian  authorities.
    Upon return he was present  during  a  range  of  attacks  including  a
    shelling attack in which his grandfather  and  aunt  were  killed.   In
    1990, as a result, the family went back to south India  and  once  more
    returned to Sri Lanka in 2002.  Shortly thereafter the first  appellant
    was stopped by the army and as he was unable  to  produce  an  identity
    card he was questioned and then detained for a period of twelve days in
    Valvettithurai army camp.  During  this  detention  he  was  physically
    abused and beaten.  The army considered that he had strong ties  to  an
    LTTE cell  in  south  India.   He  was  eventually  released  following
    intervention from his mother.   Following  this  incident  he  and  his
    family once more fled to south India.  The first appellant was involved
    in Tamil rights movements there, was a member  of  "Nam  Thamilar"  and
    attended demonstrations.  He came to the United Kingdom in  2002  as  a
    student and joined the Tamil Youth Organisation  (TYO)  in  London  and
    started to help the  Tamil  Expatriate  Movement.  He  participated  in
    processions and demonstrations against the Sri Lankan Government.

 6. The second appellant was also born in Valvettithurai.  She was  injured
    by shrapnel following a bomb attack when a house was destroyed and  her
    uncle was killed.  As a consequence of  the  hostilities  she  and  her
    family, in 1996, went to an army controlled camp in Vavuniya where they
    were questioned regarding  their  involvement  with  the  LTTE.   As  a
    consequence of the continuing unrest in her home country  she  and  her
    family moved to south India when she was aged 9 years.  There she  was,
    as a college student,  involved  in  demonstrations  for  Tamil  rights
    during the period of 2008 to 2010.  In May/June 2007  she  returned  to
    Sri Lanka to visit her  father  who  was  ill.   She  was  stopped  and
    questioned on arrival about her involvement with  the  LTTE  in  India.
    She had been absent from Sri Lanka  for  eleven  years  which  prompted
    interest in her activities abroad.  Her father informed her that he had
    connections with the LTTE and that the army  had  adverse  interest  in
    him.  He had been questioned on several occasions  by  the  army.   The
    second appellant was warned by her father that it was unsafe to  remain
    in Sri Lanka and that she should return to  India  forthwith.   On  the
    third night of her visit she was staying at her maternal  grandmother's
    brother's house when ten members of the army raided the property.   She
    was taken to a camp  where  she  was  fingerprinted,  photographed  and
    interrogated.  She was questioned and raped by four army officers.  She
    was informed during her questioning that the reason for her arrest  was
    her father's known involvement with the LTTE and the  belief  that  she
    had helped the Indian wing of that group in India.   She  was  released
    with reporting conditions.  Fearing for her  safety,  she  obtained  an
    emergency passport on payment of a bribe and fled to south India.   She
    married the first appellant in August 2011.

 7. These facts were considered at an  appeal  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by Judge Hembrough.  In a  determination,  promulgated  on  25
    July  2014,  he  dismissed  both   appellants'   appeals   on   asylum,
    Humanitarian Protection grounds and with reference to Articles 2, 3 and
    8 of the 1950 Convention.

 8. In so doing the judge  broadly  accepted  the  factual  matrix  of  the
    appellants' claims although he had some doubts about the provenance  of
    a TYO letter dated 14 July 2014 which was submitted at the hearing  and
    which stated that the first appellant was a member "in the year  2009".
    Moreover there was no reference in the letter to the appellant  holding
    any office within the organisation and no requirement to pay an  annual
    subscription.  The judge also found that whilst the TYO is a proscribed
    organisation in Sri Lanka, its aims and objectives do not  include  the
    formation of a separate Tamil state.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant is a low level supporter and member of  a  number  of  groups
    with an interest in promoting  the  rights  of  Tamils  in  Sri  Lanka.
    Whilst accepting that the appellant attended a number of events in  the
    United Kingdom the judge also found that the first appellant is "by  no
    means an activist".  The judge went on to apply the guidance  and  risk
    categories of GJ and others Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  319  (IAC)  and
    found the appellant did not meet any of the risk categories  identified
    therein and that he was in fact an economic migrant,  albeit  one  with
    continuing interest in  Tamil  affairs  as  contemplated  at  paragraph
    356(A) of GJ.

 9. As to the second appellant, he found that she had never engaged in  any
    political activity in Sri Lanka and was never an  LTTE  member,  albeit
    that she attended a small number of political meetings in  India.   She
    has not engaged significantly  in  political  activity  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge further found that even accepting  her  account  of
    her detention and rape in 2007 at face value, on her own account within
    her asylum interview she was found to be innocent  of  any  involvement
    with the LTTE and was released without charge.

10.  Following  the  dismissal  of  their  appeals  the  appellants  sought
    permission to appeal.  That was granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Landes on 13 August 2014.

11. Thus the appeal came before me today.

12. Ms Benfield relied upon and amplified the lodged grounds in  submitting
    to me that the judge had made material errors within his  determination
    as identified in the grounds.  If I was mindful to accept her arguments
    she invited me to set the judge's decision  aside  and  to  remake  it,
    allowing the appeal on the  basis  of  the  risk  of  persecution  each
    appellant would face upon return to Sri Lanka.  She  acknowledged  that
    the second appellant's claim, on the  facts,  is  the  weaker  but  she
    nonetheless is dependent, in any event, on that of the first appellant.

13. Mr Allen submitted that the first ground was no more than a dispute  or
    disagreement with the findings of the judge.  Clear reasoning had  been
    given and the judge had taken into account the  first  appellant's  sur
    place activities and submitted that GJ is not authority to suggest that
    mere involvement in diaspora activities renders one  a  refugee.   Both
    within the headnote and the authority itself it emphasises the need  to
    have a "significant role".  The judge's findings were open to  be  made
    on the evidence and the conclusions that the judge reached in paragraph
    48 of his determination were open to him.  Paragraph 48 states:-

         "48. I accept that he has attended the events claimed  in  the  UK.
             However he is by no means an activist.  He has never spoken at
             a meeting at which he was in attendance.  Nor has he committed
             his opinions to writing.  He has never openly voiced views  in
             opposition to the  Sri  Lankan  government  nor  has  he  ever
             advocated the creation of a separate of Tamil state in the  UK
             where he is free to do so.  Whilst privately he may  hold  the
             view that this may be  the  only  realistic  solution  to  the
             plight of Tamils living in Sri Lanka I find that at the  heart
             of his political beliefs is the desire to promote  the  rights
             and improve the circumstances of Tamils not the destruction of
             the unitary state in Sri Lanka."

14. Mr Allen submitted that ground 3 was also no more than  a  disagreement
    with the judge's findings and although  paragraph  43  of  the  judge's
    determination is not a "definitive finding" as  to  whether  the  first
    appellant is or is not a member of the TYO, the issue  was  nonetheless
    dealt with by the judge in the following paragraph  when  he  considers
    that the TYO letter of 14 July 2014 makes no reference to the appellant
    holding  any  office  within  the  organisation,  that  there   is   no
    requirement to pay an annual subscription and, whilst the TYO may be  a
    proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka, its aims and  objectives  do  not
    include the formation of a separate Tamil state.

15. Beyond that the judge has given  clear  reasoning  for  coming  to  the
    conclusions that he did.

16. As to the second ground, Mr Allen acknowledges that  the  determination
    makes no reference to HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 but that  in  itself  is
    not an error of law given the judge's analysis within the determination
    of the risks the appellants may face if returned to Sri Lanka.

17. It is helpful here to make reference to some of  the  authorities  that
    have been put before me prior to considering whether the judge erred as
    submitted by Ms Benfield.

18. The headnote to GJ states:-

         "(1) This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
             Sri Lanka.

         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists (whether in print or other  media)  or  human
                  rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the
                  Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
                  record, or who are associated with  publications  critical
                  of the Sri Lankan government.

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses.

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             'watch' list.  A person whose name appears on a  'watch'  list
             is not reasonably likely to be detained  at  the  airport  but
             will be monitored by the security services after  his  or  her
             return.  If that monitoring does  not  indicate  that  such  a
             person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the  unitary
             Sri Lankan state or revive the internal  armed  conflict,  the
             individual in question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             to be detained  by  the  security  forces.   That  will  be  a
             question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any  diaspora
             activities carried out by such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
             an individual's activities  and  responsibilities  during  the
             civil war, the exclusion clauses are engaged  (Article  1F  of
             the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the  Qualification
             Directive).  Regard  should  be  had  to  the  categories  for
             exclusion set out in the 'Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing
             the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from  Sri
             Lanka', published by UNHCR on 21 December 2012."

19. I am aware that the Court of Appeal found in MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829 that there was no legal error in  the
    Upper Tribunal's guidance on Sri Lanka despite the  fact  that  it  had
    narrowed the risk categories from those in the  Eligibility  Guidelines
    of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

20. I am satisfied that the judge materially erred as submitted in relation
    to all three grounds.

21. He failed to appropriately consider the findings of the Upper  Tribunal
    in GJ in respect of the relevance of attendance and a  high  likelihood
    that,  in  the  light  of  the  frequency  of  the  first   appellant's
    attendance, there would be a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  the
    first appellant (and therefore the second appellant) will  be  at  risk
    upon return owing to his sur place activities.  These amount to fifteen
    attendances, including the first appellant being shown in  a  range  of
    pictures including  a  Channel 4  TV  documentary,  coupled  with  his
    activity at the Tamil Remembrance Day distributing papers.   There  was
    also evidence before the Tribunal from the Tamil Guardian picturing the
    appellant.   There  was  ample  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  first
    appellant is, or is perceived to be, a threat to the integrity  of  Sri
    Lanka as a single state because he has, or  is  perceived  to  have,  a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora.  Ultimately this is a conclusion that can be reached when
    looking at the totality of the evidence that was before the judge.

22. The judge also erred in not explicitly considering HJ  (Iran)  and  the
    arguments that were put forward in reliance thereon.  I appreciate  the
    judge did consider that the desire to promote the  rights  and  improve
    the circumstances of Tamils was at the heart of the  first  appellant's
    political  beliefs.   I  find  though  that  the  judge  erred  in  not
    concluding that the first appellant might express such views when asked
    by the Sri Lankan authorities or, if he did not, it would be due  to  a
    fear of persecution.

23. I also find that the judge erred  in  failing  to  make  a  finding  in
    relation to the appellant's membership of the TYO  and  the  impact  of
    such membership and the perceptions the  Sri  Lankan  Government  would
    hold consequent upon such membership.  In oral evidence  the  appellant
    dealt with the anxieties of the judge in relation to  the  unattributed
    and unsigned letter and in not finding that the appellant was a  member
    of the TYO conclusively or otherwise the judge fell into  error.   When
    looking at this letter in the context of the totality of  the  positive
    credibility findings, I find the appellant was a member of the  TYO  as
    claimed.

24. The first and second appellants have both been subjected to persecution
    and serious harm within their home country of Sri Lanka.   This  is  an
    indication of their well-founded fear of persecution.

25. The first appellant has been subject to arrest and  torture,  has  been
    absent from Sri Lanka for a substantial period and will be viewed  with
    suspicion owing to the perception of association with the LTTE in south
    India.  He was released and warned  not  to  leave  his  house  and  be
    available for the authorities to visit  and  find  him  at  home.   His
    immigration history shows non-compliance with that demand.

26. He has had a high level of involvement in Tamil diaspora  movements  in
    demonstrations in India and the United Kingdom and such activities  are
    highly likely to have brought him to the attention of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, thus placing him at risk on  return.   Within  the  United
    Kingdom there is evidence of  his  membership  of  the  TYO  and  other
    involvements  including  the  Tamil  Society  of  Kingston  University,
    production of papers and acting as a volunteer at the Tamil Remembrance
    Day event on 27 November 2013.  Whilst attendance at demonstrations may
    not be enough in itself to show that an individual is a committed Tamil
    activist seeking to promote separatism, it is  a  factor  that  can  be
    taken into account when looking at the totality of the evidence and any
    individual appellant's particular makeup and the risk that  he  or  she
    might face upon return to Sri Lanka.  Given  the  extensive  nature  of
    this   first   appellant's   individual   involvement    in    diaspora
    organisations, coupled with his attendance at demonstrations  published
    in the media, I find that he is likely to be at risk of  identification
    by the Sri Lankan authorities were he to return.  I remind myself  that
    the TYO is subject to a proscription order and  the  first  appellant's
    membership thereof increases his risk.  The first appellant is  someone
    with strong political opinions and if returned to Sri Lanka he would be
    unable to express them in contravention of the  principles  established
    by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran).

27.  The  second  appellant's  claim  is  perhaps  weaker  than  the  first
    appellant's.  Nonetheless it is dependent upon it.  However, in  coming
    to my conclusions that these appeals should be allowed I also take into
    account the second appellant's rape when held by the  Sri  Lanka  Army,
    her father's profile as a supporter of the LTTE who had been subject to
    questioning himself, her own absence for a substantial period from  Sri
    Lanka, her interrogation, detention and  her  non-compliance  with  the
    reporting conditions imposed upon her.

28. I remind myself that the burden is on the appellants to show that there
    are substantial grounds for believing that they meet  the  requirements
    of the Qualification Regulations.  Given the  conclusions  as  outlined
    above, I find the appellants have discharged the  burden  of  proof  to
    establish that they are entitled to the grant of asylum.  I come to the
    conclusion that their removal would cause the United Kingdom to  be  in
    breach of its obligations under the Qualification Regulations.

29. Accordingly the appellants are not entitled to Humanitarian Protection.

30. Given my conclusions I also find  that  the  appellants'  rights  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the  1950  Convention  are  engaged  and  that  the
    decision appealed against would cause  the  United  Kingdom  to  be  in
    breach of the law or its obligations under that Convention.

31. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

32. I set aside the decision.

33. I remake the decisions in these appeals by allowing them.

Direction regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date         1 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


