
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03302/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th September 2016                         |On 6th October 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     SOK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As this appeal involves the interests of  a  young  child  I  make  the
    following anonymity direction:

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. In a renewed application Upper Tribunal Judge Finch gave permission  to
    the appellant on 21st October 2015 to appeal against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hillis who dismissed the appeal on all
    grounds against the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  asylum,
    humanitarian and human rights protection to the appellant, a citizen of
    Iraq. In relation to human rights, the appellant claimed  to  be  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a Slovakian  national  and  to
    have sole responsibility for the child of that relationship.

The Hearing

 3. At the hearing  there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Notice had been sent to him at his last recorded address in
    Liverpool on 8th July 2016 and had not been returned in the post.   The
    appellant had not been represented throughout the appeal  process.   In
    these circumstances I was satisfied that I could proceed  to  hear  the
    appeal in the appellant's absence and that it was in the  interests  of
    justice to do  so.   In  this  respect  I  applied  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Finch stated, in the grant of permission, that the
    appellant had not sought to  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse
    asylum but alleged that the First-tier Judge  had  misdirected  himself
    when he found that the appellant was not his daughter's father and  was
    not in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her mother.   It  was
    noted that the appellant's wife and her own father had  given  evidence
    at the hearing and the wife's  mother  had  also  submitted  a  witness
    statement but was not cross-examined upon it.  The First-tier Judge had
    not referred to the evidence given by the  appellant's  wife's  parents
    and did not explain why their evidence as  confirmation  of  a  genuine
    relationship was not accepted.   Further,  papers  relating  to  Family
    Court proceedings suggested that the appellant was the  father  of  his
    wife's  child.   Additionally,  the  First-tier  Judge  had  based  his
    conclusion about the child's best interests on allegations  which  were
    not proved in the Family Court and which were withdrawn.

 5. The respondent submitted a response on 4th November 2015  opposing  the
    appeal on the basis that the judge had directed himself  appropriately.
    However the respondent had not, at that time,  been  furnished  with  a
    copy of the appellant's original grounds of appeal and it was not clear
    whether or not the grant of permission by the Upper Tribunal Judge  was
    predicated upon the appellant's grounds or the judge's own view of  the
    papers as available on the court file.  Further, it was commented  that
    the judge was entitled to center upon the evidence of the appellant and
    his alleged partner with regard to questions of subsistence.

 6. Mr Bates reminded me that it was only the First-tier Judge's Article  8
    assessment that was in contention and so the dismissal  of  the  asylum
    claim should stand.  He accepted that the judge had made no findings on
    the evidence of the partner's father and mother but  argued  that  this
    was not material.  That was because the judge did consider in paragraph
    61 of the decision the relevant issues under paragraph 117B of the 2002
    Act and, in paragraph 66, recorded the fact that the  partner,  in  her
    own evidence, had stated that if the appellant were removed to Iraq she
    would go there with him and  take  their  daughter  who  is  not  a  UK
    citizen.  There would therefore be no interference  with  family  life.
    Mr Bates also contended that  the  Immigration  Rules  could  not  have
    applied to the child or the mother who was not settled  in  UK  and  so
    would not come within Section EX.1. of the Rules.   He  contended  that
    the genuineness of the relationship was not a material issue  when  the
    parties had agreed that they would return to Iraq together.   Mr  Bates
    also emphasised that the reasons for  rejection  of  the  human  rights
    claim were clearly detailed in the refusal of 13th February 2015, which
    had concluded that the appellant's partner  was  not  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom and that the parties had
    not shown that they were in a subsisting relationship for a  period  of
    two years.

Conclusions

 7. Whilst the grant of permission suggests that the  judge  did  not  give
    consideration to all the available evidence particularly in the form of
    evidence from the partner's parents and Family Court proceedings,  this
    is not entirely correct.  In paragraph 53 of  the  decision  the  judge
    details and considers the relevance of Liverpool  County  Court  orders
    which, the judge noted, did not refer to the appellant as the father of
    the child.  The judge was entitled to conclude, from those orders, that
    the parties had not been in a subsisting marriage for  all  but  a  two
    week period and was  entitled  to  note  the  serious  allegations  and
    counter-allegations made against each adult party  to  the  proceedings
    even if the claims appear not to have been pursued.

 8. I have noted from the judge's Record of Proceedings, that he  did  hear
    brief evidence from the partner's father. However, I conclude that  the
    judge's failure to refer to that evidence or documentary evidence  from
    the mother is not  material  when,  for  the  purpose  of  the  judge's
    examination of private and family life, the  partner  stated  that  she
    would go with the appellant to Iraq and take her daughter with her.  On
    that basis the family would remain together.

 9. It is unfortunate that the appellant did not attend the hearing  before
    me in order to comment  on  issues  raised  by  the  respondent.   This
    decision is therefore based upon the submissions of the respondent  and
    my consideration of the detailed and cogently reasoned decision of  the
    judge which, although it reveals  the  error  in  relation  to  witness
    evidence to which I have referred, does not show it to  be  a  material
    error such that it should be set aside.  In reaching this conclusion  I
    also bear in mind that the appellant's application for leave re-asserts
    that he is the father of his  claimed  partner's  child  but  does  not
    contend that the judge erred in his  consideration  of  other  evidence
    relating to the genuineness and subsistence of his relationship.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

I refer to the anonymity direction made at the beginning of this decision.


Signed                              Date 6th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
