
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL/KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03013/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 December 2015                   |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H Y
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M O'Brian, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S McTaggart, Counsel, instructed by RP Crawford &
                    Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 15 March 1990.  He
    arrived in the UK on 13 August 2013 and claimed  asylum  on  13  August
    2013.  That claim was refused and a decision made on 16  February  2015
    to remove him under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.



 3. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McGrade on 24 June 2015 whereby the appeal  was  allowed
    on asylum grounds.

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision

 4. Judge McGrade gave a summary of the appellant's account  which  was  as
    follows.  He claims to be a member of the Reer  Hamar  minority  ethnic
    group from Tordho village in the Lower  Juba  region  of  Somalia.   He
    worked on his parents'  farm  and  helped  his  father  as  a  teaching
    assistant, his father being a teacher of the Qur'an.

 5. In 2013 Al-Shabaab were in  control  of  his  home  area.   He  stopped
    attending the mosque on Fridays as Al-Shabaab would ask young people to
    join them  and  the  appellant  did  not  want  to.   He  was  however,
    approached many times.  On a Friday, 26 July 2013, he was at home  when
    members of Al-Shabaab came to the house.  The appellant was  assaulted,
    handcuffed, blindfolded and taken away.   He  was  detained  for  three
    days.

 6. On 29 July 2013, there was shooting outside  the  house  where  he  was
    detained.  The appellant and some others managed  to  escape.   Someone
    the appellant knew who was also detained helped him by  taking  him  to
    someone that his father knew.  With the assistance of an aunt in  Saudi
    Arabia he went to Mogadishu, and  then  left  the  country,  eventually
    arriving in Northern Ireland.

 7. Judge McGrade set out the appellant's account and  gave  a  summary  of
    country background material.

 8. At [20] he  concluded  that  the  appellant's  account  is  "reasonably
    plausible and consistent with the  objective  evidence".   At  [22]  he
    stated that he accepted that the appellant and his father  were  viewed
    with  suspicion  by  Al-Shabaab   on   account   of   the   appellant's
    unwillingness to subscribe to the views of Al-Shabaab and to join them.
     He also stated that he accepted that Al-Shabaab came to  his  home  on
    around 26 July 2013 and detained him and others.  He concluded that the
    appellant's account of being held in a house for  three  days  was  not
    inherently improbable.

 9. At [23] he stated that he  had  some  concerns  about  the  appellant's
    ability to make arrangements to  travel  to  the  UK  so  quickly.   He
    nevertheless accepted the appellant's account of  his  escape  and  the
    arrangements made for him to flee Somalia.

10. Regarding the appellant's account that his father is in prison and that
    his mother, wife and three sisters are in an IDP camp  in  Kismayo,  he
    also accepted that aspect of the account.  In  the  next  paragraph  he
    also stated that he accepted that the  appellant's  aunt  was  deported
    from Saudi Arabia and is also in  an  IDP  camp  with  the  appellant's
    mother and other family members.

11. As regards internal relocation, it was accepted that the appellant  had
    not previously lived in Mogadishu, and although  he  found  that  there
    were some clan connections between the Reer Hamar and Mogadishu, he was
    not satisfied that those connections are sufficiently strong to  enable
    the appellant to rely on them.  It was also accepted that the appellant
    will have no access to financial resources in Mogadishu.

12. At [31], although accepting that the appellant is a young healthy male,
    it was found that those factors of themselves  are  not  sufficient  to
    conclude that he would be able to obtain  employment  or  become  self-
    employed.  Given that his aunt left Saudi Arabia and is now  living  in
    an IDP camp, he found that the appellant could not  expect  to  receive
    remittances from abroad.  He also noted  that  whilst  in  the  UK  the
    appellant had relied entirely upon NASS support.

13. Accordingly, he found that the appellant was likely to have to live  in
    makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp which falls below acceptable
    humanitarian standards.  Thus, he found that it  was  not  "reasonable"
    for the appellant to relocate to Mogadishu.

    The Grounds and Submissions

14. The respondent's grounds refer to aspects of the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter and contend that the judge had not given adequate  consideration
    to those reasons for refusing the appellant's claim. Similarly,  it  is
    asserted that he had not given  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  he  was
    prepared  to  accept  the  appellant's  evidence.   This  includes  the
    appellant's claim that his father is in prison and other family members
    are in IDP camps.

15. The grounds also take issue with the judge's assessment of the  ability
    of the appellant to relocate to Mogadishu, particularly considering the
    conclusion that the appellant is a young healthy male  and  that  there
    are some clan connections between the Reer Hamar and Mogadishu.

16. With reference to the country guidance decision in MOJ & Others (Return
    to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC),  the  grounds  argue
    that the judge erred in law in failing to follow that decision,  or  if
    he had decided not to follow it to explain what his reasons were.

17. In submissions Ms O'Brian relied on the written grounds. She  submitted
    that at [20] the judge had referred to the appellant's account as being
    reasonably plausible and consistent with the objective evidence, but in
    fact in terms of Al-Shabaab recruiting child soldiers  the  appellant's
    account was not consistent with that.

18. At  [23],  although  stating  that  he  had  some  concerns  about  the
    appellant's ability to  make  arrangements  to  travel  to  the  UK  so
    quickly, the judge nevertheless  went  on  to  accept  the  appellant's
    account without explaining  why  his  concerns  in  that  respect  were
    dispelled, or how.  A mere reference to the lower standard of proof  is
    not a sufficient basis for  the  judge's  conclusions.   Similarly,  no
    reasons are given  at  [25]  for  the  conclusions  reached  about  the
    appellant's father being in prison or his other family members being in
    an IDP camp.

19. So far as internal relocation is concerned, the judge had  not  applied
    the appropriate test.  It is similarly not  clear  as  to  whether  the
    judge had decided to follow the guidance in MOJ or had distinguished it
    for some reason.

20. Even if the judge  was  purporting  to  follow  the  guidance  in  MOJ,
    inadequate reasons were given  as  to  why  the  appellant  would  find
    himself in an IDP camp.  Again, reference  was  made  to  the  decision
    letter in this respect, in particular at [44].

21. Mr McTaggart's  submissions  highlighted  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    account that were accepted by the respondent.  These were that  he  was
    from a minority clan, the Reer Hamar, that his home area was controlled
    by Al-Shabaab  and  that  members  of  Al-Shabaab  would  approach  the
    appellant and ask him to join them, that matter being  consistent  with
    the country information (see [13] of the refusal letter).

22. At [20] of the refusal letter it  was  accepted  that  Al-Shabaab  have
    forcibly recruited children and adults in the areas controlled by  them
    in south and central Somalia.  Although most recruitment was of  16  to
    20 year olds, the appellant was just over that age, being 23  years  of
    age.

23.  The  First-tier  Judge  had  taken  those  accepted  features  of  the
    appellant's case, and applied the lower standard to  find  his  account
    credible.  In reality, the  respondent's  case  is  nothing  more  than
    disagreement with the judge's findings.

24. So far as the judge's conclusions at [25] are concerned,  in  terms  of
    the appellant's father being in prison and  his  other  family  members
    being in an IDP camp, those situations are quite common and  there  was
    no reason not to accept the appellant's account.  The judge had  before
    him a large bundle of background evidence.

25. It was submitted that there was no substance to the complaint about the
    test applied by the judge in terms of internal relocation.  The refusal
    letter itself refers to questions of whether it would be "unreasonable"
    to expect the appellant to live in Mogadishu.

26. The judge had applied MOJ.  His conclusions at [29]-[31] are all  taken
    directly from  that  decision.   He  had  not  indicated  that  he  was
    departing from MOJ, and he would have said so if  that  was  his  view.
    The only thing that the appellant had in his favour was that he  was  a
    young healthy male, but the judge took that  into  account.   There  is
    reference at [400]-[401] of MOJ to  returns  of  Somali  citizens  from
    Saudi Arabia.

    My assessment

27. It is axiomatic that a judge  is  required  to  give  reasons  for  the
    conclusions reached.  At [21] the  judge  summarised  the  respondent's
    objections to the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account,  and  in
    subsequent paragraphs made a series of positive credibility findings.

28. It is true that the judge's assessment of the  appellant's  credibility
    will have started from a standpoint of  some  aspects  of  his  account
    having been accepted by the respondent, as outlined in  submissions  to
    me by Mr McTaggart.   However,  I  do  not  consider  that  that  fact,
    together with the lower standard of proof, was a sufficient basis  from
    which the judge was able legitimately to conclude that the  appellant's
    account was credible in all respects.

29. The judge's conclusions contain  a  spectrum  of  reasoning  from  some
    relatively 'thin' reasoning, to no reasons at all.

30. In the refusal letter at [20], doubt is expressed about the appellant's
    claim that Al-Shabaab came to his home and abducted him, in  the  light
    of the fact that the  background  evidence  suggested  that  Al-Shabaab
    mostly recruited 16 to 20 year olds, whereas the appellant was 23 years
    of age.  Although it was accepted by the respondent that the  appellant
    had been approached at the mosque and in the market,  or  when  he  was
    walking around town, the further contention that he was  abducted  from
    home was not accepted. Reference is made at [20] of the refusal  letter
    to background evidence suggesting that only 13 per cent  of  Al-Shabaab
    recruits had been forcibly recruited.

31. At [22] of his decision the judge  stated  that  he  was  "prepared  to
    accept" that the appellant and his father were viewed with suspicion by
    Al-Shabaab on account of the appellant's unwillingness to subscribe  to
    the views of Al-Shabaab and to join them.   However,  in  going  on  to
    accept that Al-Shabaab came to his home  and  detained  him,  the  only
    reasons given for accepting that aspect of the  account  are  circular,
    stating that they may well have sought to detain the appellant both  to
    intimidate him and in the hope that he may join  them.   However,  that
    does not engage with the issues raised by the respondent in the refusal
    letter in terms of  the  appellant's  age  and  in  terms  of  evidence
    suggesting that only a relatively small percentage of recruits who  had
    been interviewed said that they had been forcibly recruited.

32. Mr McTaggart sought to persuade me that the appellant being aged 23, he
    was only just above  the  age  in  relation  to  which  the  background
    evidence shows that there was forcible recruitment.  However, it is not
    apparent from the decision that  the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
    account of his abduction and detention on the basis that  he  was  near
    enough to the age of forcible recruitment.

33. Furthermore, at [21] of the refusal letter the  reasons  given  by  the
    appellant for the forcible recruitment, being the possibility that  one
    of his neighbours must have told them that he was reciting  the  Koran,
    is inconsistent with the background evidence in terms  of  Al-Shabaab's
    strict interpretation of Sharia law, suggesting that that would not  be
    a reason for the appellant to be forcibly recruited.

34. In addition, at [22] the judge concluded that the  appellant's  account
    of being held in a house for three days and only being spoken  to  when
    he was brought food and called to prayer was not inherently improbable.
     However, the respondent contended in the refusal letter at  [22]  that
    his account of his detention was vague and  his  claim  of  only  being
    spoken to at times when he was brought food or  taken  for  prayer  was
    inconsistent with their having abducted him in order to  force  him  to
    fight for them.  It was asserted by the respondent that  the  time  and
    effort taken to capture him and guard him for three days so  that  they
    could persuade him to join them is not reasonably likely.   Again,  the
    judge does not engage with this aspect of the respondent's case.

35. The judge stated  at  [23]  that  he  had  "some  concerns"  about  the
    appellant's ability to  make  arrangements  to  travel  to  the  UK  so
    quickly.  He then went on to accept  that  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    account but the only reasons offered  are  "bearing  in  mind  the  low
    standard of proof."

36. The respondent explained in the refusal letter at [23] and [24] why his
    account of his escape was not accepted.  However, the judge stated that
    he was "prepared to accept" that aspect  of  his  account,  again  only
    citing the low standard of  proof.   These  in  my  judgement  are  not
    legally sustainable conclusions, being conclusions reached without  any
    apparent reasons.

37. Similarly, at [25] the judge simply stated that  he  was  "prepared  to
    accept" that the appellant's father is in  prison  without  giving  any
    reasons  for  coming  to  that  view.   He  also  concluded  that   the
    appellant's account of his mother, wife and sisters  having  chosen  to
    move to an IDP camp was also credible, although in that respect he  did
    give a reason, namely that they no longer considered that it  was  safe
    to remain in their home without a male head  of  household  to  protect
    them and Al-Shabaab would  not  permit  them  to  work.   However,  the
    foundation for those findings, namely that the appellant's father is in
    prison, is unreasoned.

38. At [26] no  reasons  are  given  for  the  judge's  acceptance  of  the
    appellant's account that his aunt was expelled from Saudi  Arabia.   It
    is true that in MOJ reference was made to Somalis being  expelled  from
    Saudi Arabia but the judge does not refer to MOJ in  that  respect,  or
    indeed to any background evidence  on  that  issue.   It  may  be  that
    support for the appellant's account in that regard can be found in  MOJ
    and country background material, but it was incumbent on the  judge  to
    support his findings in that respect with reasons.

39.  In  terms  of  the  positive  credibility   findings,   Mr   McTaggart
    understandably was at pains to identify evidence, or to posit  reasons,
    as to why the judge's findings could be supported.  However,  it  seems
    to me that the casting around for support for the  judge's  conclusions
    supports the proposition that  the  judge's  own  reasons  are  legally
    inadequate.  The starkest examples of this are the  judge's  acceptance
    without  reasons  of  the  appellant's  account  of  his  escape   from
    detention, his father being in prison and his aunt being expelled  from
    Saudi Arabia.

40. So far as the respondent's other grounds are  concerned,  in  terms  of
    internal relocation and the application of MOJ, they  are  in  a  sense
    parasitic on the grounds in relation to credibility.  The assessment of
    the appellant's credibility in terms of what family support he has, and
    what  access  to  remittances  he  may  have,  are  all  dependent   on
    sustainable credibility findings.  In those  circumstances,  I  do  not
    consider it necessary to resolve the other grounds of appeal.

41. For the reasons identified above, I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Judge erred in law in terms of the assessment of credibility.  In those
    circumstances, his decision must be set aside.

42. It was agreed between the parties that if my conclusion was that  there
    was an error of law in the  assessment  of  credibility  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside, the  appropriate  course  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.
     I too consider that that is the appropriate course  of  action  having
    regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement.

43. Accordingly, the appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a hearing de novo before a judge other than First-tier  Judge  McGrade.
    No findings of fact are preserved except as  already  accepted  by  the
    respondent, or otherwise agreed by the parties.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside and
    the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo
    before a judge other than First-tier Judge McGrade.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      29/01/16

