
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/03994/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard at Crown  Square,  Manchester                     Decision  &  Reasons
Promulgated
On  14th  March  2016                                                     On
11th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                                    [O A]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Sadiq (Solicitor: Adam Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Miss Johnson (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hindson, in which he refused the Appellant's appeal  on
      Asylum, Humanitarian Protection and Human Rights grounds. His decision
      was promulgated on the 3rd June 2015.  The  Appellant  has  sought  to
      appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal and  permission  to  appeal
      has been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on the  26th  August
      2015.


   2. Within the two sets of Grounds of Appeal it is argued that the Judge's
      approach to the primary issue of  credibility  was  subject  to  legal
      error. It is stated that the core reason for doubting the  Appellant's
      integrity was set out between paragraphs 25 and 26 of the decision and
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept that a police report
      submitted by the Appellant's husband  as  part  of  his  asylum  claim
      reflected the fear expressed.  It  was  argued  that  given  that  the
      documents were only partially copied by the Secretary of State for the
      Home Department and were held on the Respondent's husband's file  that
      that document should not to have been held against the  Appellant.  It
      is argued that the Respondent chose not to produce the husband's  file
      or to avail  the  Court  of  the  full  document  and  that  in  those
      circumstances, bearing in mind the potential prejudice  likely  to  be
      suffered by the Appellant, the fair and  lawful  approach  would  have
      been to place no weight on  that  document.  It  is  argued  that  the
      Respondent had a straightforward opportunity to rebut the  Appellant's
      assertion that the whole document had not been  produced  by  bringing
      the husband's file to Court, but failed to do so.


   3. It is further argued that the rest of the findings suffer from a  lack
      of detail and the appropriate consideration of the  factual  evidence.
      It is argued that there is no  evidence  at  all  to  the  Appellant's
      explanation of her initial visit to the UK as a visitor and  that  the
      evidence of an important  witness  [Mr  O]  was  not  referred  to  or
      reconciled with the findings. It is argued that  he  is  a  first-hand
      witness  of  impeccable  bona  fides  and  that   his   evidence   was
      unchallenged. It is argued that the approach of credibility is  flawed
      due to the lack of adequate  reasoning.  It  is  further  argued  that
      within paragraph 8 of the witness statement the Appellant had referred
      to herself as having been forcibly  circumcised  and  her  family  and
      tribal origins and the risk that flowed towards her children, not just
      emanating from her husband's side of the family, but also from her own
      family as a result of her having been circumcising  and  this  is  not
      considered at all by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.



   4. Within the grant of permission  to  appeal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Lindsley, it was noted how the Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  who
      had claimed asylum in the UK on the basis that her children  would  be
      at risk of FGM if returned to Nigeria. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley
      found that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in
      law in being procedurally unfair in not adjourning the hearing so that
      the full police report could be presented to the Tribunal, if  it  was
      not believed that this was part of the document, as contended  by  the
      Appellant and that if it were held  in  an  active  asylum  matter  it
      should not have entailed  any  significant  delay  in  processing  the
      appeal and that if it transpired that what was before the Tribunal was
      only part of  the  document  as  argued  by  the  Appellant  then  the
      credibility assessment performed by the Tribunal may  well  have  been
      different. She found that it was also arguable that the  decision  was
      flawed for want of any consideration of the witness evidence of [S  O]
      and that in turn the  credibility  assessment  of  the  Appellant  was
      arguably flawed by failing to consider this evidence in the round  and
      this may have had a material effect on the outcome. It was found  that
      all grounds could be argued.


   5. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 reply, it is argued  that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself  appropriately  and  that  the
      Judge's findings were properly reasoned and  were  sufficient  in  the
      assessment of the Appellant's credibility.



   6. In his oral submissions Mr Sadiq relied upon all  of  the  Grounds  of
      Appeal. He argued that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to
      take account of really important evidence in  the  form  of  that  the
      evidence of [Mr O] and that a witness statement had been  provided  by
      him and he had given evidence on core issues. He argued  that  [Mr  O]
      had given evidence as to how the Appellant had had to relocate  whilst
      in Nigeria to a house belonging to [Mr O]'s wife as a  result  of  the
      problems that  she  had  experienced  and  how,  before  she  made  an
      application for asylum in the UK, he advised her within  the  UK  that
      she should go to the Home Office. He argued that [Mr O]'s  bona  fides
      had not been questioned, but his evidence not been  dealt  with  in  a
      meaningful manner.



   7. In respect of the police report,  Mr  Sadiq  argued  that  the  police
      report was on the husband's asylum file  but  that  the  Secretary  of
      State had failed to produce it and that she should have  produced  it,
      if she wanted to rebut the contention put  forward  by  the  Appellant
      that it was an incomplete document. He argued the  Appellant  in  such
      circumstances should not been criticised given that the  Tribunal  did
      not have the complete document.

   8. Mr Sadiq further argued that within the Appellant's witness  statement
      at paragraph 8 she detailed not only the fear  that  she  had  of  her
      husband's family performing forced circumcision on her  children,  but
      that she also described her fear of her  own  family  given  that  she
      herself had suffered FGM at the hands of her own family. He  submitted
      that this argument had not been considered by the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge.

   9. In her submissions on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  Ms  Johnson
      relied upon the Rule 24 reply and argued  that  the  findings  of  the
      Judge were open to him on the evidence and the Judge had rejected  the
      Appellant's credibility.  She  argued  that  the  Respondent  was  not
      withholding the document, but she could not confirm or deny whether or
      not the Respondent actually held the  original,  which  the  Appellant
      said that he given to the Home Office. She said that  the  Appellant's
      statement did not state that the original was being held.  She  argued
      that there had been no request for the  husband's  file,  but  in  any
      event it was open to the  Tribunal  to  make  finding  from  the  copy
      provided, that the police report was a one-page document that sets out
      a completely different basis for the Appellant's husband  having  been
      kidnapped than that now contended for by the Appellant.



  10. She argued that the Judge was entitled to conclude that the  Appellant
      was not at risk from her husband's  family  and  that  the  Judge  was
      entitled to find that the Appellant had sought  to  come  to  the  UK,
      simply for financial betterment. She asked that if the  Tribunal  were
      not able to make a finding in respect of the police report,  then  she
      asked that an adjournment be granted, but I rejected that application,
      given  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  already  had   sufficient
      opportunity of producing the police report from the  husband's  asylum
      file, even though the two files were not linked,  given  that  it  was
      clear from the both original  appeal  hearing,  from  the  grounds  of
      appeal and the grant of permission, that the contents of that document
      were in issue. The interests of justice therefore  dictated  that  the
      appeal continue and that an adjournment should not  be  granted,  when
      the Respondent had clearly chosen to produce the original document  in
      support of her position.

  11. In his submissions in reply Mr Sadiq did say that a fax had been  sent
      to the Respondent prior to the first appeal asking for the full police
      report and he asked me to find that if there was a material  error  of
      law, that the matter be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
      rehearing de novo before a different First-tier Tribunal Judge,  given
      the credibility issue.

      My findings on error of law and materiality

  12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson in dealing with the police report at
      [25] found specifically that he did not accept  that  the  Appellant's
      husband had been kidnapped at the behest of [R A], her husband's uncle
      and now head of  the  family,  whom  it  was  alleged  threatened  the
      Appellant's children with FGM, demanding to know where  the  Appellant
      and her children were. The Judge at [25] found the police  report  was
      completely at odds with that claim and the police report described her
      husband having been kidnapped and tortured to get him  to  reveal  his
      bank account pin number. The Firs-tier Judge noted  that  the  husband
      claimed that the police report was handed by him  to  the  immigration
      officer and that it was said that it was a two-page document, but one-
      page was missing. However, the First-tier Judge did  not  accept  that
      and found specifically that the text came to a conclusion and that the
      Appellant has been had been advised to report the matter to his  local
      police station and then it has the name of the police inspector.

  13. In this regard, although only a copy of the  police  report  has  been
      provided by the  Respondent,  the  Judge  gave  clear  sufficient  and
      adequate reasons for his finding that the police report was a one-page
      document.



  14. However, I do not consider that adequate or  sufficient  reasons  have
      been given by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hindson  for  rejecting  the
      police report on the grounds of it being entirely  at  odds  with  the
      account provided by the Appellant of her husband  being  kidnapped  at
      the behest of [R A],  in  order  to  reveal  the  whereabouts  of  the
      Appellant's children,  given  that  the  copy  of  the  police  report
      specifically stated that on the 20th October  2014  about  11:15  p.m.
      four men had come and they demanded the  ATM  pin,  his  international
      passport and also asked of his children. It stated that  as  he  could
      not answer their questions they had taken him to a building,  where  a
      hot iron rod been placed on his back, such that he  sustained  injury.
      The fact that the police report refers to the kidnappers having  "also
      asked of his children", as well as demanding his ATM pin and  passport
      has not been considered or explained  by  the  Judge.  The  Judge  has
      either thereby failed to take account of  material  evidence  in  this
      regard, or if he has taken account of that part of the document he has
      failed to adequately explain his reasoning regarding  the  meaning  of
      that part. The Judge has therefore materially  erred  in  law  in  his
      consideration of the police report.

  15. The Judge in his review of the evidence between [10 and  13]  set  out
      that he had read  the  witness  statements  from  the  Appellant,  her
      husband and [S O], and heard evidence from them and that he had  taken
      careful account of the documentary evidence. He  stated  that  he  had
      considered all the evidence in the  round,  but  that  he  had  to  be
      selective with his references to the evidence when giving  reasons  in
      respect of his findings. Although, the Judge has not make any findings
      in respect of the evidence of [Mr S O], I do accept that he had  taken
      that evidence into account in reaching his decision.

  16. Further, I do  accept  that  at  paragraph  8  of  her  statement  the
      Appellant made it  clear  that  she  believed  the  danger  of  forced
      circumcision came not only from her husband's  family,  but  that  she
      also stated specifically "I would like to be clear that the danger  of
      forced circumcision is also danger from my family. Neither my  husband
      nor I believe in it. I was circumcised. I recall how horrendous it was
      and the emotional trauma over it effects me every day. I remember  the
      horrible physical pain and remember not understanding why I was having
      to endure such a terrible thing. This is a family tradition in both my
      family and  my  husband's  family.  Particularly  in  my  family,  the
      practice is as a result of a commitment to a tribal tradition. We  are
      Yoruba. I know that is only matter of time before  I  would  have  had
      problems in relation to my own family over  the  circumcision  of  the
      children."



  17.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson, as has been contended by Mr  Sadiq
      on behalf the Appellant, has not dealt with this issue in his decision
      and has therefore failed to make findings on a material  issue  within
      the Appellant's asylum claim. This again amounts to a  material  error
      of law.

  18. The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hindson  therefore  does
      contain material errors of law, such that the decision should  be  set
      aside. Given those errors do go to the core question  of  credibility,
      the matter should be remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      rehearing de novo, before any Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Hindson.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hindson  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside;
The matter is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  de
novo, before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hindson.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                  Dated
15th March 2016
