
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03825/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2016                  |On 3 March 2016                      |


                                   Before

                             The Hon Lord BURNS
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                    [M M]
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge PJG White on 6 January 2016 against the decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Young made  in  a  decision  and  reasons
         promulgated on 15 October 2015 dismissing the  Appellant's  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe,  born  on  15  November
         1992.  She left Zimbabwe on a valid United Kingdom visit  visa  and
         entered the United Kingdom on 16 July 2013.  She claimed asylum  on
         2 January 2014, which was refused on 16 May  2014.   The  Appellant
         had stated that she feared to return to  Zimbabwe  because  of  her
         political opinion.  The Appellant also made an Article 8 ECHR claim
         based on her family life in the United  Kingdom.   At  the  hearing
         first fixed for the hearing of her  asylum  appeal,  the  Appellant
         raised a further claim, namely that she feared return  to  Zimbabwe
         because of her lesbian sexual  orientation.   She  was  granted  an
         adjournment in order to submit a full witness  statement,  and  for
         the Secretary of State to review her new case.

    3.     Following an adjournment lasting a number of months, the  appeal
         started afresh before Judge Young.  He found that the Appellant was
         not at real risk on return to Zimbabwe,  applying  CM  (EM  country
         guidance: disclosure) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059  (IAC).   He
         found that the Appellant was not a reliable witness.  He found that
         the Appellant was not at risk because of her  claimed  MDC  profile
         nor that she was lesbian. The Appellant had no family life  in  the
         United Kingdom.  Thus the appeal was dismissed.

    4.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         White considered that it was arguable that  Judge  Young's  adverse
         credibility findings were ill founded, and that the judge  had  not
         taken into account all of  the  evidence  when  assessing  risk  on
         return.

    5.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24 dated 22 January  2016
         indicating that the appeal was opposed.  Standard  directions  were
         made by the tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of
         whether or not there was a material error of law.

    Submissions

    6.     The Appellant appeared in person, accompanied by her  friend  Mr
         Tau Chamboko. Communication was established through the  tribunal's
         Shona interpreter.  The tribunal explained that as Mr Chamboko  had
         given evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, he would  be  unable
         to address the tribunal on the question of whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal decision and reasons should be set aside because of one or
         more material errors of law.  The tribunal would deal  with  issues
         of law on the Appellant's behalf and the Appellant would be able to
         address the tribunal if she wished.

    7.     In summary, the Appellant indicated that she wished to  rely  on
         her grounds of appeal, as  submitted  when  seeking  permission  to
         appeal.  This document prepared by the Appellant  had  referred  by
         number to the individual paragraphs of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         judge's determination.  The judge had not examined the evidence the
         Appellant had submitted properly.  It had been hard to declare  her
         orientation. The Appellant's case was  genuine  and  she  was  very
         afraid of returning to Zimbabwe. There had been inadequate findings
         and no proper analysis.  By implication the  decision  and  reasons
         should be set aside, and the appeal reheard before  another  First-
         tier Tribunal judge.

    8.     Mr Wilding for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24
         notice.  He submitted that the decision and  reasons  disclosed  no
         error of law.  The judge had examined the evidence  in  detail,  as
         his careful  summary  of  the  witnesses'  evidence  showed.   Both
         elements of the Appellant's case were considered. The Appellant had
         been disbelieved.  The Appellant's complaints at most were  just  a
         disagreement with the  judge's  proper  findings.   The  judge  had
         explained why he found that there was no real depth to the evidence
         and that the Appellant  was  not  credible.   The  Article  8  ECHR
         findings were brief but adequate.  The decision and reasons  should
         stand.

    9.     The Appellant in reply reiterated her fears of return.

    No material error of law

    10.    The tribunal reserved its decision, which now follows.   In  the
         tribunal's view, the terms of the grant  of  permission  to  appeal
         were a generous response to what was  in  essence  a  weak  reasons
         challenge, based on a superficial reading of the decision in issue.
          The tribunal agrees with Mr Wilding that the grounds are  no  more
         than disagreement with the judge's proper and sustainable findings.

    11.    The current country background evidence concerning Zimbabwe  was
         not in  dispute  before  Judge  Young,  who  correctly  applied  CM
         (above).  The Appellant's appeal turned on her credibility and,  as
         that was found entirely wanting, there was no need for any detailed
         discussion of the country evidence.

    12.    As Mr Wilding pointed out, the analysis performed by Judge Young
         was indeed a careful one.  The evidence of the  two  witnesses  was
         set out at some length.  No error in either section was identified.
          Similarly, the judge set out the  competing  submissions  of  both
         parties.  The judge then  explained  why  he  reached  his  adverse
         credibility findings, in logical and persuasive order.  The reasons
         he gave, which the tribunal  need  not  repeat  here,  were  multi-
         faceted and substantial.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
         account the Appellant's substantial delay in claiming  asylum  post
         entry to the United Kingdom and the even later addition of a  fresh
         ground of claim. The submission that Judge Young failed to consider
         the Appellant's claims properly must be firmly rejected.

    13.    The brief dismissal of the Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  family
         life claim was all that was required in light of the other findings
         which the judge  had  reached.  In  the  tribunal's  judgment,  the
         judge's decision was a  comprehensive  reflection  on  the  various
         issues raised in the appeal, and his  findings  were  balanced  and
         well structured.  He demonstrated anxious scrutiny  throughout  the
         determination.  There was no error of law.  There is no  basis  for
         interfering with the judge's decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
         appeal, which dismissal must stand.

    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


