
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03632/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th August 2016                           |On 16th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [T O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:     Mr M Schwenk (instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Secretary of State in relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge Holt
      promulgated  on  the  13th  May  2016  by  which  she  dismissed   the
      Respondent's asylum and humanitarian protection claim but  allowed  it
      on Article 8 grounds.

   2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I will  continue  to  refer  to
      [TO] as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent  in
      this decision.

   3. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ]  1972.   She  has  a
      dependent husband and 4 dependent children  all  born  in  the  United
      Kingdom, on [ ] 2006, [ ] 2007, [ ] 2009 and [ ] 2014 respectively.

   4. The Appellant had claimed asylum on the basis that her daughters would
      be at risk of FGM if returned to Nigeria and also that her husband had
      a gay relationship with a powerful man in Nigeria.

   5. Judge Holt expressed herself not remotely satisfied  that  the  asylum
      claim had any merit or was credible.

   6. There has been no challenge by the Appellant to those findings.

   7. The Judge went on to consider Human Rights.  She  referred  to  having
      seen copious evidence about the children's, and particularly  the  two
      eldest daughter's, private lives outside the family,  particularly  in
      relation to the fact that they are thriving in school.

   8. She went on at paragraph 23 to  find  that  the  two  eldest  children
      qualified  for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
      paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) on the basis of their private life  in  the
      United Kingdom for over seven years.

   9. The Judge went on at paragraph 24 to find that on the basis  that  the
      two eldest daughters had been in the United Kingdom for over  8  years
      the Appellant satisfied Article 8 within the Immigration  Rules  as  a
      parent under Ex.1 of Appendix FM.  She found that the Appellant had  a
      genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  her  two  eldest
      daughters.

  10. At paragraph  25  she  agreed  with  Mr  Shwenk's  analysis  that  the
      Secretary of State had failed to properly consider the best  interests
      of the children as required by Section 55 of the Borders, Citizens and
      Immigration Act 2009 and at paragraph 26 noted that the  eldest  child
      was entitled to British citizenship.  However, at that  date  she  had
      nor formally been granted British citizenship.

  11. The Secretary of State's grounds on which  Permission  to  Appeal  was
      granted were that the Judge had only made  findings  on  part  of  the
      requirements of both paragraphs 276 ADE and Ex.1.  She had  also  only
      considered part of the requirements of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002.  Nowhere in the decision had the Judge considered
      whether it was  reasonable  for  the  children  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom.  That is a requirement contained in 276 ADE,  Ex.1  and  also
      section 117(b).

  12. On that basis I agree with the Secretary of State that the Judge  made
      an error of law.  She did not anywhere explain why it was unreasonable
      for the children to leave the United Kingdom or give any consideration
      to that matter.  I found that to be particularly pertinent given  case
      law and in particular the recent case of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ
      705 which sets out in great detail  how  the  Tribunal  is  to  assess
      reasonableness.

  13. On that basis I set aside the Judge's findings in relation to  Article
      8.

  14. Both representatives  agreed  I  should  go  on  to  decide  the  case
      immediately.  In order to allow Mr McVeety to consider documents  that
      were missing from his bundle and to allow  Mr  Schwenk  to  deal  with
      other matters he had in Court,  I  set  the  matter  aside  until  the
      afternoon.

  15.  When the hearing resumed I heard oral evidence from the Appellant.  I
      also received into evidence, with the  consent  of  Mr  McVeety,  copy
      documents, including the eldest child's British Passport issued to her
      on 9th June 2016.

  16. Mr Schwenk also provided me with a copy of the Immigration Directorate
      Instruction, Family Migration: Appendix FM section  1.0b  Family  Life
      (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10 year Route dated  August
      2015.  He referred me to 11.2.3 which states:-

           "save in cases involving criminality, the  decision  maker  must
           not take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer
           of a British citizen child  where the effect  of  that  decision
           would be to force the British child to leave the EU,  regardless
           of the age of that child.  This reflects  a  European  Court  of
           Justice Judgement in Zambrano."


      Despite the fact that recent case law, the most recent being  MA,  has
      addressed the question of reasonableness and the fact that the various
      provisions referred to above indicate  that  even  where  a  child  is
      British, reasonableness must be assessed, the Secretary of State's own
      instruction is that unless criminality is involved  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to remove a British child from the United Kingdom.


  17. The eldest child is a British citizen and if her parents and  siblings
      are removed from the United Kingdom she would be obliged  to  go  with
      them as the alternative would be to be placed into  the  care  of  the
      Local Authority.

  18. I find myself with no alternative  in  this  case  but  to  allow  the
      appeal, on Article 8 grounds, of the Appellant and all  her  dependant
      family members on the basis of the ten year old British citizen child.

  19. It does appear extraordinary that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
      amended her IDI.  However, she has not and if that is the Secretary of
      State's policy then I give my Judgment in line with it.

  20. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed  to
      the extent that the Article 8 finding is set aside but in re  deciding
      it I allow the Appellant's original appeal against  the  Secretary  of
      States decision to refuse her leave to remain.

  21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and I  see
      no reason to make one.

       Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed but in
    redeciding the appeal  I  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.


Signed                              Date 12th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


