
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03812/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 March 2015                     |On 28 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     M Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal concerns a reasons challenge to the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fox dated 25  August  2014.   The  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal by the appellant, who is a national of Pakistan  born  in  1986,
    under the Refugee Convention and on grounds of humanitarian  protection
    and breach of Article 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

 2. The background is that the appellant who had been in the United Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student claimed  asylum  in  October  2013,  some
    eighteen months after expiry of his leave on 21 April 2012  That  claim
    was based on difficulties encountered by his family from  the  Taliban.
    The respondent has not accepted that the appellant or  his  family  had
    been threatened by the Taliban in Pakistan as claimed or that his uncle
    had been murdered by them.  In any event, she considered  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection or the option of internal relocation.

 3. The following specific grounds of complaint can be distilled  from  the
    grounds:

      i) The judge had been unclear as to the evidence he had  accepted  and
         that which he had rejected.

     ii) The judge's assessment of  credibility  had  been  inadequate  with
         reference to an expert's report which  post-dated  the  Country  of
         Origin Information Report.

    iii) Part of the judge's reasoning made no sense.

     iv) Even if the judge had been entitled to reached adverse  conclusions
         on  the  credibility  he  had  erred  in  his  consideration  of  a
         sufficiency of protection and the availability of internal flight.

 4. Mr McGlashan clarified the significance of  the  credibility  issue  in
    this claim and accepted that if the  appellant  was  found  not  to  be
    truthful, the claim would have no substance,  rendering  considerations
    of the sufficiency of protection and  internal  flight  redundant.   Mr
    Matthews acknowledged that the determination could not be described  as
    a model one and that  there  were  difficult  passages.   He  urged  me
    however to take an overall approach and that, when read as a whole, the
    determination showed that the judge had given adequate reasons why  the
    appellant had not told the truth.

 5. I am unable to agree with Mr Matthews.  An aspect that  seems  to  have
    exercised the judge's mind was an  absence  of  any  reference  to  the
    protection issue when the appellant had been arrested.  He observed  at
    [23] :

         "In investigating the claim made by the appellant he states that he
         only become aware of the difficulties that  were  arising  at  home
         after his arrest.  This may be true.  However,  I  have  considered
         that his explanations do not hold much credibility.  He has  sought
         to explain the different explanations by submission of a  statement
         and his oral evidence.  I find this evidence does not go far enough
         in persuading me that he is telling the truth."

 6. Thereafter the judge explained that  he  had  reviewed  the  background
    information and observed that "... the  explanations  provided  by  the
    appellant are not fully supported by the information contained  in  the
    COIR and to a lesser extent in the expert's report".   He  went  on  to
    reject documentary evidence produced in support of  the  claim  as  not
    true but does not give reasons why he had come to that conclusion.

 7. As to the expert's report, the judge observed that it was helpful,  and
    of  advantage  to  him  in  assessing  the   appellant's   credibility.
    Legitimately the judge expressed doubt whether the expert had  accessed
    the same information as he had, in particular the  statements  made  at
    the time of the arrest.  As I observed to Mr Matthews, the task of  the
    expert was not to express a view on the credibility of  the  appellant.
    That was firmly a matter for the judge.

 8. As to the  accounts  of  difficulties  by  the  family  members,  after
    observing that they had given no consideration  to  moving  to  another
    location  in  Pakistan  and  the  fact  of  the  appellant's   brothers
    continuing their studies, as well as an absence of  complaint  made  to
    the authorities regarding threatening letters sent to  the  appellant's
    solicitor, the judge concluded "it suggests to me  therefore  that  the
    complaints  that  nobody  bases  are   foundation   in   fact".    Both
    representatives accepted that the meaning of that  concluding  sentence
    is elusive.

 9. The judge considered the  connection  between  the  uncle's  death  and
    threatening behaviour as "beyond tenuous".  An absence of careful proof
    reading infects other aspects of the paragraph in  question  [29].   At
    [30] the judge concluded "when I take all of these matters in the round
    I am satisfied that the  appellant's  credibility  may  not  be  relied
    upon".

10. Having accepted the possibility of truth of the appellant's explanation
    that the difficulties had arisen after his arrest, the judge  does  not
    give a reasoned explanation why  he  did  not  consider  that  evidence
    persuaded him he was being told the truth.  There  is  a  disconnection
    between the two and that difficulty infects also the way in  which  the
    judge approached the expert's report.

11. Whilst I accept Mr Matthews's submission that the judge did not believe
    the appellant, his overall reasoning is not evident; the  determination
    lacks a coherent structure. There was a failure to carry out  a  proper
    or careful analysis of the evidence as the case required,  particularly
    in the light of the importance of credibility in the protection  claim.
    These aspects show clear error of law.

12. I therefore set aside the  decision.   Mr  Matthews  and  Mr  McGlashan
    accepted that in the light of the extent of fact finding required,  the
    case should properly be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and I do so
    for that purpose.  None of the findings of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fox is preserved.  In remaking the decision the  Tribunal  will  do  so
    based on the acknowledgment that if the appellant is found  not  to  be
    credible his claim will be without substance.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision is set aside  and  the
matter remitted to a differently constituted  First-tier  Tribunal  for  its
reconsideration afresh.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

In the light of this being a protection claim, unless and until  a  Tribunal
or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report
of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 27 April 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

