
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/03254/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16th February 2016                     | On 29th February 2016           |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     D L
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P Lewis, Counsel instructed by Jein
solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a  protection
claim,  it  is  appropriate  to  continue  that  direction.  This  direction
prohibits the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by  the  parties)
of the identity of the applicant.  Any disclosure in breach  of  this  order
may amount to a contempt of court.  This direction  shall  remain  in  force
unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Zahed
    promulgated on 26 November 2015 ("the Decision") dismissing his  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision dated 13 February 2015  refusing  his
    protection based claim and directing his removal to Sri Lanka  pursuant
    to section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   Permission  to  appeal
    the Decision was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the Judge misinterpreted  the  evidence
    and wrongly found  inconsistencies  where  none  existed  so  that  the
    Judge's adverse credibility findings were arguably unsafe.  The  appeal
    comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains  a  material
    error of law and, if I so find, to either re-make the Decision or remit
    to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

 2. The factual background to the Appellant's claim is as follows.  He is a
    national of Sri Lanka. He first came to the UK in  2009  as  a  Tier  4
    student migrant.  He remained with leave in that capacity until 9 April
    2012.  A subsequent application to remain as a student was refused  and
    the  appeal  dismissed.   Another  application  as  a  student  and  an
    application based on private life were also refused.   On  12  February
    2014 the appellant claimed asylum in short summary because he says that
    in July 2009 he was arrested, detained and tortured by the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities for suspected membership of the LTTE.  He was  released  on
    bail but he asserts that there is an arrest warrant issued against  him
    following a breach of his bail conditions.

Submissions

 3. Mr Lewis relied on the grounds and expanded upon those.  He also raised
    a number of other issues which he said showed that the Judge  erred  in
    his assessment of  credibility.   The  Appellant  sought  to  adduce  a
    further bundle of evidence entitled "Bundle C" which was not before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Permission to adduce that  evidence  before
    me was refused prior to the hearing.  Mr Lewis agreed that  this  could
    not be relied upon before me but could either be adduced at  a  further
    hearing if I found an error of law or would form the basis  of  further
    submissions to the Respondent if I did not.

 4. The first error asserted is that  the  Judge  misinterpreted  a  letter
    which was produced by the Appellant in support of his case  from  Mr  R
    who is an Attorney-at-law in Sri Lanka.  The translation of that letter
    appears in the Appellant's bundle at [B-18].  The  Appellant  complains
    that the Judge has misunderstood that letter at [24]  to  [25]  of  the
    Decision where the Judge says that the letter  shows  that  the  arrest
    warrant was not issued for failing to attend a  Court  hearing  as  the
    Appellant said but for failing to report to Kandy police station.   The
    Appellant's understanding of that letter is  that  it  shows  that  the
    arrest warrant was issued for both.  I pointed out  to  Mr  Lewis  that
    there were two possible interpretations of this letter.  I  noted  that
    this may be due to a poor translation.  Mr Lewis submitted that a plain
    reading favoured the Appellant's interpretation and that if there  were
    any doubt, this should be resolved in the Appellant's favour.  Mr Avery
    argued that the Judge was entitled to  the  alternative  interpretation
    which I posited.  I deal with my finding about  the  interpretation  of
    that letter below.  Mr  Lewis  pointed  out  that  the  Judge  at  [26]
    indicated that his finding about the  inconsistency  arising  from  the
    letter "severely damaged" the credibility of the Appellant.  Even if it
    was open to the Judge to rely on a possible  interpretation  which  was
    not in line with the Appellant's case, he should not have placed  great
    weight on that inconsistency given the alternative interpretation which
    did not give rise to that inconsistency.

 5. The second error asserted is that, at [21] of the Decision,  the  Judge
    relies on what is said to be an inconsistency between who arrested  him
    in Sri Lanka.  The Judge points to the fact that the Appellant said  at
    interview that he  was  fingerprinted  when  he  was  arrested  by  the
    Terrorist Investigation Department ("TID"), whereas later in  the  same
    interview he said that he was arrested by  the  Sri  Lankan  Army.   Mr
    Lewis submitted there was no inconsistency.  At [2.13] of the screening
    interview, the Appellant said this in answer to a question  whether  he
    had been fingerprinted in the UK or any other country previously:-

         "I've been fingerprinted in Sri Lanka twice.  One was for  my  visa
         when applying for a student visa for the UK and the other  was  for
         the  Sri  Lankan  army  when  I  was  arrested  by  the   Terrorist
         Investigation Department (TID) in Sri Lanka"

    Later in the same interview in response to the question "What was  your
    reason for coming to the UK?"and why he feared the TID,  the  Appellant
    gave the following answer:-

         "I came to the UK to seek protection and to save my life  from  the
         (TID) Terrorist Investigation  Department  in  Sri  Lanka.   I  was
         arrested by the Sri Lankan army as a suspect for being a member  of
         the LTTE."

 6. Mr Lewis submitted that there was no  inconsistency  if  those  answers
    were taken in the context of the Appellant's more detailed case that he
    was arrested by the army and handed over to the TID.   He  pointed  out
    that at the screening  interview  applicants  were  not  encouraged  to
    provide details of their case.  Those details were to  be  provided  in
    the substantive interview.  This inconsistency at  [21]  was  found  to
    damage the Appellant's credibility.

 7. The third error also relies on an apparent inconsistency found  by  the
    Judge at [22] of the Decision between what he said about the  terms  of
    his bail.  The Judge relied on the short answer given at the  screening
    interview in response to the question of whether he had been  sentenced
    for the charge against him as a LTTE member that  he  was  released  on
    conditional bail to sign on  at  his  local  police  station.   At  his
    substantive interview, the Judge noted  that  when  the  Appellant  was
    asked what were the conditions of his bail, he responded  that  he  was
    asked to report to the police station "and 2 lakhs" which  referred  to
    money paid to secure his release.  That inconsistency was said at  [23]
    to "severely damage" his credibility.

 8. Mr Lewis also sought to rely on  further  errors  which  he  said  were
    evident from [16] to [18] of the  Decision  where  the  inconsistencies
    relied upon were in fact differences in the detail provided rather than
    inconsistencies.  He also challenged the Judge's  finding  at  [19]  to
    [20] of the Decision that the fact that the Appellant  had  not  sought
    medical treatment for his  injuries  suffered  he  says  while  he  was
    detained damaged his credibility on this aspect.   Mr  Lewis  submitted
    that a beating with a metal pipe would not require  medical  treatment.
    Mr Lewis submitted that all of these findings had been said to severely
    damage the Appellant's credibility and his claim.   The  findings  were
    not open to the Judge and infected his adverse credibility findings.

 9. Mr Avery submitted that the findings were open to the Judge.  He fairly
    accepted that some of the inconsistencies relied upon were quite  minor
    and that the Judge could be criticised for finding that,  for  example,
    the absence of detail about the payment  made  to  secure  release  was
    enough to "severely damage" the Appellant's credibility.  Mr Avery also
    pointed to the Appellant's immigration history and submitted  that  the
    findings at [30] to [34] were central to the finding that the Appellant
    is not credible.  As the Judge points out, the Appellant has  had  five
    opportunities to claim asylum but instead made a  number  of  different
    applications.   His  assertion  that  this  was  because  his  previous
    advisers told him not to claim asylum was unsupported by any  complaint
    against those advisers.  Mr Avery submitted that even if  the  findings
    in relation to [21] to [23] of the Decision which  were  criticised  in
    the grounds were removed from account, there were more than  sufficient
    findings which supported the Judge's adverse views on credibility.

Discussion and conclusions

10. I begin with the finding made about the letter from Mr Regi referred to
    at [4] above.  The relevant part of  the  translated  letter  reads  as
    follows:-

         "I can confirm that Mr [D L]  was  arrested  on  02  July  2009  at
         vavuniya  check  point  while  he  was  travelling  from  Kandy  to
         vavuniya.

         He was arrested under PTA on suspicion that he is  a  LTTE  member.
         He was produced before the Vavuniya Magistrate  Court  on  03  July
         2009 and he was kept  for  further  investigation  with  TID  until
         enlarged on bail (16  July  2009)  and  the  conditions  were  with
         Rs.200000  surety  and  to  report  to  the  Kandy  police  station
         fortnightly.  As per the record Mr [DL] was  absent  to  the  Kandy
         police station and Court an open  warrant  issued  on  (26  October
         2009) for his arrest."

11. Mr Lewis's submission in relation to that letter depends  on  the  "and
    Court" forming part of the first part of that sentence namely that  the
    warrant was issued for failure to attend Court as well as  for  failure
    to report  to  the  police  station  which  is  the  Appellant's  case.
    However, my interpretation of that letter and the interpretation of the
    Judge is that the "and  Court"  relates  to  the  second  part  of  the
    sentence namely who issued the warrant.  That is also  consistent  with
    the remainder of the letter.  It does not say that  the  Appellant  was
    required to attend Court on 26th October.  The Appellant's evidence  as
    noted at [25] of the Decision  appears  from  [A-31]  (the  substantive
    interview) where, in response to a question  about  how  the  Appellant
    broke his conditions of bail he says:-

         "Because I went to the sign up until 5th October. 26th Oct I had  a
         court order to attend the court."

    I find therefore that the Judge was right to say that the account given
    in the letter is inconsistent with the Appellant's account.  It may not
    be a major inconsistency but it is an inconsistency nonetheless and the
    Judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on  it  as  damaging  the   Appellant's
    credibility.

12. I turn then to the other  two  errors  asserted  in  the  grounds.   In
    relation to the first of those errors, I agree with Mr Lewis that there
    is  no  inconsistency  between  the  answers  given  at  the  screening
    interview in relation to who is said to have  arrested  the  Appellant.
    The questions in response to which those answers were  given  are  very
    different.  The first answer related to who had fingerprinted him.  The
    fact he said there that he was "arrested" by TID rather than "detained"
    by them (following his arrest by the army) may be a  minor  discrepancy
    but not such as to lead to a finding that his answers were inconsistent
    and certainly not sufficiently so for those to damage  his  credibility
    taken on their own.  The second relating  to  the  conditions  of  bail
    similarly has to be looked at in the context of  the  questions  asked.
    At the screening interview, the Appellant  was  asked  whether  he  was
    sentenced for the charge and it was in response to that  question  that
    he said he was released on conditional bail.  He was not asked what the
    conditions of  his  bail  were.   The  question  asked  at  substantive
    interview was precisely that question.  In answer he said he was  asked
    to report and (to pay) two lakhs.  There is therefore no  inconsistency
    in  that  evidence  and  insofar  as  the  Judge  relied   upon   those
    inconsistencies at [21] and [23] he should not have done so.

13. Although the errors said to exist at [16] to [18] and [19] to [20] were
    not pleaded as part of the Appellant's grounds, I have considered those
    also as those are relevant to whether I find the errors  of  law  noted
    above to be material.  It is abundantly clear from what is said at [16]
    that this was, at the very least, an embellishment of  the  Appellant's
    account at a late stage in his evidence.  He had  not  mentioned  being
    beaten up when he went to report at the police station previously,  not
    even in his witness statement immediately prior to  the  hearing.   The
    Judge was clearly entitled to take into account the Appellant's failure
    to mention this earlier at [17].  The evidence given by  the  Appellant
    previously in his witness statement signed the day before  the  hearing
    was that he had done things which the police had asked him to  do  when
    he reported "to avoid problems".  This was  clearly  inconsistent  with
    his evidence at the hearing that he had been beaten when he reported.

14. In relation  to  the  injuries  which  the  Appellant  claims  to  have
    suffered, I note that the Appellant did not claim only to have been hit
    round the head with a  pipe  (which  might  in  any  event  be  thought
    sufficient to require some medical attention).  He also claimed to have
    suffered a broken front tooth and to have also been  beaten  (according
    to the screening interview with a baton although it is there said  that
    the beatings were not such as to leave marks  or  scars).   It  is  not
    unreasonable for the Judge to have  considered  that  this  would  have
    required  some  medical  assistance  after  his  release.   Mr  Lewis's
    submission was without any supporting evidence from the Appellant  that
    he did not require medical assistance because  the  injuries  were  not
    such as to require that.  It was open to the Judge to make the  finding
    he did about the absence of such evidence. I note in passing  that  the
    Appellant has now sought to rectify the lack of medical  evidence  with
    the further evidence which I refer to at [3] above but, as noted there,
    I have not taken that into account.

15. Having found that there are two errors of law in the findings  at  [21]
    and [23] of the Decision, I turn to consider whether those can be  said
    to be material.  As I note, the first finding is  said  to  damage  the
    Appellant's credibility and the second is said to severely  damage  his
    credibility.  Mr  Avery  accepted  that  to  say  that  the  second  in
    particular  severely  damaged  the  Appellant's   credibility   is   an
    overstatement of the weight which could  attach  to  what  is  a  minor
    inconsistency even if it had been  an  inconsistency.   However,  those
    errors in findings have to be read in the context of the Decision as  a
    whole and in particular [16] to [41].  I have already dealt  with  [16]
    to [20] of the Decision and have found that there are no errors in  the
    Judge's findings  in  those  paragraphs.   I  have  found  against  the
    Appellant in relation to the letter from Mr Regi which disposes of  the
    challenge to [24] to  [26].   The  Appellant  has  not  challenged  the
    findings at [27] to [41].  He would face  significant  difficulties  in
    challenging the findings at [30]  to  [34]  based  on  his  immigration
    history.  The finding at [41] that the  Appellant  did  not  leave  Sri
    Lanka immediately after his release until he was granted a Tier 4  visa
    and that this damaged his credibility is also  clearly  one  which  was
    open to the Judge.  The findings at [35] to  [39]  relate  to  evidence
    given by the Appellant's room mate at university which, put simply, the
    Judge did not accept.  The finding at [40] relates to the  reliance  on
    what is said to have happened in 2006 as a reason for the  authorities'
    interest in 2009.  That is also a finding which was open to  the  Judge
    on the evidence and the Appellant does not challenge it.

16. Judged against the entirety of the  credibility  findings  in  [16]  to
    [41], I am satisfied that the errors in the findings at [21] to [23] of
    the Decision are not material.  I accept that the Judge has noted  that
    those carry weight in his assessment of  the  Appellant's  credibility,
    particularly the second of those  errors  which  is  said  to  severely
    damage his credibility.  However, there are other inconsistencies which
    are said to carry an equivalent weight and taken together,  there  were
    ample adverse findings to justify the overall conclusion at  [42]  that
    the Appellant's claim is not credible.  I emphasise again that  I  have
    not taken into account in my decision the bundle of new evidence  which
    the Appellant sought to adduce.  It is open  to  him  to  make  further
    submissions based on that new evidence if so advised.

Decision

I am satisfied that  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
contain a material error of law.  The Decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
Zahed promulgated on 26 November 2015 is therefore confirmed.

Signed        [pic]                 Date 24 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
