

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: AA/03226/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal |Decision & Reasons promulgated |
|on 14 June 2017                         |on 26 June 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                [BOLANLE O.]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Mohzan of Schaws Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. In a decision dated 31  March  2017  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
        Renton found an error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal and set that decision aside. Directions were given for the
        matter to be listed for a Resumed hearing and a  judicial  transfer
        order made. The appeal comes before this Tribunal for the  purposes
        of that further hearing after which the Tribunal will either  allow
        or dismiss the appeal.



Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, was born on 27 July 1977.  The
        appellant has three dependent children [C] born on [  ]  2005,  [A]
        born on [ ] 2007 and [J] born on [ ] 2012. The first  two  children
        are Nigerian citizens, the child [J] is a German citizen.
     3. The appellant applied for leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a
        visitor  which  was  refused  on  29  December  2006.   A   further
        application made on 29  October  2009  succeeded  after  which  the
        appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor.
     4. On 20 May 2014, the appellant claimed asylum which was refused on 9
        January 2015 and a direction made for the appellant's removal  from
        the United Kingdom pursuant to section 10  Immigration  and  Asylum
        Act 1999.
     5. The appellant's appeal against the refusal came  before  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge C Chapman sitting at Sheldon Court in Birmingham  on
        18 May 2015. Having considered the evidence provided Judge  Chapman
        dismissed the appeal of protection and human rights grounds.
     6. Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant on the basis  the
        grounds  submitted  that  in  issue  was  the  nationality  of  the
        appellant's child in relation to whom  there  was  a  copy  of  the
        child's German passport in the bundle to which Judge  Chapman  made
        no reference.  It was found  to  be  arguable  that  Judge  Chapman
        should have had regard to the child's passport  given  the  EU  law
        implications following any finding  which  might  be  made  if  the
        appellant's child was an EEA national.
     7. The Error of Law hearing came before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
        McCarthy sitting at the Birmingham Employment Tribunal on 5 January
        2016. The Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Mills,  acknowledged  that  the
        appellant's appeal bundle contained a copy of a German passport  of
        the appellant's son. It was accepted  Judge  Chapman  had  made  no
        findings as to whether the appellant's  son  was  German  and  what
        rights he and the appellant might  have  as  a  result,  which  was
        accepted as amounting to a material  error  since  the  grounds  of
        appeal and  the  statement  of  additional  grounds  mentioned  EEA
        rights. In light of  the  conceded  error  it  was  agreed  it  was
        appropriate for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal for findings  to  be  made  on  the  relevant  issues,  in
        relation to which, Mr  Mozhan  accepted  that  the  issues  in  any
        rehearing would be limited to the matters set out at [8] which  are
        said to be:


   a. Issues relating to whether the appellant has a right of residence as a
      result of her son being an EEA national.  This will of  course  depend
      on whether the appellant's son has a  right  of  residence  under  the
      provision of the 2006 EEA Regulations, which is by  no  means  obvious
      since the father is no longer resident here and it is unclear  how  he
      might have obtained a retained or derivative right of residence  given
      his young age and lack of financial evidence.
   b. Issues relating to whether the appellant's proposed removal will be  a
      disproportionate interference with her private and family life  rights
      and those of her daughters and son.


     8. It was noted by Judge McCarthy at [9] that the issues would need to
        be explored carefully,  particularly  in  light  of  the  Court  of
        Appeals reference of certain questions to the Court of  Justice  of
        the European Union in SSHD v NA  (Pakistan)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  140
        which it is said  might  have  a  bearing  on  the  outcome.  Those
        questions considered the  interplay  of  article  8  ECHR  and  EEA
        nationality and residence rights.
     9. The appeal was listed before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robertson
        who on 19 July 2016 produced her  decision  dismissing  the  appeal
        under Article 8 ECHR. Judge Robertson noted an adjournment  request
        by Mr Mohzan for the matter to be stayed pending the outcome of the
        referral mentioned by Judge McCarthy above although the adjournment
        request was refused. Judge Robertson noted the application  at  [6]
        in the following terms:


             6. Mr Mohzan requested an adjournment,  submitting  that  this
             matter should be stayed pending the outcome of the decision of
             the Court of Justice of  the  European  Union  (CJEU)  on  the
             reference of the issues set out in NA (Pakistan)  [2015]  EWCA
             Civ 140 by the Court of Appeal. He  submitted  that  the  case
             before me was on all fours with that case  and  the  Court  of
             Appeal found a reference was necessary,  although  he  had  no
             timescale as to when the CJEU was likely to hear the  case  or
             issue its decision. However, in the cases before the Court  of
             Appeal, both minor appellants were in education and there  was
             a preserved finding of fact that  removal  of  the  appellants
             would result in a breach of their Article 8  rights.  [J]  was
             not in education and there was no finding of fact that removal
             of the Appellant would result in a breach  of  his  Article  8
             rights. Mr Mozhan submitted that [J] was at a nursery and that
             this  was  education.  However,  'education'  is  defined   as
             excluding nursery education (EEA Regs, Reg 15A(6)(a)).


    10. Judge Robertson did not find it was necessary  to  adjourn  as  the
        matter could be fairly decided on the evidence before her.  It  was
        also noted to be contrary to the overriding objectives for the case
        to be stayed indefinitely.
    11. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  basis
        the grounds of appeal complained that Judge  Robertson  misdirected
        herself in relation to both EEA law and  Article  8.   No  arguable
        error of law was found for in a thorough and careful decision Judge
        Robertson is said to have given clear reasons for findings open  to
        her.
    12. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application by  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Smith on 5 October  2016,  on  the  grounds  it  was
        arguable that  absent  evidence  that  the  appellant's  other  two
        children could be admitted to  Germany  (there  being  no  apparent
        basis in EU law for them to be admitted) the finding at [24] of the
        decision that the family could return as a whole  to  Germany,  and
        that therefore the appellant is not entitled to a derived right  of
        residence,  contained  an  error  of  law.  Judge  Smith  was  less
        persuaded by the ground concerning the Article 8 consideration  but
        as this issue  would  be  affected  by  the  question  whether  the
        appellant had a derived right, the limit of the grant of permission
        was not restricted.
    13. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton sets out the  following  summary
        of the issues before him at that stage in the following terms:


         3.   The Judge dismissed the appeal because she was  not  satisfied
             that the principles set out in the decision in Zambrano Case C-
             34/09 [2011] ECR 1-0000 applied.  This was because  [J]  as  a
             German citizen had a right to enter Germany, where his  father
             lived,  and  therefore  would  not  be  forced  to  leave  the
             territory of the EU.  Under Zambrano, the Appellant  as  [J]'s
             primary carer would also have the right to enter Germany,  and
             the German authorities  would  be  bound  to  also  admit  the
             Appellants  two   dependent   daughters   as   it   would   be
             disproportionate to exclude them. Therefore [J] did not have a
             derived right of residence in  the  UK  under  Article  12  of
             Regulation 1612/68 and the Appellant did not  have  a  derived
             right of residence as his primary carer under  Regulation  15A
             of the EEA Regulations 2006.


        4.   The Judge dismissed the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds
             because it was not contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  the
             children to live in Germany, where  their  father  would  have
             greater  access  to  them,  and  overall  it  would   not   be
             disproportionate for the Appellant and her family to reside in
             Germany.


        5.   At the hearing, Mr Mohzan referred to  his  Skeleton  Argument
             and submitted that the Judge had erred in law in reaching  her
             decision. The Judge was wrong to find  that  the  decision  in
             Zambrano did not apply to the Appellant following the decision
             in Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; Reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs)  [2013]
             UKUT 00089 (IAC).  The Judge had relied  on  speculation  that
             the Appellant and her two daughters would be able to enter and
             reside in Germany  along  with  [J].  Further,  there  was  no
             requirement for children such as [J] to be a  British  citizen
             as opposed to a  citizen  of  any  other  EEA  state  for  the
             purposes of EU law and the principle established in  Zambrano.
             This error infected the Article 8 ECHR decision as it was made
             on the assumption that the Appellant  and  her  two  daughters
             could enter and reside in Germany with [J].


        6.   In response, Mr Mills referred to the  Rule  24  response  and
             argued that there was no such error of law.  The  Judge  found
             that the principles established in Zambrano did not apply as a
             consequence of her finding  of  fact  that  [J]  as  a  German
             citizen would not have to leave the territory of the  EU.  The
             decision in Ahmed did not contradict this finding  as  it  was
             made on a different factual matrix. It was open to  the  Judge
             to find that the Appellant as [J]'s  primary  carer  would  be
             able to enter and reside in Germany, and that  her  two  other
             children could accompany her  there.  There  was  no  evidence
             before the Judge to the contrary. The Judge was able  to  make
             the inference that that was the case. It was for the Appellant
             to show that it was not the  case.  At  worse  [J]'s  siblings
             would have a very strong claim to  live  with  him  and  their
             mother in Germany.


        7.   At the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give.  I  do
             find an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge  which  I
             therefore set aside. Regardless of the technical arguments  as
             to whether the appellant could rely on the Zambrano principle,
             it was an essential part of the judge's decision in respect of
             both the Appellants derivative rights and Article 8 ECHR  that
             [J]'s minor sisters will be able to accompany  him  and  their
             mother to Germany and reside  there.  However,  there  was  no
             evidence before the Judge that this was the case. It may  have
             been a reasonable assumption for the Judge to make,  but  that
             would still amount to speculation, and it is an error  of  law
             for the Judge to rely upon such.


    14. The removal direction issued against the  appellant  on  9  January
        2015 is set to Nigeria.
    15. The protection claim was dismissed on an earlier  occasion  and  is
        not a live issue before this Tribunal which relates solely  to  the
        two issues identified by Mr Mohzan  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge McCarthy.
    16. In addition to the appellant, her two  Nigerian  national  children
        and [J], the other relevant  person  is  [AA],  a  German  national
        resident in Berlin who is [J]'s father and from  whom  [J]  obtains
        his German nationality.




Submissions



    17. As there is no factual dispute in relation to the  key  players  or
        the appellant's immigration history there was no  need  to  receive
        further  evidence.   The  matter  proceeded  by  way   of   further
        submissions being made by the advocates.
    18.  Mr  Mohzan  sought  clarification  from  Mr  Mills  regarding  the
        Secretary of State's intentions, for  if  the  family  were  to  be
        returned to Germany it was submitted  that  the  removal  direction
        would require amendment. It was submitted that the appellant cannot
        go to Germany as there is no removal direction to that country.
    19. Mr Mohzan referred to the fact that if the  children's  names  were
        included in a removal direction and were removed  to  Germany  they
        would need accommodation and subsistence but there was no provision
        for this within the documentary  evidence  emanating  from  Germany
        that he provided, leaving the appellant with no source  of  income.
        Mr Mohzan also  argued  that  in  domestic  legislation  a  country
        residence permit was limited in time.
    20. Mr Mohzan submitted that under Regulation 15(4)(a) and the Zambrano
        principle the appellant can remain as a  primary  carer  of  an  EU
        national child and that as the child is in the UK the appellant can
        remain on the basis of a derivative right. It is  argued  that  the
        fact [J] was born in the UK is relevant  as  per  the  decision  in
        Amos.
    21. This is Mr Mozhan's primary case.  His alternative position relates
        to the problems the appellant would experience in Germany if she is
        able to obtain the relevant permit.  It was submitted the appellant
        would need to have a passport and obtain a right to go  to  Germany
        which would  have  to  be  under  provisions  contained  in  German
        domestic law.
    22. It was submitted under EU law the appellant could reside in Germany
        if she was self-sufficient but she is not. Also, her daughters  are
        Nigerian citizens and  they  cannot  enter  Germany.  It  was  also
        submitted  that  even  if  the  appellants  could  meet  the  self-
        sufficiency test, they could not meet any other test.
    23. Referring to section 28 of  the  Act  on  the  Residence,  Economic
        Activity and Integration of Foreigners in  the  Federal  Territory,
        Residence Act, issued  by  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Justice  and
        Consumer Protection in Germany, Mr Mohzan submitted this  provision
        only deals with the appellant and not her daughters and that  under
        German domestic law the two children will not be permitted entry.
    24. It was submitted under EU law there is a need to show dependency as
        an extended family member  which  neither  the  appellant  nor  her
        children have.
    25. Mr Mohzan also submitted that Section 12a  of  the  Residence  Act,
        entitled 'Residence Rule', is a  domestic  provision  which  states
        that to obtain residence it is necessary for an individual to  work
        which the appellant would find difficult.
    26. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, the two Nigerian children were  born
        in the UK and have been here for seven years. The EEA national  was
        born in the UK and it was submitted it  was  not  proportionate  to
        expect the children to leave.
    27. Mr Mills submitted the challenge to the decision of Judge Robertson
        was due to the position of [J]'s sisters although Judge Renton  did
        not dispose of the Zambrano point. It was accepted that if there is
        no evidence [J]'s sisters can live in Germany then it will  not  be
        possible to move the appellant and  [J]  as  the  child  cannot  be
        forced to leave the territory of the EU.
    28. Mr Mills provided two translated documents he had obtained relating
        to German legislative provisions. The first is a  shorter  document
        headed Act on the General Freedom  of  Movement  for  EU  Citizens,
        Freedom  of  Movement  Act/EU  in  which  the   German   government
        incorporate  the  Free  Movement  Directive  of  2004  into   their
        legislation, in a similar way the  UK  incorporated  such  material
        into the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  It  is  accepted  the
        Freedom of Movement  Act  has  not  been  amended  to  include  the
        judgment  in  Zambrano  in  the  same  way  in  which  UK  domestic
        legislation  has,  as  illustrated   by   the   Immigration   (EEA)
        Regulations 2012.
    29. The Free  Movement  provisions  do  not  therefore  appear  in  one
        document, as a result of which the Freedom of Movement Act does not
        arguably assist as this is not a traditional free movement case.
    30. The German government incorporated the judgment in Zambrano in  its
        domestic legislation within the provisions  of  the  Residents  Act
        referred to above. Mr Mills submitted that the relevant  provisions
        of that Act enabled the appellant  to  succeed  in  being  able  to
        settle with  [J]  and  for  his  siblings,  the  appellant's  other
        children, to join the appellant and [J] in  Germany,  and  for  the
        family  to  be  provided  with  suitable  financial   support   and
        accommodation. These provisions are  discussed  in  further  detail
        below.
    31. In reply, Mr  Mohzan  claimed  section  28  of  the  Residents  Act
        referred to a derogation from section 5 (1) but that the  appellant
        would still be required to show  she  could  meet  the  subsistence
        precondition for entry before she applied.
    32. Although Mr Mohzan submitted that Section 28 required the appellant
        to demonstrate an ability to  satisfy  a  maintenance  requirement,
        when challenged by Mr Mills and asked to  point  out  where  within
        that section such a requirement  existed,  Mr  Mohzan  accepted  Mr
        Mills  submission  that  Section  28  did  not  require  proof   of
        maintenance and accommodation, but then claimed  that  this  is  an
        exceptional that will only take effect if the appellant and [J] are
        in Germany, i.e. he has to physically be there.  It  was  submitted
        that the parent cannot automatically go to Germany with  the  child
        and a derogation from the maintenance and other requirements  would
        only apply if the German child is ordinarily resident in Germany.
    33. Mr Mohzan submitted that as the appellant could not rely on section
        28 she could not hold temporary residence and there was  no  answer
        to the question of the requirement for  ordinary  residence  within
        Germany.
    34. Mr Mohzan repeated his submission that  the  judgment  in  Zambrano
        applied to the UK following the decision in  Amos  in  relation  to
        article 20, and that the facts of this case are similar to those in
        Amos.
    35. Mr Mozhan further submitted the appellant could only enter  Germany
        if she was self-sufficient and that as she could not make  out  the
        same she could not go to Germany.



Discussion



The European element (excluding article 8 ECHR)


    36. It is not disputed [J] is a German national  as  evidenced  by  his
        passport. [J]'s birth certificate names both the appellant  as  his
        mother and [AA] as his father. Paternity is not disputed.  [J]  was
        born in the United Kingdom on 12 November 2012 and resides with his
        mother at her address in Birmingham.
    37. Under the Free Movement Directive, a national of a member state has
        a right to reside in another member state of the EU for an  initial
        period of three months but thereafter needs to establish that  they
        are a qualified person under the Directive or terms of  Regulations
        made  by  the  host  member   state   incorporating   the   minimal
        requirements of the Directive into domestic law.
    38. [J] as a child is not exercising a  right  of  Free  Movement  from
        Germany as it is argued that he has never lived in Germany although
        he is a national of that State.
    39. It was not submitted by Mr Mozhan that [J]'s father had  worked  in
        the United Kingdom recently or exercised treaty rights or continues
        to do so at the relevant dates. It is understood that [J]'s  father
        works and is settled in Germany.
    40. The appellant claims to have a derived right to  reside  in  United
        Kingdom such that the respondent's direction  for  her  removal  is
        unlawful as being contrary to EU law.  The  concept  of  a  derived
        right  arose  from  the  decision  in  Zambrano  which   has   been
        incorporated into Regulation 15A of  the  EEA  Regulations  in  the
        United Kingdom.
  41. The appellant claims a derived right on the basis she is  the  primary
      carer of [J]. Regulation 15A(7) states that a  person,  P,  is  to  be
      regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if (a) P is  a  direct
      relative or a legal guardian of that person; and (b)  P-  (i)  is  the
      person who has primary responsibility for that person's care; or  (ii)
      shares equally the responsibility for  that  person's  care  with  one
      other person who is not an exempt person.
    42. In Ayinde and Thinjom (carers - Reg 15A  -  Zambrano)  [2015]  UKUT
        00560 it was  held  that  (i)    The  deprivation  of  the  genuine
        enjoyment of the substance of the rights attaching to the status of
        European Union citizens identified  in  the  decision  in  Zambrano
        [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 is limited to safeguarding a British citizen's
        EU rights as defined in Article 20; (ii) The provisions of reg. 15A
        of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  as
        amended apply when the effect of removal of the carer of a  British
        citizen renders the British citizen no longer able to reside in the
        United Kingdom or in another EEA state.  This requires the carer to
        establish as a fact that the British  citizen  will  be  forced  to
        leave the territory of the Union; (iii) The requirement is not  met
        by an assumption that the citizen will leave and does not involve a
        consideration of whether it would be reasonable for  the  carer  to
        leave the United Kingdom.  A comparison of  the  British  citizen's
        standard of living or care if the appellant remains or  departs  is
        material only in the context of whether the  British  citizen  will
        leave the United Kingdom' (iv)The Tribunal is required  to  examine
        critically a claim that a British citizen will leave the  Union  if
        the benefits he currently  receives  by  remaining  in  the  United
        Kingdom are unlikely to be matched  in  the  country  in  which  he
        claims he will be forced to settle.
    43. The phrase "effect of removal of the carer  of  a  British  citizen
        renders the British citizen no longer able to reside in the  United
        Kingdom or in another EEA state" is only partly applicable in  that
        [J] is not a British citizen, and  neither  are  any  other  family
        members, although the effect of removal to Nigeria will prevent [J]
        from living in the UK but not necessarily in another EEA state.
    44. Chavez-Vilchez and  others  v  Raad  van  Bestuur  van  de  Sociale
        verzekeringsbank  and  others  (Case  C-133/15)   the   CJEU   were
        considering the circumstances in which a Netherlands national child
        would, in practice be forced to leave the Netherlands and hence the
        EU, if the right of residence was refused to  their  third  country
        national  mothers.    The  CJEU  held  that  it  was  important  to
        determine which parent was the  primary  carer  of  the  child  and
        whether there was in fact a relationship of dependency between  the
        child and that parent.  As part of that assessment the  authorities
        should take into account the right to respect for  family  life  as
        per Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights to  be  read  in
        conjunction with the obligation to take into consideration the best
        interests of the child.  That the other parent,  a  Union  citizen,
        was actually able and willing to take responsibility for the  child
        was a relevant factor, but it was not a  sufficient  ground  for  a
        conclusion that there was not, as between the child and the  third-
        party national parent, such a relationship of dependency  that  the
        child would indeed be compelled to leave the EU if the  third-party
        national were refused the right of residence.  Such  an  assessment
        must take into account the best interests of the  child  concerned,
        all the specific circumstances including the age of the child,  the
        child's physical and  emotional  development,  the  extent  of  his
        emotional ties to both parents and the risks which separation  from
        the third-country parent might entail for the child's  equilibrium.
        Although the burden of proof was on the third-country  national  to
        prove that a refusal of the right of  residence  would  oblige  the
        child  to  leave  the  EU,  it  was  for  the  competent   national
        authorities to undertake on the basis of the evidence  provided  by
        the third-country national the necessary enquiries in order  to  be
        able to assess, in the light of all the circumstances, whether  the
        refusal would oblige the child to leave the EU.
    45. Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights relates to the  need
        for respect for private and family life and  states  that  everyone
        has the right to respect for his or her private  and  family  life,
        home and communications.
    46. This case is not on all fours with the  current  case  but  perhaps
        answers the question posed in  the  early  hearing  concerning  the
        relationship between respect for right to family life and the  free
        movement provisions  in  which  all  aspects,  including  the  best
        interests of the child concerned, have  to  be  factored  into  the
        decision-making process.
    47. The Secretary of State's stance is that under European law [J] will
        not leave the EU as he has a right to reside in Germany.
    48. It has not been shown [J] himself retains a right to reside on  the
        basis that he is in education in the United  Kingdom  as  case  law
        relating to this topic does not  suggest  that  is  a  freestanding
        right available to an EEA national in isolation.
    49. In Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013]  UKUT
        89 (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that  notwithstanding  inability  to
        satisfy new  regulation  15A(3)(c)  of  the  Immigration  (European
        Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended with effect from 16 July
        2012, the parent of a  child  of  an  EEA  national  who  has  been
        employed in the UK when the child was also residing here can have a
        derived right of residence under Article 12 of  Regulation  1612/68
        (now Article 10 of Regulation No  492/2011)  even  though  the  EEA
        national parent is no longer a worker in the UK  at  the  time  the
        child commences education: see Case C-480/08 Teixiera [2010] EUECJ,
        23 February 2010.
    50. Mr Mills submitted that in Ahmed the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
        concession in the appellant's favour  that  the  appellant  had  no
        status in Germany, the relevant country in that appeal too. At [68]
        the Upper Tribunal note:


             68.  We accept that nothing said by the Court  of  Justice  in
                  any of the Article 20 TFEU cases  excludes  the  potential
                  application of Zambrano principles to 3rd country national
                  parents if the practical effect of a refusal  decision  is
                  that the children are obliged to leave  the  territory  of
                  the Union as a whole, notwithstanding  that  the  children
                  are not, as in  Zambrano,  citizens  of  the  host  member
                  state. That was also the stated position of Mr Deller,  Ms
                  Asanovich and Mr Weiss.  Ordinarily  in  such  a  case  it
                  would be  necessary  for  applicants  to  prove  that  the
                  children concerned  were  prevented  from  living  in  the
                  territory of their  host  Member  State  (of  nationality)
                  together with their parent (s) and that may not be easy to
                  do, given that for a child to have acquired citizenship of
                  a Member State his or her third  country  national  parent
                  will often have lived there lawfully in the past.  In  the
                  appellant's case, however, there is no suggestion  of  the
                  children being able to  live  with  their  father  and  Mr
                  Deller said that he accepted that it was not realistic  to
                  expect that she could live in Germany with  her  children.
                  He also accepted that for her and her children  there  was
                  no alternative Union territory location other than the UK.
                  In our view Mr Deller was right to make  that  concession.
                  The appellant did  not  have  any  immigration  status  in
                  Germany nor could she rely in Germany on any EU  right  of
                  residence (to our understanding she would only be entitled
                  to reside in Germany as a matter of EU law if able to show
                  (as she clearly could not) that she was a  self-sufficient
                  parent in accordance with the principles set  out  by  the
                  Court of Justice in Chen [2004] ECR 1-9925).  Accordingly,
                  in our judgment the appellant  is  able  to  rely  on  her
                  children's Article 20 right of Union citizenship under the
                  Treaty.


    51. I have also noted the Opinion of the Advocate general in SSHD v  NA
        Case C-115/15 (previously NA (Pakistan) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  140)  in
        which  the  Advocate  General  Opinion  suggests  that  victims  of
        domestic violence should retain EU law  rights  of  residence  even
        where the EU citizen  was  not  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
        country concerned at the time of divorce.  Although this is  appeal
        not a divorce case, paragraph 2 of the opinion refers  to  Articles
        20 and 21 of the Treaty of the Functioning of  the  European  Union
        (TFEU) and how they should be interpreted. The  three  sections  of
        the opinion state:


         (1)  In cases where divorce is  consecutive  to  acts  of  domestic
             violence, Article  13(2(c)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the
             European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the
             right of citizens of the Union and  their  family  members  to
             move and reside freely within  the  territory  of  the  Member
             States amending Regulation  (EEC)  No  1612/68  and  repealing
             Directives  64/221/EEC,  68/360/EEC,  72/194/EEC,  73/148/EEC,
             75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC,  90/364/EEC,  90/365/EEC  and  93/96/EEC
             does not require that a European  Union  citizen  who  is  the
             spouse of a third country national should himself be  resident
             in the territory of the host Member State, in accordance  with
             Article 7(1) of that directive, at the time of the divorce  in
             order for that third country national to be able to  retain  a
             personal right of residence under that provision.


        (2)  Articles 20 TFEU and 21 TFEU must be  interpreted  as  meaning
             that they preclude a Member State from denying a third country
             national a right of residence  in  its  territory  where  that
             national has sole responsibility for children  who  are  Union
             citizens and who have resided with him/her since  their  birth
             but who do not possess the nationality of  that  Member  State
             and have not made use of their right to freedom  of  movement,
             in so far as those Union citizens satisfy the conditions  laid
             down in Directive 2004/38 or, failing that, in so far as  such
             a refusal deprives those citizens, in practice, of the genuine
             enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred  by  virtue
             of their status as Union citizens, a matter which it falls  to
             the referring court to determine in the light of  all  of  the
             circumstances of  the  present  case.  If  there  has  been  a
             judicial finding  that  the  removal  of  the  Union  citizens
             concerned  would  infringe  Article  7  of  the   Charter   of
             Fundamental Rights of the European Union or  Article  8(1)  of
             the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
             Fundamental Freedoms, signed at Rome on 4 November  1950,  the
             national court must take that finding into account.


        (3)  Article 12 of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 of the Council of 15
             October 1968 on freedom of movement  for  workers  within  the
             Community must be interpreted as meaning that a child and,  in
             consequence, the parent having custody of that child  enjoy  a
             right of residence in the host Member State where  the  parent
             who is a Union citizen and has worked in that Member State has
             ceased to reside in that Member State before the child  enters
             education there.


  52. It is again relevant to note in the Opinion  the  phrase  "so  far  as
      those Union citizens satisfy the conditions  laid  down  in  Directive
      2004/38 or, failing that, in so far as such a refusal  deprives  those
      citizens, in practice, of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of
      the rights conferred by virtue of their status  as  Union  citizens,".
      These issues are to be determined by the  domestic  court  on  a  fact
      specific basis.
  53. Mr Mohzan made no submissions demonstrating the appellants  were  able
      to satisfy the requirements of Directive 2004/38 and whilst [J]  could
      arguably be deprived of his rights  as  an  EU  citizen  if  moved  to
      Nigeria, this would not be the position if he  was  able  to  live  in
      Germany.


UK domestic law


    54. The position under UK domestic law  is  that  the  EEA  Regulations
        incorporate into UK jurisprudence the minimum standards set out  in
        the Directive 2004/38 together with any provisions  that  confer  a
        greater right/benefit upon a qualifying individual.
    55. As the Directive sets out the right of an EU citizen to move freely
        within the  territory  of  a  Member  State  for  the  purposes  of
        exercising treaty rights the ability of  an  EU  national  to  live
        within the United Kingdom is dependent upon their establishing such
        a right.
    56. Family members of EU nationals also have a right to reside  in  the
        United  Kingdom  if  they  can  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
        Regulations but this is not a freestanding right but a  right  that
        flows from the right of the EU  citizen  to  be  able  to  exercise
        treaty rights free from anything that may prevent or  inhibit  them
        from doing so, which is felt may be the case if they were unable to
        have their family members  accompany  or  join  them  within  their
        existing family unit.
    57. Extended families have no such right although can be  permitted  to
        remain within the family unit of an EEA national exercising  treaty
        rights at the discretion of the Member State.
    58. In  relation  to  UK  domestic  law  in  isolation,  basic  general
        principles apply, which is that a  person  who  is  not  a  British
        citizen or a person who has an automatic right  to  reside  in  the
        United Kingdom requires permission of the Secretary  of  State  for
        the Home Department to enter or remain in the UK. A person is  able
        to apply for such a right on a temporary basis such as a student or
        visitor or a more  permanent  basis  such  as  an  application  for
        indefinite leave to remain or settlement in any other capacity.
    59. It has not been made out that the appellant or any members of  this
        family group have a right to remain in the United Kingdom under  UK
        domestic law.   For  that  reason,  the  application  made  by  the
        appellant to the Secretary of State was for leave to  remain  as  a
        refugee and/or on human  rights  grounds  outside  the  Immigration
        Rules. Both applications have been rejected.


German domestic law


    60. It is not disputed that [J] has a right to reside in Germany as  he
        is a  German  national.  The  main  issue  that  requires  detailed
        consideration is whether the appellant and [J]'s siblings  will  be
        entitled to live with him in Germany and  if  adequate  support  is
        available to endure their basis needs of  housing  and  subsistence
        are met.
    61. There was some disagreement between  the  advocates  regarding  the
        provisions of the domestic German law leading, at one point, to  Mr
        Mills asking whether it would assist Mr Mohzan if he was allowed to
        set out his understanding of the  relevant  provisions  upon  which
        submissions could be made. Such invitation was not taken up  by  Mr
        Mohzan although he was able to respond by exercising his  right  of
        reply.
    62. As stated above, the Act on the General  Freedom  of  Movement  for
        capping EU  Citizens  is  not  directly  applicable.  The  relevant
        legislation is the Residence Act. The purpose of this  act  is  set
        out in section 1 (1) in the following terms:


             "this act shall serve to control and restrict  the  influx  of
             foreigners into the Federal  Republic  of  Germany.  It  shall
             enable  and  organise  immigration  with  due  regard  to  the
             capacities for admission and integration and the interests  of
             the Federal Republic of Germany in terms of its  economic  and
             labour market. At the same time, the Act shall also  serve  to
             fulfil  the  Federal  Republic   of   Germany's   humanitarian
             obligations. To this end, it shall regulate  the  entry,  stay
             and economic activity of foreigners  and  the  integration  of
             foreigners. The  provisions  contained  in  other  acts  shall
             remain unaffected.


    63. Mr Mohzan referred in his submission to the issue of  preconditions
        for the granting of a 'residence title' set out in Section 5 of the
        Act which are in the following terms:

   1) the granting of a residence title shall generally presuppose


   1. that the foreigners subsistence is secure;
           1a     that the foreigners identity is established, as is his or
             her nationality, if he or she is not  entitled  to  return  to
             another state
           2  that there is no public interest in expelling the foreigner
           3. That, if the foreigner has  no  entitlement  to  a  residence
           title,  the  foreigners  residence  does   not   compromise   or
           jeopardise the interests of the Federal Republic of  Germany  or
           for any other reason and
           4. That the passport obligation pursuant to Section 3 is met


   2) The granting of a temporary residence permit, a  permanent  settlement
      permit or an EU long/term residence permit  further  presupposes  that
      the foreigner


   1. Has entered the country with the necessary Visa and
   2. has already furnished the key information required  for  granting  the
      title in his or her Visa application.


           These  requirements  may  be  waived   if   the   pre-requisites
           qualifying a foreigner for the granting of a residence title are
           met or if special circumstances relating to the individual  case
           concerned  render  a  subsequent  Visa   application   procedure
           unreasonable.


   3) Application of subsection 1 and 2 shall  be  waived  in  the  case  of
      issuance of a residence title pursuant to Section 24 or Section 25 (1)
      to (3); application of subsection 1, nos. 1 to 2 and 4 and  subsection
      2 shall be waived in the cases of Section 25 (4a) and (4b).
           Application of subsections 1 and 2 may be waived  in  the  other
           cases of issuance of a residence title pursuant  to  Chapter  2,
           Part 5. Where application of subsection 1, no. 2 is waived,  the
           foreigners authority may point out that expulsion is possible on
           account of certain public interests in expelling  the  foreigner
           forming the subject of criminal or other proceedings  which  are
           still in progress, whereby such interests are  to  be  specified
           individually. Application of subsection 2 shall be waived in the
           event of a residence title being issued pursuant to  Section  26
           (3).
   4) A residence title shall be refused if there is a  public  interest  in
      expelling the foreigner within the meaning of Section 54 (1) no. 2  or
      no. 4. Exemptions  from  sentence  1  may  be  approved  in  justified
      individual  cases,  if  the  foreigner  divulges  said  activities  or
      allegiances  to  the  competent  authorities  and  credibly  distances
      himself or herself  from  his  or  her  actions  posing  a  threat  to
      security. If justified in individual cases, the  Federal  Ministry  of
      the Interior or a body designated  by  the  Federal  Ministry  of  the
      Interior may permit exemptions from sentence 1  before  the  foreigner
      enters the country for the purpose of crossing the border, and  for  a
      subsequent stay of up to 6 months.


    64. Mr Mohzan also referred to the provisions of Section 12a  described
        as the Residence Rule which is written in the following terms:


   1) In order to promote their sustainable integration into the way of life
      in  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany,  foreigners  who  have   been
      recognised as being entitled to asylum, having refugee  status  within
      the meaning of Section 3 (1) of the Asylum Act, who have been  granted
      subsidiary protection within the meaning  of  Section  4  (1)  of  the
      Asylum Act or who have been granted  an  initial  temporary  residence
      permit pursuant to Section 22, Section 23 or Section 25 (3)  shall  be
      obliged to take up their habitual residence (place of residence) for a
      period of three years as from recognition or issuance of the temporary
      residence permit in that Land to which they have  been  allocated  for
      the purposes of the asylum  procedure  or  in  the  context  of  their
      admission process. Sentence 1 shall not apply where the foreigner, his
      or her spouse, registered domestic partner or minor child take  up  or
      has taken up employment, of at least  15  hours  per  week  with  full
      Social Security coverage, on account  of  which  that  person  has  an
      income amounting to at least the average monthly needs for  individual
      persons pursuant to Section 20 and 22 of Book Two of the Social  Code,
      or that person takes up or has taken  up  vocational  training  or  is
      pursuing his or her studies or is in a training relationship.
   2) A foreigner who is subject to the obligation under  subsection  1  and
      who is living in a reception centre or other  temporary  accommodation
      may within six months following recognition or admission, but no later
      than the expiry of the period referred to in subsection 1, be obliged,
      for the purposes of providing him or her with suitable  accommodation,
      to take up residence in a specific place if this is not  precluded  by
      the promotion of his or her sustainable integration into  the  way  of
      life in the  Factual  Republic  of  Germany.  In  so  far  as,  in  an
      individual  case,  it  was   not   possible   to   allocate   suitable
      accommodation within six months, such allocation pursuant to  sentence
      1 may be made within a further six months on one occasion.
   3) In order to promote their sustainable integration into the way of life
      in the Federal Republic of Germany, foreigners who are subject to  the
      obligation pursuant to subsection  1  shall  be  obliged,  within  six
      months following recognition or the  first  issuance  of  a  temporary
      residence  permit,  but  no  later  than  the  expiry  of  the  period
      applicable in accordance with subsection 1, to take up residence in  a
      specific area if this can facilitate


   1. Having provided with suitable accommodation,
   2. there are acquiring sufficient oral command  of  the  German  language
      pursuant to Level A2 of the Common European Framework of Reference for
      Languages and
   3. their  commencing  paid  employment,  taking  account  of  this  local
      conditions on the vocational training and labour market.


   4) Foreigners who are subject to the obligation under subsection  1  May,
      in order to prevent social exclusion, also be  obliged  up  until  the
      expiry of the period applicable under subsection 1,  not  to  take  up
      residence in a specific area, in particular if it is  to  be  expected
      that they will not use German as the key lingua franca at that  place.
      Account is to be taken  of  the  situation  of  the  local  vocational
      training and labour market when taking this decision.
   5) An obligation imposed or allocation made pursuant to subsection 1 to 4
      is to be revoked upon application by the foreigner


   1. If the foreigner furnishes proof, in the event of an obligation  being
      imposed or allocation being made pursuant to subsections  1  to  3  to
      take up residence at another place, or in the event of  an  obligation
      being imposed pursuant  to  subsection  4  not  to  make  his  or  her
      residence at a place, that


   a) He or she or his or her spouse, registered domestic partner  or  minor
      child is in employment with full Social Security coverage  within  the
      meaning of subsection 1, sentence 2, has an income which  secures  his
      or her subsistence or vocational training or place to study or
   b) his or her spouse, registered domestic  partner  or  minor,  unmarried
      children have their place of residence elsewhere
   2. to prevent hardship; in particular, hardship shall exist where


   a) The competent Youth Welfare Office estimates that the effectiveness of
      child and Youth welfare benefits and measures pursuant to  Book  Eight
      of the Social Code would be undermined on account of the effectiveness
      of local child and youth welfare benefits and measures.
   b) Acceptance by  another  Land  has  been  confirmed  on  other  urgent,
      personal grounds or
   c) comparable  unreasonable  restrictions  would  arise  for  the  person
      concerned on other grounds


            in the event of revocation pursuant to sentence  1  no.  2,  the
            foreigner is to be obliged pursuant to subsection  3  or  4,  at
            most up until the expiry of the period referred to in subsection
            1, account having been taken of his or her interests.
   6) Where dependents subsequently immigrate to be with a foreigner who  is
      subject to an  obligation  imposed  or  allocation  made  pursuant  to
      subsections 1 to 4, the obligation or allocation shall also  apply  to
      the dependents subsequently immigrate in at most up until  the  expiry
      of the period applicable to the foreigner pursuant  to  subsection  1,
      unless the  competent  authority  has  ordered  a  different  measure.
      Subsection  5  shall  apply  mutatis  mutandis   to   the   subsequent
      immigrating dependents.
   7) Subsection 1 to 6 shall not apply to foreigners who were recognised or
      initially granted a temporary residence permit within the  meaning  of
      subsection 1 before 1 January 2016.
   8)  Objections  and  actions  filed  against  obligations   pursuant   to
      subsection 2 to 4 shall have no suspensory effect.
   9) Where it comes  to  foreigners  who  are  subject  to  the  obligation
      pursuant to  subsection  1,  the  Lander  may,  by  way  of  statutory
      instruments of the Land government or other  Land  regulations,  issue
      regulations  concerning  particulars  concerning   the   organisation,
      procedures and suitable accommodation relating to


   1. Their distribution within the Land pursuant to subsection 2
   2. the procedure for making allocations and imposing obligations pursuant
      to subsection 2 to 4
   3. the requirements as to suitable accommodation within  the  meaning  of
      subsections two, three no. 1 and  subsection  5,  sentence  1,  no.  1
      letter a), as well as the form of its proof,
   4. the manner of furnishing proof of employment with full Social Security
      coverage pursuant to subsection 1, sentence 2,  income  which  secures
      subsistence, as well as of having a vocational  training  place  or  a
      place to study within the meaning of subsections 1 and 5, sentence  1,
      no.1, letter a).
   5. The obligation to be taken up by the municipality determined as his or
      her place of residence and the admission process.


    65. Mr Mills submitted that there was no requirement for the  appellant
        to be subject to the requirements of Section 5 (1).  He  made  this
        submission  in  relation  to  Section  28,   a   section   entitled
        "subsequent immigration of dependents to join a  German  national".
        This section provides:




   1) the temporary residence permit should be granted to the foreign


   1. spouse of a German,
   2. minor, unmarried child of a German,
   3. parent of a minor, unmarried  German  for  the  purpose  of  care  and
      custody


            If the German ordinarily residence is in the federal  territory.
            By way of derogation from section 5 (1),  no.  1,  it  shall  be
            granted in the cases covered by sentence 1, nos. 2  and  3.   By
            way of derogation from Section 5 (1) no 1, it should be  granted
            as a general rule in the cases covered by sentence 1 no. 1.   By
            way of derogation  from  Section  5  (1),  no.1,  the  temporary
            residence permit may be  granted  to  the  parent  of  a  minor,
            unmarried German who does not possess  the  right  of  care  and
            custody of said child, if the family unit already exists in  the
            federal territory. Section 30 (1), sentence  1,  nos  1  and  2,
            sentence  three  and  (2),  sentence  one  shall  apply  mutatis
            mutandis in the cases covered by sentence 1, no 1.
   2) As a rule, the foreigner  shall  be  granted  a  permanent  settlement
      permit if she or he has been in possession of  a  temporary  residence
      permit for three years, the family unit with the German  continues  to
      exist in the  federal  territory,  there  is  no  public  interest  in
      expelling the foreigner and the foreigner has  sufficient  command  of
      the German language. Section 9  (2)  sentences  2  to  5  shall  apply
      mutatis mutandis. The temporary residence permit  shall  otherwise  be
      extended as long as the family unit continues to exist.
   3) Section 31 and  34  shall  apply  subject  to  the  proviso  that  the
      foreigner's  residence  title  shall  be  replaced  by  the   ordinary
      residents of the  German  in  the  federal  territory.  The  temporary
      residence permit granted to a parent of a minor and  unmarried  German
      national for the purpose of care and custody is to be  extended  after
      the child has come of age as long as the child lives with him  or  her
      in a family  household  and  the  child  is  undergoing  education  or
      training which leads to a  recognised  school,  vocational  or  higher
      education qualification.
   4) Section 36 shall apply mutatis mutandis to other dependents.
   5) (Repealed).


    66. This section arguably demonstrates that the appellant has  a  right
        under German domestic law to  acquire  initially  a  temporary  but
        thereafter a permanent residence permit as the parent of [J] who is
        an unmarried German, for the purposes of providing care and custody
        for the child. The  formal  requirements  for  permanent  residence
        permit appearing to be the need for the appellant to  speak  German
        and have lived with [J] for three years.
    67. As stated, Section 28 incorporates into German law the judgment  of
        the European Court in Zambrano.
    68. In relation to Jamar  siblings,  the  appellant's  non-EU  national
        children, Mr Mills submitted that they too have a right  to  reside
        in Germany by virtue of section 32 of the Residence Act.
    69. Section 32 provides:


   1) the minor, unmarried child of a foreigner shall be granted a temporary
      residence permit if the parents or  the  parent  possessing  the  sole
      right of care and custody hold a temporary residence  permit,  and  EU
      Blue Card, a permanent settlement permit or an EU long-term  residence
      permit.
   2) If the minor, unmarried child is aged 16 or over and if  it  does  not
      relocate the central focus of its life to Germany  together  with  its
      parents or the parent possessing the sole right of care  and  custody,
      subsection 1 shall only apply if the child speaks German and  appears,
      on the basis of his or her education and way of life to date, that  he
      or she will be able to integrate into the way of  life  prevailing  in
      the Federal Republic of Germany. The first sentence  above  shall  not
      apply if


   1. The foreigner possesses a temporary  residence  permit  in  accordance
      with Section 23 (4), Section 25 (1) or  (2),  a  permanent  settlement
      permit in accordance with Section 26  (3)  or  possesses  a  permanent
      settlement permit in  accordance  with  Section  26  (4)  after  being
      granted a temporary residence permit in  accordance  with  Section  25
      (2), sentence 1, second alternative, or
   2. the foreigner or his or her spouse living together as a family possess
      a permanent settlement permit in accordance with Section 19 or  an  EU
      Blue Card.
   3) Where parents share  the  right  of  care  and  custody,  a  temporary
      residence permit pursuant to subsections one or  two  should  also  be
      granted for the purpose of joining  just  one  parent,  if  the  other
      parent has given his or her consent to the child stay in Germany or if
      the relevant  binding  decision  has  been  supplied  by  a  competent
      authority.
   4) A minor, unmarried child of a foreigner may  otherwise  be  granted  a
      temporary residence permit if necessary in order  to  prevent  special
      hardship on account of the circumstances pertaining to the  individual
      case concerned. The child's well-being and the family situation to  be
      taken into consideration in this connection.


    70. Section 32 (4) is clearly relevant as it is arguable  that  special
        hardship on account of circumstances appertaining would arise if  a
        residence permit was not to be granted  to  the  appellants  non-EU
        national children if this  prevented  them  from  continuing  their
        family life  with  their  mother  and  [J].  This  is  a  provision
        contained within German domestic statutory law  not  a  right  that
        would have to be pursued outside domestic provisions under  Article
        8 ECHR.
    71. It is arguable based upon  the  German  legal  provisions  set  out
        above, that there are good reasonable prospects for  the  appellant
        and the siblings being able to settle with  [J]  in  Germany  which
        will enable the child to maintain his presence within the EU and to
        still benefit from family life within his immediate family unit.
    72. Mr Mills submitted that although no effort had  been  made  by  the
        appellant or her representatives to approach the German authorities
        to ascertain their position,  if  this  was  an  application  by  a
        British national minor child wishing to return to his or  her  home
        state and to enable his or her mother and siblings  to  enter  with
        him for the purposes of maintaining the family unit, it  is  likely
        that leave would  be  granted.  Mr  Mills  submitted  there  is  no
        evidence that such  an  approach  could  not  be  followed  by  the
        immigration authorities in Germany. There is no evidence that  this
        would not be the case.
    73. In relation to the criticism by Mr Mohzan of the lack of a  removal
        direction being set to Germany, Mr Mills responded by stating  that
        the Secretary State cannot set a removal direction  to  Germany  as
        the appellant is not a German citizen and that  to  enable  her  to
        settle in Germany with [J] she would need to make an application to
        the German authorities. The only place to which a removal direction
        could be set so far as the appellant is concerned  is  to  Nigeria,
        the effect of which is to trigger the right of appeal that  enabled
        all matters to be discussed including those  relating  to  Zambrano
        and the relevant provisions of EU and German domestic law.
    74. I find it has been made out for the reasons set out above that  the
        appellant and her non-EU national  children  have  the  ability  to
        settle with [J] in Germany in accordance  with  the  provisions  of
        domestic immigration law referred  to  above.  I  do  not  find  Mr
        Mozhan's counterargument to have been properly made out.
    75. The derogation from section 5 (1)  under  the  Zambrano  principles
        would entitle the appellant to  seek  social  assistance  from  the
        Federal Republic of Germany who are prevented  from  discriminating
        against the appellant under principles of EU law.
    76. The definition of ordinary residence  within  the  German  domestic
        provisions appears to be interpreted by reference to where a person
        lives. As [J] has a right to enter Germany that will be  the  place
        where he lives fulfilling the ordinary residence test.  As  stated,
        it  would  have  assisted  the  tribunal  greatly  if   appellant's
        representative had  approached  the  German  authorities  and  made
        necessary applications  or  engaged  in  discussion  with  them  in
        relation to the specific matter but the Tribunal can only determine
        the appeal on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  has  been  made
        available.


Article 8 ECHR


    77. It is not disputed that the appellant and her children have  family
        life recognised by article 8 (1). It has not  been  made  out  that
        interference with such family life, if this results in  the  family
        unit being fragmented, will amount to justified  interference  with
        such family life.
    78. This is therefore a family unit that  shall  remain  together,  the
        issue  is  whether  moving  the  family  to  Germany  will   be   a
        disproportionate interference with any private life formed  in  the
        United Kingdom as the family life that they have will  continue  if
        they are allowed to settle in Germany as a family unit.
    79. [J] has been born in the United Kingdom and has lived here all  his
        life and is clearly settled and establish as  are  the  appellant's
        other children.
    80. None of the children are British citizens and only [J], even though
        having no right to remain in the UK in his own right  or  under  EU
        law, has a right to reside in another European state.
    81. If [J] returns to Germany and the authorities in Germany  deny  the
        appellant or the other children the ability to live in Germany with
        [J], especially in light of the first appellant being [J]'s primary
        carer, preventing  family  reunification  or  the  continuation  of
        family life with his mother and siblings, it is unlikely that  such
        an act could be shown to be proportionate pursuant to article  8(2)
        ECHR.
    82. The effect of the failure by  the  appellant's  representatives  to
        have made an application or approach to the German  authorities  on
        the appellants behalf, to establish whether they would  refuse  the
        appellant and  [J]  siblings  a  right  to  enter  and  settled  in
        accordance  with  domestic  or  European  law,  and  what  support,
        financial assistance  and  housing  would  be  allocated  to  them,
        prevents this Tribunal undertaking a comparative  analysis  of  the
        position of the family unit relocating to Germany or  remaining  in
        the United Kingdom.
    83. It is known, for the reasons stated above, that the requirement for
        the appellant to be  self-sufficient  has  no  application  as  the
        derogation from Section 5 (1) of the Residents Act clearly has this
        effect.
    84. It is accepted that expecting the appellant  and  the  children  to
        relocate means disrupting the lives they have in United Kingdom and
        having  to  rebuild  their  lives  in  Germany.  In  terms  of  the
        Immigration Rules there would be the need  to  assess  whether  the
        reality of such a move would be unduly harsh  or  unreasonable.  In
        relation to article 8 ECHR it is whether a  combination  of  events
        demonstrates that such a move will  not  be  proportionate  to  the
        legitimate aim relied upon by the Secretary of State.
    85. It appears from the information available to this Tribunal that the
        family will not be destitute, that  they  will  receive  assistance
        with housing and subsistence and, in accordance with major  centres
        of inward migration within  the  European  Union,  assistance  with
        integration including the acquisition of language skills.
    86. Mr Mohzan produced no evidence to show the children had no  command
        of German or could not learn German and it is known that English is
        spoken in Germany and  that  schools  are  available  that  provide
        instruction in English. This, arguably, would only be  a  temporary
        issue in any event for as the children improve their command of the
        German language they can no doubt be educated in German.
    87. It has not been made out that the appellant or children  would  not
        be able to re-establish a private life  in  Germany.  There  is  no
        suggestion that there will be a denial of contact  between  another
        parent in  the  United  Kingdom  and,  indeed,  there  may  be  the
        possibility that [J] is able to have contact  with  his  father  if
        they settle in or around the Berlin area.
    88. The appellant has no status and her position in the UK  has  always
        been  precarious.  She  has  had  children  knowing  that  is   the
        situation.  Any private life  the  appellant  seeks  to  rely  upon
        therefore warrants little weight being attached to it - see section
        117 of the 2002 Act.
    89. In assessing proportionality generally of an Article 8  appeal,  it
        will be necessary to factor in the statutory provisions in  section
        117 A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 so  far
        as applicable (this not being a deportation appeal).
    90. It has not been made out that with the social assistance that  will
        be available in  Germany,  where  it  is  understood  the  packages
        available are perhaps  more  generous  than  those  in  the  United
        Kingdom, this family unit would  not  have  enough  to  meet  their
        needs.
    91. Considering all  issues  in  the  round,  and  in  the  absence  of
        sufficient evidence from the appellant  that  she  and  the  family
        members would not be permitted to settle in Germany,  I  find  that
        the Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof upon  her
        to the required standard to show that the decision to remove  is  a
        proportionate decision.
    92. It goes without saying that attempting to remove the  appellant  or
        family members to Nigeria will be unlawful but that does not confer
        an entitlement to a grant of leave  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
        result of the existence  of  an  alternative  place  of  residence,
        Germany, to which  his  family  could  arguably  go.  Although  the
        Secretary of State cannot set a removal direction for the appellant
        to Germany, for the  reasons  outlined  by  Mr  Mills,  it  may  be
        arguable that a direction could be made for [J]'s removal  pursuant
        to the EEA Regulations as it has not been established that  he  has
        any arguably lawful basis for claiming to be entitled to remain  in
        the United Kingdom.  Such  a  decision  may  trigger  the  type  of
        enquiries that should have been made that may advance  the  process
        further,  although  the  appellant's  representatives  and/or   the
        Secretary  of  State  could  consider  liaising  with  the   German
        immigration authorities without the  need  for  formal  proceedings
        when the facts are not in dispute, German domestic law  provides  a
        solution, and it is  only  the  question  of  how  matters  may  be
        practically arranged to ensure [J] has the appropriate support  and
        assistance  from  his  family  and  by  way  of   subsistence   and
        accommodation required, to prevent a breach of [J]'s  rights  as  a
        German national and/or Article 8 ECHR rights.


Decision

    93. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been  found  to  have  materially
        erred in law and her decision set aside by a Deputy Upper  Tribunal
        Judge.  I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    94. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 23 June 2017












