
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                     OOA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. An anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances I am
    satisfied that the order should continue.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney promulgated on 28 November 2014 which dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum on all grounds .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 14 August 1971 and is a national of  Nigeria.
    Her three children are her dependents in the appeal.

 4. On 23 January 2012 the Appellant applied for asylum on the  basis  that
    she would be at risk of mistreatment by the family of the father of her
    three children.

 5. On 20 April  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application as it was not accepted that the Appellant or  her  children
    were at risk from the family of the father of her children  in  Nigeria
    as claimed; there was sufficiency of protection  in  Nigeria;  internal
    relocation was a viable option; the decision was  not  disproportionate
    under Article 8 and there was no basis for a grant of leave outside the
    Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  De  Haney  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing :

      a) The Judge failed to make an adequate assessment of  the  Article  8
         rights of the family and the best interests of the children.

      b) Procedural unfairness in dismissing  the  claim  based  largely  on
         adverse credibility findings about matters and evidence  never  put
         to the Appellant.

      c) The adverse findings are flawed because  the  Judge  made  perverse
         findings of fact.

 8. On 29 December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell  gave  permission
    to appeal on all grounds.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Ms  Smith  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that (a) Mr McVitie conceded that errors of law were made out
    and the decision should be  set  aside  and  remitted  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr McVitie confirmed that he accepted  that
    material errors of law had been made. The Article  8  assessment  which
    was one short paragraph at 47 of the decision  was  wholly  inadequate.
    The Judge appeared to hold it against  the  Appellant's  children  that
    they had been a drain on the NHS when the evidence was  that  they  had
    been the victims of crime, of abuse, and had thus called  on  the  NHS.
    There was no consideration of Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009. He accepted that there were issues raised  by
    the Judge in his credibility findings that the  HOPO  had  specifically
    identified that the Respondent was not pursuing and the  Appellant  did
    not have the chance therefore to address them. Finally he accepted that
    the Respondent had always conceded on the basis of clear evidence  that
    there were two different men involved in this case, EO and MO, but  the
    Judge erroneously concluded that they were one and the same person.





Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

12. I am satisfied that Mr McVitie was right to concede that those  matters
    as set out in detail in the  Ground  of  Appeal  and  summarised  above
    amounted to material errors of law: it was not reasonably open  to  the
    Judge to conclude at paragraph 37 that MO and EO were the same  person;
    the Article 8 assessment was wholly  inadequate;  it  was  procedurally
    unfair (paragraph 27 onwards) to base  findings  on  matters  that  the
    Respondent did not seek to pursue and the Appellant was  not  given  an
    opportunity to address.

13. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety. All matters to be redetermined afresh.

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to procedural  unfairness
    and inadequate findings. In this case none of the findings of fact  are
    to stand and the matter will be a complete re hearing.

16. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed, before any  First-tier
    Immigration Judge.


Signed      Date 30.9.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
