
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03739/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 27th November 2017              |On 18th December 2017                    |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    [S J]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell of Counsel, instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1980.   He
    arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2006  and  claimed  asylum.   That
    application was refused by the respondent on  11th  August  2006.   The
    appellant sought to appeal against that  decision,  which  appeal  came
    before Immigration Judge Hawden-Beal.

2.   In a determination promulgated on 30th  October  2006  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum was dismissed  on  the  basis   that  he  fell  within
    Article 1F(a) of the Refugee  Convention.   However,  his  claim  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR was allowed  and  he  was  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 1st August 2007.

3.   On 10th September 2007 the appellant renewed his application for  leave
    to remain but it took the respondent until 13th February 2015 to make a
    decision.  That decision was to refuse  to  grant  any  further  leave,
    essentially on the basis that circumstances had changed, such that  the
    Article 3 risk no longer was a live one.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge James at a hearing  on  22nd  May
    2015.  The Judge noted in that decision  that  he  was  considering  an
    appeal against a decision to refuse to extend his  discretionary  leave
    to remain, rather than one to refuse asylum.  Thus the  Judge  did  not
    engage with the issue  of  Article  1F.  Nevertheless  the  appeal  was
    allowed on the basis of Articles 3 and  8  of  the  ECHR,  particularly
    having regard to the risks which the appellant would face upon return.

5.   The Secretary of State sought to appeal against  that  decision,  which
    matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty at a hearing  in
    Field House on 7th March 2016.  In a determination of 11th April  2016,
    the Judge upheld the findings as to Article 3 of the ECHR.  However, it
    was noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  make  any
    findings in respect of Article 1F or Article 8.  Thus the  decision  of
    Judge James was set aside to be reheard on those issues but  Article  3
    was preserved.

6.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss on 10th  November
    2016.  The Judge applied the principle of Devaseelan to  the  issue  of
    Article 1F and dismissed the appeal in respect of Articles 3 and 8.

7.   Thus the appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal on the  challenge  that
    at the very least the appeal on Article 3  should  have  been  allowed,
    particularly given the findings of Judge James and Judge  McGinty.   It
    was argued that it was an error of  law  for  the  Judge  not  to  have
    grappled with the issue of 1F.

8.   I considered the matter on 7th August 2017 and adjourned the matter  in
    order that proper consideration can be given to the issue of 1F(a)  and
    whether or not that should  continue to apply.

9.   At the hearing Mr Bates  indicated  that  he  had  no  instructions  to
    concede the Article 1F(a) point. Thus it was that the hearing proceeded
    to consider the argument as to whether or not that  Article  should  be
    continued or not in the light of subsequent jurisprudence.

10.  The matter as was presented before  Immigration  Judge  Hawden-Beal  is
    set out in paragraphs 57 to 62 of the determination.

11.  In interview the appellant agreed that he had attacked  forces  of  the
    Karzai government but denied  attacking  civilians.   He  said  in  his
    interview at question 26 that he did kill people sometimes  because  it
    was war.  He said he took no  prisoners  and  did  not  mistreat  enemy
    combatants but rather fought with the enemy.  He  said  he  would  come
    down from mountains and attack them.

12.  In evidence he said that the new government was  anti-Hizb-i  and  that
    when they attacked him he defended  himself.   He  said  that  the  new
    government would not leave Hizb-i alone and  so  he  fought  back.   He
    confirmed that coalition forces were in  Kunar  Province  when  he  was
    fighting with the Karzai government  forces  but,  in  spite  of  being
    bombed by the coalition forces, the appellant denies shooting at  them.
    He said he had never deliberately killed anybody but if  he  was  fired
    upon he returned the fire and if returned to Afghanistan he would again
    take up arms on behalf of Hizb-i.

13.  The Judge commented at paragraph  60  as  follows:  "Having  considered
    Article 1F(c) I am not satisfied that the appellant has been guilty  of
    acts contrary to the purposes and principles of  the  United  Nations."
    The Judge went on, however, in paragraph 61 to say as follows:

         "However, the evidence before  me  shows  that  the  appellant  has
         participated in a crime against peace as defined in Annex 5 Article
         6 of the 1951 Convention, in that the appellant has taken  part  in
         the planning, preparation,  initiation  and  waging  of  a  war  of
         aggression, or  a  war  in  violation  of  international  treaties,
         agreements or assurances, or has participated in a common plan or a
         conspiracy for the accomplishment of any of the above.  I therefore
         find the appellant is excluded from being a refugee  under  Article
         1F(a)."


14.  Mr Blundell submitted that merely being with a band of fighters  in  an
    internal conflict situation was not sufficient to  constitute  a  crime
    against peace.

15.  In that connection my attention was drawn to an  old  decision  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal, as it then was, 00/TH/01570, in the matter
    of Amberber. The relevance of that decision  is  that  it  sets  out  a
    letter from UNHCR as to how Article 1F(a) should be  read.   Paragraphs
    147 - 150  of  the  UNHCR  Handbook  on  Procedures  and  Criteria  for
    Determining Refugee Status set out the categories of  persons  who  are
    not considered  to  be  deserving  of  international  protection  under
    Article 1F(a) of the Convention.  A list of international  instruments,
    which contained definitions of "a crime against peace, war crime, or  a
    crime against humanity" are found in Annex VI of  the  UNHCR  Handbook.
    In particular, Article 6 of the Charter of the  International  Military
    Tribunal  defines  "crimes  against   peace"   as   namely,   planning,
    preparation, initiation or waging of a war of aggression, or a  war  in
    violation of  international  treaties,  agreements  or  assurances,  or
    participation in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment  of
    any of the foregoing.

16.  The United Nations General  Assembly  resolution  3314  (XXIX)  on  the
    definition of aggression, defines aggression as the use of armed  force
    by  a  state  against  the  territorial   sovereignty,   or   political
    independence of another state.  Such would suggest that there  are  two
    conditions which should be met in terms of an act of aggression, namely
    that the act must have been committed by a leader of the state and must
    have been committed against  the  territorial  sovereignty  of  another
    state, that is, there must be  some  kind  of  conflict  waging  across
    international borders.

17.  Further, the crime of aggression, as  defined  in  Article  16  of  the
    International Law Commission's 1996 "Draft Code of Crimes against Peace
    and Security of Mankind," relates to the crime  of  aggression  in  any
    deed committed by leaders  of  a  state.   This  led  the  Tribunal  to
    conclude that a conflict  of  action  of  AAPO  members  against  EPRDF
    soldiers did not amount to a war of aggression and did not constitute a
    crime against peace.

18.  Further, my attention was drawn to a decision of the Supreme  Court  in
    Al-Sirri v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (United  Nations
    High Commissioner for Refugees intervening) [2012] UKSC 54.  The  court
    at paragraph 36 indicated that  the  general  principles  and  guidance
    given  by  the  UNHCR,  although  not  binding,  should   be   accorded
    considerable weight.  My attention was further  invited  to  R  on  the
    application of JS (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] UKSC 15.  This perhaps was a very  relevant  decision
    as the court paid careful regard to what constituted  a  crime  against
    peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity as set  out  in  Article
    1F(a) of the Convention.

19.  In that particular case the appellant was a  member  of  the  LTTE  and
    team leader of a combat unit engaging in  military  operations  against
    the Sri Lankan Army (a  situation  not  dissimilar  from  that  in  the
    current appeal.

20.   Reference  was  made  to  Article  28  of  the  Rome  Statute  of  the
    International Criminal Court (the ICC Statute), which was considered to
    be  the  starting  point  for  considering  whether  an  appellant  was
    disqualified from asylum by virtue of  Article  1F(a).   Considerations
    are also given to the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC (in particular
    Article 12(2)(a), which mirrors 1F(a) itself.  The court considered the
    decision  in  Gurung  to  be  one  not  without  its  difficulties,  in
    particular the view that mere membership of  an  organisation  that  is
    committed to the use of violence for political ends is  not  enough  to
    bring an appellant within the exclusion clauses.   The  starting  point
    for a decision maker in addressing  the  question,  whether  there  are
    serious reasons for considering that an asylum seeker has committed  an
    international crime so as to fall within Article 1F(a), should  be  the
    Rome Statute.  The decision maker will need to  identify  the  relevant
    types of crime as defined in Articles 7 and  8  and  then  address  the
    question whether there are serious reasons  for  considering  that  the
    appellant has committed such a crime.  There has to be a focus upon the
    actual participation of the individual as opposed to an  assumption  as
    to its significance from mere membership.

21.  The Rome Statute came into force on 1st July 2002.  Article  8  defines
    what is a war crime.  Wilful killing or wilfully causing suffering,  or
    serious injury to body or health is within the context of acts  against
    persons or property protected under  the  provisions  of  the  relevant
    Geneva Convention, which does not apply in the current  case  of  civil
    war.

22.  Significantly,  other  serious  violations  of  laws  and  customs  are
    against civilians or  those  involved  in  humanitarian  assistance  or
    peacekeeping  by  employing  violence  in  humiliating  and   degrading
    situations such as rape or slavery.  Properly  speaking,  there  is  an
    expectation that that is an international context.

23.  In the case of armed conflict,  not  of  international  character,  the
    violations that are specified, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture,
    outrages upon personal dignity, taking of  hostages  and  carrying  out
    executions without  proper  procedures.   None  of  those  matters  are
    suggested in relation to the appellant.  His case  is  simply  that  he
    fights those who seek to invade his  territory  and  responds  to  such
    aggression with aggression.

24.  As Mr Blundell indicates, the nature of the action  that  is  described
    so far as the appellant is concerned is not one of those falling within
    Article 8.

25.  Article 22 provides that the definition of a crime  shall  be  strictly
    construed.   The protecting of the tribal  area  from  the  Taliban  or
    government forces lacks the international element,  but  in  any  event
    does not denote conduct  against  individuals  that  are  envisaged  in
    Article 8 or under the Code itself.  Taking part in a war of aggression
    is taking part in a much wider operation of international dimensions or
    of significance, which is not  being  envisaged  in  the  case  of  the
    appellant.

26.  As Mr Blundell indicated, there are sadly many  areas  of  conflict  at
    present, many of which are in local areas with local  militia  fighting
    those who seek to control the territory.  Such is not the nature of the
    conduct, which is envisaged in the Rome Statute, nor do any of the acts
    fall within the categories envisaged.  As  I  so  find,  the  appellant
    falls more within the context considered by the  Supreme  Court  in  JS
    (Sri Lanka).  His involvement has very much  a  local  rather  than  an
    international or state character.

27.  Having heard the submissions by Mr Blundell I invited Mr Bates for  his
    response.  He indicated that he had no submissions to make.

28.  Accordingly  it  seems  to  me,  on  the  authorities  that  have  been
    presented,  that  Immigration  Judge  Hawden-Beal  was  in   error   in
    categorising the activities of the appellant as a crime against  peace.
    In any event,  the  jurisprudence  has  developed  since  2006  in  the
    decisions to which reference has been made.

29.  I do not find that that what was described by the appellant, as to  his
    participation in armed conflict, was such as to constitute a war  crime
    or a crime against peace such as to justify the imposition  of  Article
    1F(a) and certainly not to continue that exclusion.

30.  To the extent therefore that there is an appeal against the finding  of
    1F(a) that is allowed such that the exclusion is revoked.

31.  That in practical terms enables the appellant to advance his claim  for
    asylum.

32.  In that connection it is important to note  that  the  findings  as  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR were specifically preserved.  The nature  of  the
    reasoning behind Article 3 is set out in some detail in the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge James promulgated on 19th June 2009  and  set
    out in paragraphs 65 to 72 onwards.  In that connection the  Judge  had
    had regard to the report of Dr Giustozzi and to the country case of  PM
    and Others (Kabul - Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00089
    and RQ (Afghan National Army - Hizb-i-Islami  -  Risk)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00013.  It was the finding of Judge  James,  as  set  out,
    that the appellant would be at risk of arbitrary arrest, detention  and
    torture were he to return, on account of his political involvement with
    Hizb-i-Islami.  Clearly therefore there is a finding that the appellant
    is at risk for a Convention reason were he  to  return.   This  clearly
    satisfies the requirement of asylum.  Mr Bates  does  not  seek  to  go
    behind the ambit of the findings by Judge James, which were in  essence
    preserved, nor does he contend that asylum would not be an  appropriate
    disposal.

33.  In terms of Article 8, private and family life, it  was  considered  by
    Judge James at paragraphs 73 to 81 and Article 8  was  allowed.   Those
    findings are also preserved.

34.  In all the circumstances therefore the appellant's  appeal  in  respect
    of asylum is allowed as is the appeal  in  respect  of  Article  3  and
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

The appellant's appeal is allowed as to asylum, Article 3 of  the  ECHR  and
Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]    Date 18 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
