
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03609/2015
                                                               AA/03753/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2016                    |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     R R
                                     N A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Mills, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the two Appellants against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro (hereafter the judge),  promulgated  on  26
    August  2015,  in  which  she  dismissed  their  appeals  against   the
    Respondent's decision of 13 February 2015, refusing  to  grant  asylum,
    refusing to vary their leave to remain, and to remove them  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  In my decision I will refer only to the lead Appellant,  the
    second Appellant's case being entirely dependent upon his.

 2. The Appellant's claim for international protection was  essentially  as
    follows.  His  father  had  been  actively  involved   in   the   LTTE.
    Subsequently the Appellant  himself  had  assisted  this  organisation.
    This involvement resulted ultimately in both of them being arrested and
    court  proceedings  initiated.   The  father  and  the  Appellant  were
    released on conditions.  The Appellant then left Sri Lanka in  December
    of 2012.  The Appellant asserted that he was a wanted person given that
    an arrest warrant had been issued for  him  and  that  his  father  had
    subsequently disappeared.

 3. At paragraphs 64 and 65, the judge in her  decision  made  findings  in
    respect of the family's ethnicity, faith  and  linguistic  preferences.
    She found the Appellant's evidence  to  be  inconsistent  with  country
    information.  At paragraph 66 she found that there was a lack of detail
    in the Appellant's evidence in relation to his  father's  role  in  the
    LTTE.  At paragraphs 67 and 68 the judge found that the nature  of  the
    father's claimed release from detention was inconsistent  with  country
    information and ultimately she found that the father had  not  in  fact
    been involved in the LTTE.

 4. The judge made two other adverse findings in paragraphs 71 and  72  and
    then at paragraph 73 she stated: "As I do not accept the Appellant  was
    involved in assisting the LTTE when he first left Sri Lanka [that being
    in 2008], I do not accept that he was of interest  to  the  authorities
    when he returned leading to his arrest and detention."  At paragraph 74
    she made reference to a  particular  court  document  produced  by  the
    Appellant at C15 of the Respondent's bundle and she  found  that  there
    was  an  inconsistency  within  this  document  in  relation   to   the
    Appellant's own evidence. She held this point against  the  Appellant's
    credibility.

 5. In paragraph 75 the judge went on to state as follows:

         "Well, as I do not accept that the authorities have any interest in
         the Appellant or that he was arrested and detained when he  visited
         Sri Lanka in 2012, I do not accept that a warrant has  been  issued
         for his arrest."

 6. The judge went on to cite country information on Sri Lanka and the well-
    known Tribunal decision of Tanveer Ahmed.  At paragraph 79 she said the
    following:

         "I have not overlooked the  verification  report  on  the  document
         prepared by Mr A.M.A.S Senanayake.  In view of  my  findings  about
         one of the court documents the Appellant relies on and  bearing  in
         mind what the objective evidence says about genuine documents being
         easy to obtain fraudulently, without there being a  need  to  forge
         them, I will gave [sic] no weight to this verification report."

 7. The judge then considered the country guidance case in  GJ  and  Others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  and
    went on to dismiss the appeals on all grounds.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal relying on two  grounds,  the
    first of these relating to what may be termed a "cart before the horse"
    error whereby it is said that the judge  failed  to  consider  relevant
    evidence in the round when assessing core elements of  the  Appellant's
    account.  Ground 2 relates to allegedly flawed findings in  respect  of
    the father's involvement with the LTTE.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    on 8 October 2015.  The terms of  the  grant  of  permission  certainly
    appear to be limited in scope, ground 2 being described as nothing more
    than a disagreement with the findings of the judge.  Subsequent to  the
    grant of permission there had been no application by the  Appellant  to
    the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal on ground 2 (see Rule 21 of
    the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules).

The hearing before me

10. Mr Mills relied on his skeleton argument  and  the  case  law  attached
    thereto.  He confirmed that he was not pursuing ground 2 of the grounds
    of appeal.  He submitted that that was not necessary in  light  of  the
    main ground of appeal, which he said was of  such  importance  that  it
    rendered  all  other  credibility  findings  unsustainable.   Mr  Mills
    submitted that the court documents relating to the  Appellant's  father
    went to the issue of whether he had been involved in the LTTE  at  all.
    Mr Mills submitted that what is said by the judge in  paragraph  74  of
    her decision was not a 'knock-out point' against the Appellant, and  in
    respect of paragraph 79 it was clear, he  submitted,  that  the  expert
    report from the Sri Lankan lawyer had been treated  effectively  as  an
    add-on by the judge after she had already rejected the issuance  of  an
    arrest warrant.

11. For the Respondent Mr Avery submitted that the judge's decision had  to
    be considered in the round; decisions had to be written in a structured
    way so it followed that one point would come after another and  so  on.
    The judge had stated at paragraph  55  that  she  was  considering  the
    evidence in the round and  had  adopted  an  appropriate  chronological
    approach to her decision.  The lawyer's letter had been considered  and
    rejected for adequate reasons.

12. Mr Avery submitted that on a proper reading of paragraph 73 it followed
    that paragraph 74 related to that paragraph in terms of its  reasoning.
    Paragraph 74 related to a key legal document that the judge  found  was
    unreliable.   Therefore  her  conclusion  that  the  other  documentary
    evidence was also unreliable was sustainable.

13. In reply Mr Mills relied on  the  decision  in  MT  [2004]  UKIAT  307,
    particularly at paragraph 7.  He submitted that  paragraph  73  of  the
    judge's decision was in fact a summary of what had gone before, and not
    what followed, contrary to Mr Avery's position.  Paragraph 74  did  not
    raise a clear inconsistency and was not fatal to the Appellant's  case.
    In respect of the lawyer's report the judge's consideration of  it  was
    too brief and in respect  of  its  location  in  the  decision  it  was
    apparent that it was indeed an afterthought in her consideration of the
    evidence as a whole.

14. In respect of disposal both representatives were agreed that if I found
    there to be material errors of law the appeals should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

15. I announced at the hearing that I found that the judge  had  materially
    erred in law and I now give my reasons for that conclusion.

16. The principle that the cart should not be put before  the  horse  is  a
    trite one cited in a number of cases.  Nonetheless it is  an  important
    point.  Considering the evidence in the round it is a matter not simply
    of form but of substance, and particularly in protection  cases  judges
    must deal with relevant and important evidence carefully and clearly.

17. It is right that the judge stated that she was considering the evidence
    in the round, and I certainly appreciate  Mr  Avery's  point  that  any
    decision has got to be structured: this must mean that one  point  will
    follow after another.  It is right also that  there  are  a  number  of
    adverse credibility  findings  in  the  decision  that  have  not  been
    expressly challenged and these must be taken into account when  looking
    at the decision as  a  whole.   Having  said  that,  I  conclude,  with
    particular reference to paragraphs 75 and 79 of her decision, that  the
    judge did commit an error of law, which may  be  categorised  in  short
    terms as putting the cart before the horse.

18. Looking at the wording used by the judge, which must be an indicator of
    how she  approached  her  decision  making,  she  states  in  terms  in
    paragraph 75 that she did not accept that a warrant had been issued for
    the  Appellant's  arrest  because  she  had  not  accepted   that   the
    authorities had any interest in the Appellant currently or in the past.
     On the face of it that reasoning pre-empts  consideration  on  whether
    the warrant (a vital piece of evidence) was a reliable document or not.
    There is a significant danger that the judge has  failed  to  assess  a
    crucial element of the evidence as part and parcel of the claim, rather
    than as an addendum.

19. I appreciate what is said in paragraph 74 in respect of one element  of
    a document at page C15 of the Respondent's bundle.  However, in my view
    that was not sufficient without more to have rendered the rest  of  the
    documentary evidence, including the warrant, as  being  unreliable  and
    incapable of carrying any weight at all.

20. The second limb of the judge's error relates to paragraph  79  and  the
    verification report of the Sri Lankan lawyer (to be found at page 13 of
    the Appellant's bundle).  This  evidence  was  clearly  of  importance,
    given its contents.  The lawyer states in terms  that  he  himself  had
    attended the relevant Magistrates' Court in Sri Lanka and had  actually
    inspected the court file.  He confirmed that the  case,  the  reference
    number of which is stated  in  the  relevant  court  documents,  was  a
    genuine case against the Appellant.  This is an  example  of  important
    evidence that had to be considered as part and parcel of the assessment
    of:

          a) whether  the  Appellant  had  been  of  any  interest  to  the
             authorities,

          b) whether there had been any court proceedings,

          c) whether a warrant had been issued for the Appellant's arrest.

21. Whilst taking on  board  Mr  Avery's  point  about  the  structure  and
    chronology of the decision, I conclude that what is said  in  paragraph
    79 is in effect a very strong indicator  of  the  judge  treating  this
    important  expert  evidence  as  being  an  add-on  in  terms  of   her
    consideration of the core issues of the court documents and in turn, of
    the adverse interest in the Appellant.  The assessment of the  lawyer's
    evidence comes a number of paragraphs after her conclusion in paragraph
    75 that no warrant had in  fact  been  issued.   There  is  no  express
    reasoning as to the standing of the lawyer and the particular  contents
    of his report, and the point made by the judge in  paragraph  79  about
    the apparent inconsistency in one of the other court documents  at  C15
    in the Respondent's bundle could not  have  been,  in  and  of  itself,
    sufficient to disregard the entirety of the lawyer's report.

22. In addition, contrary to Mr Avery's position on the correct reading  of
    paragraph 73, I see that passage as being a summary of what  the  judge
    had found already and not as a headline  summary  of  what  follows  in
    paragraph 74.  Therefore this provides another example in  my  view  of
    the judge stating a finding of fact prior  to  consideration  of  other
    relevant evidence going to that particular issue.

23. Although this is certainly not a clear-cut case, in my view the  errors
    of law exist and are material given the centrality  of  credibility  in
    this appeal, the important nature of court documents, and the  evidence
    from a lawyer purporting to have  verified  the  reliability  of  those
    court documents.

24. In light of the above, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Disposal

25. Both representatives were agreed that remittal would be the appropriate
    course of action in this case were I to find material  errors  of  law.
    That must be the correct course of action having regard to  the  nature
    of the issues and paragraph  7  of  the  relevant  Practice  Statement.
    Therefore this appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    heard completely afresh with no findings of the judge being  preserved.
    I set out relevant directions, below

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties

      1. The remitted appeals are to be reheard completely afresh,  with  no
         findings from Judge O'Garro's decision to stand;

      2. Either party will have the opportunity to adduce  further  evidence
         in accordance with standard directions to be issued by  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

Directions to Administration

      1. The remitted appeals will be heard  at  the  Hatton  Cross  hearing
         centre;

      2. The remitted appeals shall not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge O'Garro;

      3. The date for the remitted appeals to be heard shall be fixed by the
         Hatton Cross hearing centre itself;

      4. A Sinhalese interpreter is required for the remitted hearing;

      5. There is a three-hour time estimate for the remitted hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 19 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

