

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      AA/03361/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 9 October 2013                         |On 10 October 2013       |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                     O M
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent


                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:               Mr A A Khan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:            Ms A Holmes, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.         An anonymity order was made in respect of the appellant by the
      First-tier Tribunal and in the absence of any request for that  to  be
      set aside, it is continued.

   2.       The appellant challenges the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  Oliver  to  dismiss  his  appeal  by  way  of  a  determination
      promulgated on 13 May 2013. Permission to appeal was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Cox on 20 August 2013.

   3.       The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 6 September 1980
      and this is his second asylum claim made on the basis of religion.  He
      has also unsuccessfully attempted to remain as  a  spouse.  He  claims
      that as an Ahmadi he would be at risk on return to Pakistan.  He  does
      not appear to have pursued the part of his case which argued  that  he
      would be at risk from his former in-laws.

   4.       His appeal was initially determined and dismissed by the  First-
      tier Tribunal on 7 December 2012. More recently it  was  dismissed  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver who relied  heavily  on  the  earlier
      determination, concluding briefly  at  paragraph  13  that  there  was
      nothing new in the appellant's evidence that could be  regarded  as  a
      fresh claim and that the evidence made it  clear  that  he  had  never
      indulged in the type of behaviour referred to in the country  guidance
      case of MN (i.e. openly practising his faith). He found the section 47
      decision  to  give  removal  directions  unlawful  and  dismissed  the
      substantive asylum/humanitarian protection/human rights appeal.

   5.         At the hearing on 9 October I heard submissions from  Mr  Khan
      and Ms Holmes. It was argued for the appellant that the judge had been
      confused over whether  this  was  a  fresh  asylum  application  or  a
      statutory  appeal.  Reference  was  made  to  paragraph  13   of   his
      determination where he stated  that  there  was  nothing  new  in  the
      evidence "to indicate that I could regard it as  a  fresh  claim".  Mr
      Khan also argued that the appellant's oral evidence was  that  he  had
      not preached in Pakistan as he had done in the  UK  because  he  would
      have been beaten. This did not accord with the judge's finding on  the
      appellant's behaviour. He submitted that the judge had only one option
      available to him and that was to allow the  appeal.  He  urged  me  to
      substitute my own decision for that of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
      allow the appeal.

   6.       In response Ms Holmes conceded that she was unable to defend the
      determination, accepting that it was inadequate and that there was  no
      analysis of  the  appellant's  evidence.  For  that  very  reason  she
      objected to Mr Khan's proposal for disposal.

   7.       Mr Khan's reply was to submit that the judge  had  accepted  the
      appellant's evidence.
   8.       Having heard the submissions made and  having  considered  Judge
      Oliver's determination, I have no alternative  but  to  set  it  aside
      (apart from the decision relating to section 47 which  is  maintained;
      see paragraph 12 below).  The  only  'analysis'  of  the  evidence  is
      contained at paragraph 13 and even that is confused. The judge was not
      required to make findings on whether the evidence  was  sufficient  to
      found a fresh claim. Although I suspect that what he  meant  was  that
      there nothing new which would lead to a departure from the findings of
      the previous judge (as per Devaseelan guidelines), that is not what he
      said and, given his reference in the same paragraph to dismissing "any
      further asylum claim", I cannot find with any certainty what he had in
      mind.   Further,  there  is  no  consideration  of  the  evidence  the
      appellant gave, whether new or not, and no explanation for why it  was
      found that his behaviour was not covered by paragraph 2(1) of MN.  The
      determination is, regrettably, inadequate.

   9.         This is not to say that  the  appellant  should  expect  to be
      successful when his appeal is reheard. There are difficulties with his
      case. Firstly the evidence that purports to be new (in  ground  1)  is
      not. Evidence from the  Ahmadiyya  community  was  also  submitted  in
      support of the earlier hearing and the letter now relied on is plainly
      a generic one which provides no specific information on the  appellant
      and indeed gives a wrong address of residence for him.  His  evidence,
      as contained in his witness statement of 2011, maintained that he  had
      been preaching in Pakistan which rather contradicts his claim that  he
      would be unable to preach there because of fears of ill treatment.

  10.       This contradiction in the  evidence  needs  to  be  put  to  the
      appellant and his claim needs to be fully considered and the  evidence
      analysed in light of the earlier determination.

  11.       For these reasons, the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  for  a  hearing  afresh.   No  separate  human   rights   or
      humanitarian protection claims have been made.

  12.       There  was  no  dispute  over  the  judge's  decision  that  the
      Secretary of State's decision under section 47 was unlawful  and  that
      part of the determination is preserved.






Decision

  13.       The First-tier  Tribunal  made  errors  of  law.  I  re-make the
      decision and allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted to the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.


            Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal

      9 October 2013
