
[pic]
IAC

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03271/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   Mr W.H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MaDE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Benfield, Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  8  July  1992.  The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  on
    12 January 2012 (with  a  visa  valid  until  15  October  2013).   The
    appellant claimed asylum on 20 July 2012. The respondent  refused  that
    claim on 10 February 2015.

 2. The appellant appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal NMK Lawrence on 3 August 2015.  In a decision promulgated
    on 28 August  2015  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds and further on human rights grounds.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  27  October
    2015.  Permission was sought on five grounds: Rejection of the claim as
    incredible/implausible;  Assessment  of  credibility  in  relation   to
    screening and substantive asylum interview; Failure  to  give  adequate
    reason for rejecting documentary evidence; Failure to properly consider
    the medical evidence; Failure to consider the background  evidence  and
    failure  to  give  reasoned  findings  in  relation   to   Humanitarian
    Protection.  The appeal then came before me.

Error of Law

 4. Although the respondent's Rule  24  argued  that  the  Judge  had  made
    findings in relation to the photographs and documents submitted by  the
    appellant, in that the Judge directed himself to the  appropriate  case
    law of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318 and found that he was unable  to
    attach any weight to the documents or photographs submitted by  him  'a
    discredit witness' (sic), Mr Duffy conceded, quite properly,  that  the
    respondent was in difficulty in relation to the Judge's approach to the
    documents.

 5. Although the Judge had at [18]  to  [22]  found  the  appellant  to  be
    lacking in credibility, it is not clear  that  the  Judge  applied  the
    principles of Tanveer Ahmed despite setting those principles out.   The
    Judge failed to give any further reasons for  rejecting  the  documents
    which included to a number of letters  purportedly  from  the  Taliban,
    photographs, a death certificate, copy ID cards and  an  envelope  they
    came in.  A number of these documents, including  the  claimed  letters
    from the Taliban potentially go to the core aspects of the  appellant's
    claim, that his father was in the Taliban, was killed because  he  left
    the Taliban and the appellant was subsequently abducted and  forced  to
    be a suicide bomber  but  escaped.   The  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
    consider these documents in the round.  I  am  further  satisfied  that
    this error is material, as I cannot safely say that had the judge given
    proper consideration  to  these  documents  he  would  inevitably  have
    reached the same conclusion.  The decision contains  an  error  of  law
    such that it must be set aside.

 6. The remaining grounds are  therefore  academic.   I  indicated  at  the
    hearing that there was no merit in grounds 4 and 5 as these were merely
    disagreements with the Judge's findings. However although Mr Duffy,  in
    relation to the Judge's credibility findings, was of the view that  the
    Judge had made valid findings including that it was not  credible  that
    the appellant returned to Afghanistan in order to  obtain  a  passport,
    again Mr Duffy accepted that there were  difficulties  in  the  Judge's
    approach to plausibility.   Although  the  case  law,  including  HK  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 accepts
    that fact-finders can rely on their 'coon sense and his ability,  as  a
    practical  and  informed  person,  to  identify  what  is  or  is   not
    plausible', the Courts are clear that it is not a safe basis  on  which
    to reject facts (simply because they are so unusual as  to  be  thought
    unbelievable), particularly  where  they  are  said  to  have  occurred
    'within an environment and culture  which  is  so  wholly  outside  the
    experience of the decision maker' (paragraph 72, HK).

 7. The Judge found the appellant's claims to be 'inconceivable'  and  that
    it was 'odder still' that his father was asked to rejoin  the  Taliban.
    There is no indication that  the  Judge  viewed  these  claims  in  the
    context of the prevailing situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan and  in
    relation to the Taliban.  These errors are also material, in  light  of
    the lack of other sustainable credibility findings; in  particular  the
    Judge's central reason for disbelieving  the  appellant  was  that  the
    Judge found that the Appellant had provided a different account at  his
    substantive asylum interview than he had at his screening interview.  I
    am not satisfied that there was any rational basis  for  that  finding.
    Having considered  both  accounts  there  is  no  significant  material
    difference.  Although what the appellant has provided is  substantially
    more detail at his substantive interview, that is the purpose  of  such
    an  interview  and  the  appellant  was  specifically  advised  at  the
    beginning of the screening interview  (B2)  that  the  information  was
    'mainly for administrative purposes' and that he would 'not be asked at
    this stage to go into detail about  the  substantive  details  of  your
    asylum claim.'

 8. I am satisfied therefore that the errors in the  judge's  consideration
    are sufficient that the decision of 28 August  2015  cannot  stand  and
    should be set aside in its entirety.  No findings are preserved.

Conclusion

 9. The decision contains an error of law and is set aside. It  was  agreed
    that fresh findings of fact need to be made.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  set
aside.  No findings are to stand.  Under section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007
Act and Practice Statement 7.2(b), the nature and extent  of  judicial  fact
finding necessary for  the  decision  to  be  remade  is  such  that  it  is
appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s)  of
the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are  not  to  include
Judge NMK Lawrence.

Anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 3 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
