

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/03759/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 21 December 2015                           |On 04 January 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 JIEDI YANG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate,   instructed by Maguire
Solicitors  (Scotland) Ltd

For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of China born on  17  February  1973,  appeals
    against a determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox,  promulgated
    on 23 September 2015.

 2. There were two aspects to the appellant's case.  Firstly, she said that
    in China she would be at risk of further  violence  from  her  husband.
    The issues on that protection claim appear to have been whether it  was
    defeated in all or any of three ways: lack of credibility,  sufficiency
    of protection, and internal relocation.

 3. Secondly, the appellant sought to remain  here  on  the  basis  of  her
    family life with Mr David Foreman, a UK citizen.  He has a  son  and  a
    daughter, aged 26 and 28 at the time of the respondent's decision.  She
    appears to have a minor child and other relatives in  China.   She  did
    not argue  that  this  part  of  her  case  could  succeed  within  the
    immigration rules.  It was based only on article 8 of the ECHR, outside
    the rules.

 4. The grounds of appeal  identify  several  errors,  inconsistencies  and
    deficiencies  in  the  determination.   The   first   important   self-
    contradiction is over whether or not the appellant was  the  victim  of
    domestic violence, which is both rejected  and  accepted  at  different
    points.   Some of the further deficiencies are of no real importance to
    the outcome, and others are of a proof-reading nature  which  might  be
    safely be read as  if  corrected;  but  the  respondent  accepted  that
    cumulatively there are errors such that  the  determination  could  not
    stand as a legally adequate explanation of why the appeal failed.

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  with  no
    findings preserved.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial  fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge Fox.

 6. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            21 December 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




