
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03482/2015
     PA/00162/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 July 2016                          |On 17 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    1) UH
                                    2) AR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms A Jones, instructed by Milestone Solicitors

ANONYMITY

I make anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  orders
otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof
shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.   This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties and their representatives.




                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (delivered orally on 22 July 2016)

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department ("SSHD"). I shall refer to UH and MR as  the  first
    and second claimant's respectively. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") did
    not make an anonymity direction but at the outset of this hearing I was
    invited so to do.  I agree that it is appropriate  in  this  particular
    case to make such a direction, given the nature of the  claim  made  by
    the claimants.

 2. This is an appeal against a  composite  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Majid
    allowing the appeals of  the  two  claimants,  who  both  claim  to  be
    homosexual  and  in  a  relationship  with  each  other.   Despite  the
    reference to the  Immigration  Rules  in  paragraph  17  of  the  FtT's
    decision I  treat  the  appeals  as  having  been  allowed  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds.

 3. As already identified, the central feature of the claimants' assertions
    is that they are  a  homosexual  couple  and  that  they  would,  as  a
    consequence, each be at risk if returned to Pakistan.  The core of  the
    FtT's reason for allowing the claimants' appeals is as follows:

         "13.     In the Detailed Reasons dated 29 January 2015  (paragraphs
             30-31) the Home Office "accepts" that the Principal  Appellant
             has no "sufficiency" of protection and no option of  "internal
             flight" in  Pakistan  given  the  fact  that  he  is  a  known
             homosexual there.  If the Home Office (and if I may say rather
             professionally) accepts the fact that  there  is  evidence  to
             persuade them with the assertion that the Principal  Appellant
             does not have "sufficiency of protection" and  the  option  of
             "internal flight" then there is good reason for  me  to  allow
             the appeal.  If the  appeal  of  the  Principal  Appellant  is
             allowed, then the dependent Appellant's appeal should also  be
             allowed.

         14.  I am fully aware of the treatment of gay people in the  asylum
             law.  In this respect in my academic article on this  issue  I
             was forced to conclude that the gay person has  the  immutable
             characteristics entitling him to fall in a  particular  social
             group and get asylum. ...

         16.  Given the lethal risk which can visit these  Appellants  I  am
             minded  to  allow  these   appeals   after   considering   the
             Appellants' case anxiously.

         17.  I am fully conscious of the "legal requirements" stipulated by
             immigration law.  It is incumbent upon me to advert to the new
             Rules giving respect to the intention of the House of  Commons
             dictated by the supremacy of Parliament.  These Appellants can
             benefit from the Rules because I am left in no doubt that  the
             Pakistan authorities will not  spare  them  from  persecution.
             They have  the  "indubitable"  characteristics  to  merit  the
             protection of this country and compassion  cannot  be  totally
             ignored in matters where the judicial system of  this  country
             can help the individuals in need of human care."

 4. The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  the
    permission of FtT Judge Grant-Hutchison, given on 13  June  2016.   The
    grounds are twofold. First, that the FtT erred by failing  to  lawfully
    apply the ratio of HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31. Second, that the FtT's decision
    is so lacking in reasoning that the SSHD is not able to understand  why
    she was unsuccessful.

 5. I consider both grounds together.

 6. It is necessary to initially identify how the SSHD put her case  before
    the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  paragraph  29  of  the  refusal  letter
    relating to UH the Secretary of State rejects both UH's  assertions  to
    be gay  and  to  have  participated  in  LGBT  activities  in  the  UK.
    Thereafter, in paragraphs 30 and 31, there is an acceptance that if the
    claimant's case is taken at its highest (which as identified above  the
    SSHD concluded it should not be)  there  would  be  no  sufficiency  of
    protection  or  internal  relocation  alternative  for  the   claimant.
    Subsequently, in paragraph 32  of  the  decision  letter,  there  is  a
    rejection of the UH's claimed fear of persecution.

 7. Conclusions in similar terms are found in the  decision  letter  of  AR
    (see paragraphs 26 to 34 thereof).

 8. Although Ms Jones submitted  that  when  read  as  a  whole  the  FtT's
    decision discloses that it gave anxious scrutiny to the matters  before
    it, I do not accept that this is so. The reasoning found  in  paragraph
    13 of the FtT's decision is central to its rationale for  allowing  the
    claimants' appeals. On any reading of that paragraph, and  particularly
    when it is read in conjunction with those paragraphs  of  the  decision
    immediately preceding and following  it,  it  is  clear  that  the  FtT
    proceeded on the basis  that  the  SSHD  had  accepted  the  claimants'
    assertions to be gay and to have participated in LGBT activities in the
    UK. This, of course, was incorrect.

 9. If, as Ms Jones submitted, the FtT in fact made findings of fact in the
    claimants' favour on the aforementioned issues, rather than  proceeding
    on the basis of an acceptance of such  facts  by  the  SSHD,  then  the
    decision is still fundamentally flawed as a consequence of the lack  of
    analysis anywhere therein of the points made by the Secretary of  State
    in relation to such matters. In addition,  the  decision  discloses  no
    reasoning process identifying how such conclusions were  reached.  Once
    again, this constitutes an error in the FtT's decision.

10. Even if I am wrong in my conclusions above I also accept the  first  of
    the Secretary of State's grounds i.e. that FtT has not asked itself, or
    answered, the four questions identified in HJ.

11. This failure is clearly material because if the claimants  evidence  is
    found to be truthful then they have acted  discreetly  in  relation  to
    their sexual orientation in the past in Pakistan. There is no  finding,
    however, as to why that was the case or whether that would be the  case
    if they were to return.  Absent such consideration, the decision of the
    FtT must be flawed.

12. For the reasons given above I set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.   I  have  decided  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  FtT  for
    consideration de novo given the extent of  the  fact  finding  that  is
    still required.

Decision

    The decision of the FtT contains an error of law capable  of  affecting
    the outcome of the appeal and is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the FtT for consideration afresh

    Signed:
[pic]

    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor





                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Upper Tribunal Judge      |Mr M O'Connor                     |
|issuing approval:                 |                                  |
|Appellants' Names:                |UH & Mr AR                        |
|Case Numbers:                     |AA/03482/2015 & PA/00162/2016     |

Oral decision (please indicate)

I approve the attached Decision and Reasons for promulgation

Name:    M O'Connor



