
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03889/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 7 June 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                    [A R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K Anifowoshe, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  J  Parker  ("the
    Judge") in a decision promulgated on 27  August  2015.   The  appellant
    claimed to be a national of Burma and a member of the  Rohingya  ethnic
    group.  The Secretary of State disbelieved his core  claims  and  found
    that the appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and not at  any  risk  on
    return there.

2.    Having  weighed   the   evidence   before   him,   the   judge   found
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account and concluded,  as  had  the
    Secretary of State, that the appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.   He
    dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds, found that the appellant is not
    entitled to humanitarian protection, and also dismissed the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

3.   In grounds in support of an application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was contended that the judge failed to apply the  correct  standard  of
    proof and gave inadequate reasons for finding the  appellant  to  be  a
    citizen of Bangladesh.  It was also contended that he erred in relation
    to some of the evidence before him, including a "refugee  book"  issued
    to members of the Burmese Rohingyan community in some circumstances and
    country evidence in the form of a report from the  Danish  authorities.
    Permission to appeal was refused by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  but
    granted on renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

4.   In a Rule 24 response from the  Secretary  of  State,  the  appeal  was
    opposed on the basis that the judge directed himself appropriately  and
    reached conclusions which  were  open  to  him  on  the  evidence.   In
    particular, the judge was entitled to find as he  did  in  relation  to
    nationality, in the light of  the  appellant's  apparent  inability  to
    speak the Rohingya language.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   The hearing was adjourned for a short  while  so  that  copies  of  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in RM (Sierra Leone)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    541 could be made available. The judgment contains part of the  starred
    decision of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in  Hamza  [2002]  UKIAT
    05185.

6.   Miss Anifowshe relied upon her skeleton argument.   The  judge  applied
    the wrong standard of proof, perhaps too high a standard, in concluding
    that the appellant was not a refugee.  The appellant left Burma at  the
    age of 4 and this provided an explanation for his  inability  to  speak
    the Rohingya language.  He lived in a refugee camp for some eight years
    and might very well have lost what he had  learned  in  his  first  few
    years.

7.   So far as nationality  was  concerned,  RM  (Sierra  Leone)  and  Hamza
    assisted the appellant in relation to the  submission  that  the  wrong
    standard of proof had been applied.  At paragraph 17 of  the  decision,
    the judge directed himself in relation to burden and standard of proof,
    setting out there the "lower standard".   Paragraph 25 of the  decision
    contained a clear finding  by  the  judge  that  the  appellant  was  a
    national of Bangladesh.  At paragraph 32 of  the  judgment  in  RM  the
    Court of  Appeal  drew  attention  to  the  higher  standard  of  proof
    required, in this context.  The judge had not  shown  in  his  decision
    that the correct standard of proof, the balance of  probabilities,  was
    applied.

8.   The other grounds also had merit. An adjournment was  required  because
    the "refugee book" was not before the Tribunal and the appellant  could
    not give relevant, direct evidence about the document.   Sight  of  the
    document was required in the interests of  fairness.   The  judge  also
    erred in relation to his adverse finding on the  appellant's  inability
    to speak Rohingya.  The appellant's explanation, that he left Burma for
    the camp at a very young age, was reasonable and deserved to  be  given
    weight.  Finally, the judge did not take into account  the  appellant's
    arrival in the United Kingdom as a minor,  at  the  age  of  15.   This
    aspect was relevant to Section 8 of the 2004 Act, the appellant  having
    been trafficked to the United Kingdom.  He  was  unable  to  reasonably
    claim asylum sooner than he did, four years after entry.

9.   Mr Tarlow said that any error in the determination was not material  in
    the light of the judge's findings overall.   At  paragraph  19  of  the
    decision, for example, the judge assessed the position with  regard  to
    the language spoken  by  the  appellant  and  the  overall  credibility
    assessment was one the judge was entitled to make.  He did not  err  in
    describing the appellant's inability to speak Rohingya as very strange,
    precisely because the appellant left Burma when he was 4 years old.

10.  The judge  dealt  with  the  discrepancies  properly  and  fairly,  for
    example at paragraph 22 of the decision. Taken as a whole, the decision
    was sustainable.

11.  Miss Anifowoshe had nothing to add to her earlier submissions.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  The decision has been prepared by a very experienced judge  and  it  is
    readily apparent that  he  took  considerable  care  in  assessing  the
    appellant's case.

13.  At paragraph 17 of the decision, the judge  succinctly  summarised  the
    relevant burden and standard of proof applicable to his  assessment  of
    risk on return. He made mention of the 2006 Qualifying Regulations  and
    the Immigration Rules. He correctly directed himself,  in  relation  to
    the protection claim, that the burden fell on  the  appellant  to  show
    substantial grounds for believing that he would be at risk on return to
    Burma.

14.  At paragraphs 26, 27 and 28 of the decision,  the  judge  set  out  his
    conclusion that the appellant had not  shown  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution or a real risk of suffering serious harm.   He  found  that
    there were no substantial grounds  for  believing  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk of ill-treatment on return, in breach of Article 3  of
    the Human Rights Convention.

15.  The decision contains no other self-direction on the applicable  burden
    or standard of proof.

16.  Paragraph 25 of the decision contains  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and not at risk on return there.

17.  As is clear from the starred decision in Hamza and the judgment of  the
    Court of Appeal in RM (Sierra Leone) (the full citations appear  above)
    what is usually described as "the lower standard of proof"  applies  in
    an assessment of the risk of persecution or ill-treatment claimed by  a
    person.  However, where the Tribunal  is  minded  to  make  a  positive
    finding against an appellant in relation to  his  nationality,  and  so
    long as this part of the analysis does not concern risk on return,  the
    correct standard of proof is the balance  of  probabilities,  a  higher
    standard than "real risk".

18.  At paragraph 25, the judge made a  finding  against  the  appellant  in
    relation to nationality.  Bangladesh is not a country  in  relation  to
    which the appellant claims  to  be  at  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
    treatment.  Rather, he claims to be a Burmese national at real risk  of
    persecution there.  In these circumstances,  the  correct  standard  of
    proof to be applied is the balance of probabilities.  With some regret,
    I find that the absence of a self-direction to this effect amounts to a
    material error of law.  The decision does not show that the  judge  had
    the higher standard of proof in mind and the application of the  "lower
    standard" summarised at paragraph 17 to the finding that the  appellant
    is a national of Bangladesh is not sustainable.

19.  So far as the other grounds are concerned, I conclude  that  they  have
    less merit in the light of the care the judge took in  his  assessment.
    Nonetheless, as I believe Mr Tarlow accepted, if an  error  of  law  is
    found in relation to something as fundamental as the standard of proof,
    it would be unsafe to seek to preserve findings of fact that  may  have
    been made in the light of the wrong standard.

20.  For this reason,  I  conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains a material error of law and must be set aside.  In  a
    brief discussion regarding the appropriate venue for  the  remaking  of
    the decision, both representatives agreed that this should be the First-
    tier Tribunal, at Taylor House, before a judge other  than  Judge  A  J
    Parker.  I find that this is the proper course  in  the  light  of  the
    extent of the fact-finding that will be required.

DECISION

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   It  shall  be
    remade, de novo, with no  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal preserved, at Taylor House by a judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parker.

Anonymity

The judge made no anonymity direction and there has been no application  for
anonymity since then.  I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed   Date 7 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
