
IAC-AH-pc/SC-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/03808/2014
     AA/03584/2014
     AA/03586/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2014                         |On 13th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           Ms B (first appellant)
                     Ms A A (a minor) (second appellant)
                     Miss N (a minor) (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first Appellant was  born
    on 11th February 1982.  The second and third Appellants are  her  minor
    daughters and were born  respectively  on  2nd  August  2012  and  30th
    November 2007.  All references herein unless otherwise indicated are to
    the first Appellant.

 2. The first Appellant was granted a family visit visa in 2011 and arrived
    in the UK on 2nd August 2011  along  with  the  third  Appellant.   The
    second Appellant was  born  in  the  UK.   On  12th  October  2012  the
    Appellant applied for asylum based  on  a  fear  that  if  returned  to
    Pakistan she would face mistreatment as being a member of a  particular
    social group.  In particular the Appellant claimed that she had a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Pakistan at the hands  of  her  in-laws,
    own brothers, people from her area, police officers and M  because  her
    alleged in-laws did not  believe  that  her  eldest  daughter  was  her
    husband's child and  because  her  second  daughter  was  born  out  of
    wedlock.

 3. The Appellant's application was refused  on  7th  December  2012.   The
    Appellant appealed against that  decision  on  21st  December  but  the
    appeal was dismissed on 25th February 2013.  Permission to  appeal  was
    refused and the Appellant was considered to have had all appeal  rights
    exhausted on 1st May 2013.

 4. Further submissions  were  received  on  31st  July  2013.   They  were
    addressed in a Notice of Refusal dated 13th May 2014.

 5. The Appellant appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Sweet sitting at Hatton Cross on 2nd  July  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated shortly thereafter  the  Appellant's  appeals
    based on asylum  and  under  Articles  2,  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights were refused and the Appellant's  claim  for
    humanitarian protection was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal on 22nd July 2014 to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 1st August  2014  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McCarthy refused permission to appeal.  Those grounds were  renewed  on
    12th August 2014.

 7.  On  31st  August  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  had  granted
    permission to appeal.  In granting permission he was persuaded that  it
    was arguable that the judge  may  have  erred  in  his  application  of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  D  (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702* (formerly known  as  Devaseelan).   Further  he  noted  that  in
    reading the determination it appeared to him that in paragraph  41  the
    judge was seeking corroboration of the fact that the photos were of B's
    house and that suggested that it was arguable that the judge  may  have
    further erred.

 8. On 21st November 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  That response opposes the Appellant's appeal.
     They contended that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  directed  himself
    appropriately and that the judge took  the  determination  of  February
    2013 as the starting point entirely in  accordance  with  the  guidance
    given in D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702*.  Further it was contended  that
    paragraph 39 of the determination updated  the  position  with  current
    evidence and the judge made findings on those points at  paragraph  41.
    The Rule 24 response contends that such findings were entirely open  to
    the judge to make and are adequately reasoned and that it is  submitted
    that the grounds are in reality a disagreement with the findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 9. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Iqbal.  Mr Iqbal is familiar  with  this  matter  being  the
    author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Shilliday.

Submissions/Discussion

10. Mr Iqbal seeks to address the second ground first submitting  that  the
    judge did not address the quality of the oral  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant in the course of the hearing.  He submits  that  the  further
    documentary  evidence  is  highlighted   at   paragraph   40   of   the
    determination and that paragraph 41 seeks to apply the principles to be
    found in Devaseelan.  However, he notes  that  the  judge  rejects  the
    evidence on plausibility and has not found the documents to be genuine.
     Firstly he submits that the judge should have done so and secondly  as
    the pictures relate to the house of B the  judge  should  have  decided
    whether the Appellant was telling the truth or not.

11. Secondly he turns to the argument under Devaseelan submitting that  the
    judge has not  addressed  the  determinative  factors  as  set  out  at
    paragraph 39(2) of the authority and  that  facts  that  have  happened
    since an original  judge's  determination  can  always  be  taken  into
    account by the second Tribunal.  He submits that  the  second  FIR  was
    lodged in Pakistan after the conclusion of  the  first  claim  and  the
    letter from the bishop in Pakistan and some photos relating  to  B  and
    from B's sisters all fall to be considered under this.  He submits that
    there is a material error of law and that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should be set aside.

12. Mr Shilliday submits that the judge has followed the  correct  approach
    in Devaseelan and that the second ground upon which the Appellant seeks
    to rely is extremely  confused.   The  decision  he  submits  was  made
    following a hearing  and  he  takes  me  to  relevant  paragraphs  from
    Devaseelan and submits that the approach adopted by  Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy in refusing the permission  was  perfectly
    correct and that the first decision cannot therefore  be  re-litigated.
    He reminds me that the judge in  the  First-Tier  initially  found  the
    Appellant was not credible and such findings stand.

13. Mr Shilliday acknowledges that facts not before the first  hearing  can
    be brought before a further hearing but that they have to be considered
    in context and that is not what has happened here.  He  indicates  that
    you require further facts in order to re-litigate and that the relevant
    threshold has not been overcome by the Appellant.  He submits there  is
    no material error in law and asks me to dismiss the appeal.

14. In response Mr Iqbal indicates that nowhere in the prior  determination
    had the judge made any findings of credibility and  takes  me  back  to
    paragraph 41 of the  determination  of  Judge  Sweet  which  lists  the
    circumstances he submits that postdate the previous decision.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

17. The initial submission made is that the judge erred in his  application
    of the principles of Devaseelan.  This is completely  contrary  to  the
    approach that was adopted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet.   The
    relevant principles are set out at paragraph 39  of  Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702.  It is not necessary to recite them within this  error  of
    law finding but I have given due  consideration  to  them.   The  basic
    facts are clear however.  A first Adjudicator's determination is always
    the starting point and that is the approach that has  been  adopted  by
    this judge.  The facts can always be taken into account by  the  second
    Tribunal.  Despite the fact that it is  contended  that  that  has  not
    taken place here that I conclude admits to little  more  than  argument
    and disagreement.  The issues are initially addressed at  paragraph  40
    of the determination.  Judge Sweet noted that the  previous  judge  had
    doubts about the veracity of the FIR of  8th  July  2008  and  goes  on
    thereafter to consider the later  FIR  of  17th  May  2013  and  arrest
    warrants.  It is clear that the judge has given  due  consideration  to
    the documents and at paragraph 41 sets out that he  needs  to  consider
    the further evidence as to whether or not it assists the  Appellant  in
    her claim.  He has noted that  the  fundamental  issue  of  credibility
    remains and has made findings of fact within paragraph 41 which  he  is
    entitled to make both with regard to the prospective  alleged  vendetta
    against the Appellant some five years after a previous incident in 2008
    and more than eighteen months after the Appellant came to  the  UK  and
    has also gone on to consider the lack of corroborative evidence of  the
    photographs of B's house.

18. What the grounds and the submission amount  to  is  nothing  more  than
    argument and disagreement.  The judge followed for all the reasons  set
    out above the principles in Devaseelan and  the  findings  are  clearly
    recorded.  Further the judge went  on  to  make  findings  on  all  the
    evidence that was presented and there  is  nothing  whatsoever  in  the
    determination nor am I persuaded by any of the submissions  to  suggest
    that the judge determined appeal on the papers and failed  to  properly
    consider the evidence.  In such  circumstances  there  is  no  material
    error of law whatsoever in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal renewed an anonymity direction  made  on  16th  June
2014.  No application  is  made  to  vary  that  order  and  that  order  is
maintained.



Signed        Date 11/02/2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed        Date 11/02/2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

