
[pic]




Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
AA/03575/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Birmingham                         Decision Promulgated:
On: 17 November 2014                                                   On:
19 January 2015



                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                                     SA
                           (Anonymity Order Made)


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Blundell, instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellant is a national of Afghanistan and was born in 1996.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I make the order so as to prevent a likelihood of serious  harm
arising from the facts of the appellant's protection claim.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination dated  10  July
2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew which refused  his  protection  and
Article 8 appeals.

The challenge before me was restricted to the appellant's Article  8  claim.
It  remains  expedient  to  set  out  here  a  summary  of  the  appellant's
protection claim as it is relevant to the Article 8 claim.  The  appellant's
account was accepted as credible in its entirety by Judge Andrew;  see  [16]
of her determination.

The appellant's father was a member  of  the  Taliban.  After  his  father's
death the Taliban took steps to recruit the appellant as a  suicide  bomber.
Although still very young, the appellant was taken to  a  Taliban  camp  but
refused to assist them and was returned home after 3 days.  His  mother  and
uncle, fearing further adverse interest from the Taliban, arranged  for  the
appellant to come to the UK. His date of entry to the UK is  not  known  but
he claimed asylum on 3 September 2009 when he was only 13 years  old.  On  2
December  2009  his  protection  claim  was  refused  but  he  was   granted
discretionary leave to remain until 1 December 2012. On 30 November 2012  he
applied in time for further leave. That application was refused  on  14  May
2014 and the refusal gave rise to these proceedings.

The appellant  brought  three  grounds  of  appeal  against  Judge  Andrew's
refusal of his Article 8 claim. In summary:

    i) Inadequate reasons for a finding that  the  appellant's  family  life
       with his foster carer and his family was only "akin" to  family  life
       and insufficiently strong to render removal disproportionate.
   ii) No clear finding on  the  appellant's  contact  with  his  family  in
       Afghanistan
  iii) Absence of weight given to the respondent's failure to carry out  her
       tracing duty

The first ground appeared to me, albeit stated to  be  a  challenge  to  the
adequacy of reasons, to be a disagreement with the decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal and one that could only succeed where the  position  taken  by
Judge Andrew was outside the range of responses reasonably open to her.

The  grounds  contend  that  Judge  Andrew's  statement  at  [33]  that  the
appellant's relationship was "almost akin  to  a  family  life  in  that  he
regards Mr S as a father figure" and at [34] that the relationship  amounted
only to "strong ties" were inadequate as they failed to deal with the  clear
evidence before her from the appellant and his foster carer that they had  a
relationship that was a family life.

The statements at [33] and [34] must be read in the context of the  decision
as whole, however. At [20] to [26]  Judge  Andrew  considered  the  evidence
before her concerning the appellant's maturity and ability  to  live  as  an
independent adult. Part of that  consideration  specifically  addressed  the
foster carer's evidence on his relationship with the  appellant;  see  [22].
I accept  that  this  part  of  the  determination  is  concerned  with  the
appellant's protection claim and whether the  appellant  could  live  as  an
independent adult in Kabul. It remains the case that the evidence  contained
in expert reports on the appellant was at odds with the view of  the  foster
carer; see [23].   Judge  Andrew  concluded  at  [26]  that  "[t]he  picture
emerges of quite  a  capable  young  man  with  no  particular  physical  or
psychological vulnerability" and someone who could  reasonably  be  expected
to return to live alone in Kabul. In my view  Judge  Andrew's  consideration
of this evidence was relevant to her Article  8  consideration  and  to  her
finding that there the appellant, an  adult  at  the  time  of  the  hearing
before her, did not have a family life with his foster carer.

When  the  statements  at  [33]  and  [34]  are  read  together   with   the
consideration at [20] to [26] it is not my judgement that Judge  Andrew  can
be said to have erred in failing to address the evidence  of  the  appellant
with his foster carer as to their having a family life. Further,  given  the
evidence before her it cannot be said to  have  been  perverse  to  conclude
that the appellant did not have that family life.

Also, Judge Andrew did apportion weight in the  appellant's  favour  arising
from the relationship nevertheless, stating at [33]  that  the  relationship
with the foster  carer  formed  "a  significant  part"  of  the  appellant's
private life and its strength being  acknowledged  at  [33]  and  [34].  The
force of this ground is further undermined where the relationship was  given
that weight, albeit characterised as part of a private life  rather  than  a
family life.

This ground also queries the comment of Judge Andrew  at  [34]  that  foster
care "is always intended as temporary and this  would  doubtless  have  been
well known to both carer and the  care  for  ...  ."   I  accept  that  this
comment is somewhat problematic. Even if foster care is temporary this  does
not always preclude a relationship formed in a foster  care  situation  from
amounting to a family life for the purposes of Article 8.   It  remains  the
case that in the light of the evidence regarding  the  appellant's  maturity
and independence  which  Judge  Andrew  gave  reasons  for  preferring,  her
finding that there was a strong relationship but  not  one  amounting  to  a
family life was open to her and is sustainable.

The findings at [26] that the appellant was "a capable  young  man  with  no
particular physical or psychological  vulnerability"  and  was  someone  who
could reasonably be expected to return to relocate to Kabul  also  undermine
the second ground of appeal concerning the absence of  a  clear  finding  of
there  being  any  contact  with  the  appellant's  family  since  he   left
Afghanistan.  The appellant is now an adult and it is not disputed  that  he
no longer faces harm on return to Kabul such that he requires  any  form  of
international protection.  Would a positive finding that  he  has  lost  all
contact with his family  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the  Judge
Andrew's Article 8 proportionality consideration? Given her comments on  the
appellant's maturity and independence it did  not  appear  to  me  that  the
outcome of the appeal would have been any different. That is  so  regardless
of the  comments  made  by  Judge  Andrew  at  [29]  as  to  her  scepticism
concerning contact with the family after the appellant came to the UK.

The third ground seeks to  introduce  into  the  Article  8  proportionality
assessment the principles arising from case law concerning the  respondent's
failure to comply with her tracing duty,  that  tracing  duty  arising  from
Regulation 6 (1) of the Asylum Seekers  (Reception  Conditions)  Regulations
2005 (Regulation 6).

The relevant line of case law began with  DS  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  (2011)
EWCA Civ 305 and developed further in KA (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
Civ 1014 and EU (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  32.  I  note,  in
particular, the comment of the Court of  Appeal  at  [7]  of  EU  that  "the
failure to endeavour to trace may result in a failed asylum seeker, who  may
in consequence lose contact with his family, putting  down  roots  here  and
establishing a valid Article 8 claim."

It is correct that when conducting her Article 8 proportionality  assessment
Judge Andrew did not address the respondent's failure  to  comply  with  her
tracing duty as part  of  the  December  2009  decision  which  refused  the
appellant's asylum claim but granted discretionary leave. The best that  can
be said is that Judge Andrew referred to that earlier  failure  at  [27]  to
[30] only when considering the appellant's renewed asylum claim.  There  are
a number of reasons why I do not consider a material error arises,  however.


Firstly, it was not the earlier decision from December 2009 that was  before
Judge Andrew. The appellant could have challenged the failure  to  trace  at
that time but did not. In the respondent's decision dated 14 May  2014  that
was under appeal here, paragraphs 31 to 48 show that the respondent had,  by
then, endeavoured to trace the appellant's family. Even if  there  is  force
in the submission that the "failure to  trace  principle"  set  out  in  the
cases listed above should be extended so as to afford  positive  weight  for
an applicant in an Article 8 assessment, it seems to me it must  carry  less
weight where the specific decision under appeal  shows  the  respondent  has
complied with her duty, albeit she did not do so in a previous decision.

Further, as above, it was clearly Judge Andrew's view  that  this  appellant
was mature, independent and sufficiently in touch with Afghan  culture  such
that return to  Kabul  would  not  be  disproportionate  even  when  weighed
against the  "strong" relationship with his foster family  and  links  built
up since coming here at the age of 13 years old. As indicated by  the  Court
of Appeal, a failure to trace may lead to a situation  where  an  individual
establishes a private and family life of sufficient strength to make  return
disproportionate. That was not the view of the First-tier Tribunal here  and
a fair reading of the decision does not indicate that this appellant,  given
the aspects of his profile found by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  could  have
succeeded under Article 8, notwithstanding a  positive  application  of  the
"failure to trace principle".

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 18 December 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




