

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      AA/03088/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Sent           |
|On: 30th September 2014                       |On 01 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                mohammad khan
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Selway,  Christian Goffried & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan date of  birth  1st  January
    1994. He appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Brenells) to dismiss his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999. That  decision  followed  from  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's claim to international protection.


 2. The Appellant was, on the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, only  15
    when he arrived in the UK and claimed asylum. He  gave  an  account  of
    fleeing from members of his paternal family who killed his father in  a
    land dispute, and from his maternal family who tricked him into  giving
    up his right to said land.   The Respondent did not believe a  word  of
    it.

 3.  The  appeal  came  before  Judge  Brenells.   In  an  extremely  brief
    determination he makes the following findings:

    "16. I do not find the Appellant to  be  a  credible  witness  for  the
    cumulative reasons set out below:


    1. He was unable to say where his cousins he says he feared  lived.  He
       could not even tell me if they lived in the same village.
    2. He could not offer any credible explanation as to  why  he  was  not
       found at his maternal uncle's house when that house was in  his  own
       village and the relationship between them must have been known.
    3. He says his father was a wealthy landowner who owned land and houses
       which were rented to tenants yet at interview he could only name one
       of those tenants.
    4. His evidence was that from the  age  of  eight  he  accompanied  his
       father as the father drove around to inspect his  land  and  yet  he
       could not name any of the crops grown on the land he says his father
       owned.
    5. Despite being in hiding he claims that a  meeting  was  arranged  so
       that local tribal elders came to his uncle's house and witnessed the
       transfer of land ownership from the Appellant to his uncle.
    6. The claim  that  the  Uncle  would  be  willing  to  have  the  land
       transferred to him despite knowing that the Appellant's  father  had
       been killed a week ago because he owned land.


    17. Even if the Appellant was at  risk,  there  is  no  evidence  which
    establishes that if he is at  risk  from  his  cousins,  Horvath  level
    protection would not be  available  to  him  on  return.  There  is  no
    evidence which establishes that his cousins, if they exist  and  are  a
    threat to him, would be able to locate him anywhere  in  the  whole  of
    Afghanistan on his return"

 4. The grounds are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing  to  take
    into account the Appellant's young  age  in  reaching  the  credibility
    findings and that there was a paucity of reasoning.


 5. I find that the individual criticisms made of each of the  reasons  set
    out at  paragraph  16(1)-(6)  are  probably  well  made.  There  is  no
    particular reason for a  child  to  know  the  names  of  his  father's
    tenants, much less the names of the crops they grow.   As a young child
    the Appellant cannot be expected to understand the motivation of adults
    around him, nor everything that was happening at the meeting  mentioned
    at (5). I consider it arguable that the Appellant is not in a  position
    to understand why the Judge reached the conclusions  he  did.  However,
    all of that is academic.  That  is  because  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    decision the Judge sets out alternative reasons why the appeal must  be
    dismissed: there is no current risk, if there is the Appellant has  not
    shown that there is not a sufficiency of protection, nor that he  could
    not avail himself of internal flight. Although the Judge does not spell
    it out he is presumably here thinking of Kabul,  that  being  the  only
    part of Afghanistan currently considered durably safe enough to support
    internal relocation.  The Appellant was aged 20  at  the  date  of  his
    appeal before Judge Brenells, and that finding was  therefore  open  to
    the Tribunal. There is no challenge  to  it  in  the  grounds,  and  it
    therefore remains intact.   The determination  may  contain  errors  in
    respect of the credibility findings but these are  not  such  that  the
    decision must be set aside.


      Decisions

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    such that it should be set aside. The decision is upheld.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         30th September 2014
