
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/03289/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 January 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                  Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     A K

                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss T Murshed, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The applicant is a citizen of Cote d'Ivoire,  of  the  minority  Dioula
    ethnicity.  She appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to set removal  directions  to  the  Cote
    d'Ivoire after refusing to vary her leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    asylum, humanitarian protection or human rights.

 2. There was unrest in Cote d'Ivoire in 2010 and 2011, arising out of  the
    election of President Alassane  Ouattara  in  November  2010,  and  the
    refusal of outgoing President Laurent Gbagbo, who  had  been  in  power
    since 2000, to stand aside.  The situation was not resolved until April
    2011, when President Ouattara's forces overran the country.  Gbagbo was
    arrested and, in November 2011,  sent  to  the  International  Criminal
    Court to answer charges of crimes against humanity.

 3. In her account of what happened to her in Cote d'Ivoire, the  appellant
    relied on two separate incidents:

      a) On 18 December 2010, the appellant says she and  her  husband  were
         attacked and beaten in her  home  in  Cote  d'Ivoire,  probably  by
         supporters of the RHDP party, before coming to the United  Kingdom.
         The appellant miscarried her early pregnancy,  the  only  pregnancy
         she has had after years of trying, as well as suffering  widespread
         bruising and some bleeding.  Her husband suffered a broken nose and
         a knee injury.  She described herself as having been 'beaten like a
         dog' and that nobody came to  help  her.   The  appellant  did  not
         report the incident to the Ivorian authorities.

      b) In February 2011, after  ignoring  the  call  to  join  an  'Orange
         Revolution' to force  President  Laurent  Gbagbo  from  power,  the
         appellant says that she taken from her home  by  uniformed  solders
         and detained for  27  days,  kept  naked,  humiliated,  abused  and
         beaten.  The appellant was unable to say whether her  captors  were
         Laurent Gbagbo's forces or those of  President  Ouattara.    During
         her final beating in March 2011, she was hit  with  truncheons  and
         kicked in the head.  The  beating  was  so  severe  that  she  lost
         consciousness.

         The appellant later learned that she was taken to  hospital  on  17
         March 2011, where she  awoke  the  following  day.   The  appellant
         stayed in hospital until 22 March 2011. A friend of the appellant's
         late sister, who worked at the hospital, arranged her to  be  taken
         to another district of Abidjan, where she was kept  in  hiding  for
         ten days to recover, and then helped to flee the  country.   Again,
         the  appellant  did  not  seek  to  access  protection   from   the
         authorities in Cote d'Ivoire.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal accepted the first  account  as  credible  (see
    paragraph [38]), and the respondent accepts that there  has  been  past
    persecution.  It is unclear from the determination whether  the  second
    incident, which was clearly a very serious  one  if  it  occurred,  was
    treated by the First-tier Tribunal judge as credible.

 5. The really crucial issue in asylum and humanitarian protection cases is
    the risk on return, if the appellant  is  returned  to  Cote  d'Ivoire.
    Unfortunately, the judge's findings as to future  risk  are  internally
    contradictory and unclear: at [44] he found that there was no  risk  to
    the applicant from the RHDP supporters in Cote d'Ivoire now, given  the
    change in government, and that even if such a risk existed,  sufficient
    protection was available.  However, at paragraphs [47]  and  [48],  the
    judge found that  the  appellant  had  shown  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that she would face a real risk of serious harm, and that her
    return would risk breaching  her  Article  2  and  3  ECHR  rights.  At
    paragraph [60], the judge stated that he did not find that the  Article
    3 claim was established, and at [61], that her  Article  8  claim  must
    fail.  The appeal was then dismissed on all grounds.

 6. We note that there was a preliminary issue in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    as to whether the appellant should give  evidence,  her  representative
    asserting that she was a vulnerable witness, which should have  alerted
    the judge to the need to consider the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note
    No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant  guidance
    (the Presidential Guidance). The appellant's assertion of vulnerability
    was supported by medico-legal evidence from Freedom from  Torture  that
    she has post-traumatic stress disorder and  depression,  that  she  has
    suicidal ideation with at least some planning of how she might carry it
    into effect, and that she would find  it  difficult  to  give  reliable
    evidence by reason of the fear she would experience.

 7. No reference was made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  to  the
    Presidential Guidance, in particular paragraphs [10]-[15] thereof which
    give guidance  on  the  conduct  of  hearings  and  the  assessment  of
    credibility where a witness is vulnerable  by  reason  of  age,  mental
    health difficulties, social or learning difficulties, or  a  number  of
    other matters identified at paragraphs [2]-[3] thereof.   It  does  not
    appear to us that the judge was guided by the  principles  therein  set
    out  when  deciding  how  to  deal  with  the   cross-examination,   in
    particular.

 8. It may be that the appellant's mental health  difficulties  contributed
    to credibility problems in her evidence, but it is difficult to  assess
    whether that is the case because the judge's credibility  findings  are
    contradictory and  unclear.   We  observe,  however,  that  failure  to
    address himself to the Presidential Guidance may  have  led  the  judge
    into error in his control of the cross-examination.  It is not intended
    that the appellant should give evidence at the hearing  to  remake  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.

 9. The appellant's principal challenges to the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal were that:

      i)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  that  she  was  a
         vulnerable  witness  or  apply  the  Presidential   Guidance   when
         considering credibility;

     ii)  Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  sets  out  the
         principles in J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]
         EWCA Civ 629 (2005) and also the case of Y and Anor (Sri  Lanka)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362  and
         in N v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL  31,
         upheld in the European Court of Human Rights in N.  v.  The  United
         Kingdom - 26565/05 [2008] ECHR 453, they are not properly applied;

    iii)  The  determination  is  inadequately  reasoned,  with   particular
         reference to paragraphs [37]-[39], [44] and [47]; in particular

          i) The assessment of the  appellant's  objective  and  subjective
             fear  on  return  is  inadequate,  and  there  is  no   proper
             assessment of the risk of serious harm,  potentially  engaging
             Article 3 ECHR; and/or

         ii) The assessment of Articles  3  and  8  is  inadequate,  having
             regard to the J and N principles.

10. Having regard to the lack of clarity as to the judge's findings set out
    at paragraph 5 above, we find that the reasons challenge  is  made  out
    and that the decision will have to be  made  again  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  We have not found it necessary to make  a  decision  on  the
    Presidential Guidance issue, nor on whether the J and N principles  are
    properly applied in the decision under challenge.

Conclusions.

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a  point  of  law,  in  that  the  reasoning  was
    inadequate as set out at  paragraph  90(3)  in  the  judgment  of  Lord
    Justice Brooke in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

12. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and remit  it  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  remaking.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    credibility finding as to  the  incident  in  December  2010  shall  be
    preserved.

Anonymity.

13. The parties are reminded that an anonymity order remains in force until
    further order, pursuant to Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and Rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  No  report  of
    these proceedings, in whatever form, either during the  proceedings  or
    thereafter,  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.
    Failure to comply with this order may be treated as contempt of court.

Directions.

14. We make the following directions to assist in remaking this decision in
    the First-tier Tribunal:

      1) The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  remaking,
         with a time estimate of two hours, not to be listed  before  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy.

      2) The parties are invited to agree what other findings  of  fact  are
         uncontested and to serve an agreed Schedule of facts and Chronology
         (indicating  what  areas  remain  in  dispute)  on  the  First-tier
         Tribunal not later than 7 days before the  hearing  to  remake  the
         decision.

      3) It is not expected that there will be  any  oral  evidence  at  the
         appeal hearing. If, contrary to the indication to that effect given
         at today's hearing, the appellant and her  advisers  consider  that
         she is fit to give evidence, an  application  to  the  Tribunal  on
         notice supported by medical evidence may be made on 7 days' notice.
          If the  appellant  gives  evidence,  she  will  require  a  French
         interpreter.

      4) Additional directions for the rehearing may be given at the hearing
         centre where the appeal is listed for hearing.

      5) Liberty to either party to apply to discharge or vary  any  of  the
         above directions.




    Signed        Date 30 January 2015


    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

