
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04210/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination sent           |
|on 25th October 2013                          |on 12th December 2013        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AKD
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Ms Pickering instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. On 9th August 2013, for the reasons set out in  the  error  of  law
        finding and directions document of the  same  date,  it  was  found
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley had  erred  in  law  in  allowing
        AKD's appeal on asylum and Article 2 and 3 ECHR grounds, against  a
        direction  for  his  removal  to  Senegal  which  accompanied   the
        rejection  of  his  claim  for  asylum  or  any   other   form   of
        international protection.


     2. AKD was born on 17th December 1978 and is a  national  of  Senegal.
        The core of his claim to be at risk on return to his home state  is
        set out  at  paragraphs  6  to  11  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        determination. He arrived in the United Kingdom in  2007  to  study
        and prior to this  was  politically  active  in  Senegal,  although
        experienced no problems prior to leaving the country.  He  returned
        to Senegal in 2010 where he claimed he became a founding member  of
        Y'en Marre ("YAM") which he and a number of others set  up  due  to
        the conditions in Senegal.  AKD claims that during this time he met
        Aliou Tine, the President  of  a  human  rights  organisation,  who
        agreed to support YAM although shortly thereafter AKD stated he was
        arrested and questioned about the meeting, denied food  and  water,
        but released after 24 hours. AKD and others submitted documents  to
        enable YAM to be approved  by  the  authorities  although  he,  his
        brother, and others were attacked. AKD claims he was able to escape
        and reported the matter to the police but they did  not  help  him.
        He claims to have been warned about his association with YAM and to
        have received threatening telephone calls but did  not  inform  the
        police.


     3. AKD left Senegal in December 2010.  He claims he has contacted  his
        family who told him not to return and that  other  members  of  YAM
        have given him similar advice.  He claims his brother was killed on
        31st January 2012 four days after  declaring  that  President  Wade
        should go, a declaration broadcast on television. The  police  told
        AKD it was an accident but he believes his brother was killed.   He
        claims he saw his brother being beaten in Senegal. Others have been
        arrested and he has received  threatening  e-mails.  Since  leaving
        Senegal AKD claims to have been involved with  a  number  of  radio
        programmes where individuals telephone in with  comments/questions.
        He claims to have given his  name  when  telephoning  a  particular
        radio station because he was representing YAM.


     4. The preserved findings of the First-tier Judge are in the following
        terms:


     53.  I am therefore satisfied that the appellant was  involved  in  the
          founding of  YAM  and  that  he  came  to  the  attention  of  the
   authorities             as a consequence of that  involvement.  I  accept
   that his brother had a           similar involvement with this group  and
   that he too came to the               attention of the  Authorities.   He
   was killed when attending a               demonstration and I accept that
   his death was reasonably likely to            have been as a  consequence
   of his involvement with YAM and his            known  opposition  to  the
   government.



Discussion


     5. It was found by the First-tier that  the  purpose  of  YAM  was  to
        challenge the validity of President Wade who was seeking a  further
        term of office.  As identified in the application for permission to
        appeal and grant of permission,  by  the  time  the  case  came  to
        hearing before the First-tier Judge, President Wade was  no  longer
        in power as he  had  been  replaced  by  President  Sall  following
        relatively peaceful elections.


     6. Miss Pickering submitted there still  remain  two  issues  for  the
        Upper Tribunal to consider when assessing  whether  the  change  in
        government in Senegal made it safe for AKD to  return.   These  are
        what YAM represents and whether the change in government  has  made
        any material difference to the risk on return.


     7. Documentary  evidence  has  been  provided  by  both  advocates  in
        relation to  the  first  of  these  issues  all  of  which  I  have
        considered in detail.  In the SSHD's bundle, page 6, is a print out
        from the internet headed "World  Movements:  Y'en  a  Marre"  which
        contains the following text :


              In April 2012, the African Union, the European Union  and  the
   United Nations               were all quick to applaud  the  ex-President
   of Senegal Abdoulaye Wade for                 stepping down from power so
   gracefully after his election defeat and pointed to             him as  a
   great example of an African leader  committed  to  democracy.   Yet  this
     man, and this  election  in  particular,  were  notable  for  something
   different.                   Abdoulaye Wade's less than peachy tenure has
   sparked a cultural movement in            Senegal involving  a  group  of
   young activists who had had enough of the  system             and  wanted
   change. And to achieve it, they used music.


              The grassroots movement began in 2011 and was  called  Y'en  a
   Marre, the French            equivalent of our idiom 'enough  is  enough'
   as chosen by Senegalese rappers           Thiat and Kilifeu (from the hip
   hop band Kear Gui of Koalack and Fou Malade,           which means 'crazy
   sick  guy')  along  with  journalists  Fadel   Barro   and   Alio   Sane.
   It aimed to encourage Senegalese people to go out and  vote,  to  take  a
   stand               against the government's mismanagement and corruption
   and to encourage a           sense of civic duty - the lack of which  had
   allowed the corruption in Senegal to          get so bad. By this  point,
   an ageing Wade who ruled with the help of his son was           no longer
   the poster boy for African democracy, but an out  of  touch  leader  who,
     behind a veil of democracy, was responsible for  running  a  government
   which          was bogged down by corruption and  nepotism,  as  well  as
   limiting  the  freedom  of                the  press  and  certain  civil
   liberties.


              The collective was initially sparked off by a series of  power
   cuts across the                  country that, according  to  the  group,
   was systematic of the chaotic nature of  the             government.   It
   then  became  a   call   to   arms:   or   at   least   to   microphones.
   Throughout the year the group organised protests against  the  government
   whilst               releasing  songs  such  as  the  anthem  'Faux!  Pas
   Force!'.   The  song   emphatically             complained   about   deaf
   governments   who   seemed   unable   to   listen    to    its    people,
   while calling on those very people to make an impossible to ignore stance
   and            ask the  country's  leaders  to  peacefully  stand  aside,
   without bloodshed. As the             elections of 2012 drew nearer,  the
   government made these protests illegal and, as              if to make an
   example  out  of  them,  the  three  members  were  arrested  for  taking
   part in a the day after they were made illegal.


              .........


              Many commentators suggest that the overthrow of Wade would  be
   the end for             the young activists, yet the members  of  Y,en  a
   Marre disagreed. In a 2012                interview, Fadel Barro compared
   the events post-election to an orchestra having             a  change  of
   conductor:   "When   you   change   the   conductor,   you   don't   keep
   playing the same symphony".  He lamented the fact  that  Y'en  a  Marre's
   work           had been depicted as solely  focused  on  the  removal  of
   Abdoulaye Wade, when in               fact the movement was about so much
   more.  What the group now called for was            a  "Nouveau  Type  de
   Senegalais",  a  new  type   of   Senegalese   citizen   who   would   be
   engaged in  politics,  understand  their  rights  and  their  vote  in  a
   responsible                  manner.  Despite managing to overthrow Wade,
   the group noted that the vast             majority  of  young  Senegalese
   people   still    did    not    fully    appreciate    the    power    of
   democracy, and that is something which had  to  change.   Crucially,  the
   group          never aligned themselves with  a  particular  presidential
   candidate  -  they  simply                opposed  the   re-election   of
   Abdoulaye Wade.  This means that a  year  after  the            election,
   they are still free to push for an agenda that concentrates on  education
          and opportunities for young people and  furthering  the  cause  of
   democracy,              without being held back by the  policies  of  the
   government that they supported.           The group is still very  active
   in setting up youth projects across Senegal, and are            committed
   to the education of the people about their rights.


     8. In a further article provided by the Secretary of State, page 9  of
        the supplementary bundle, titled  'Chronic'  refers  to  the  quote
        attributed to Fadel Barro  a  few  months  after  the  election  of
        President Sall. That same article notes that since  President  Sall
        took office members of Y'en a Marre have  highlighted  land  grabs,
        begging in the street, the raising of  university  fees,  and  have
        collaborated with Amnesty International to denounce impunity.  They
        have also in the 'Journal Rappe' a news broadcast, raised the issue
        of  the  current  Presidents  "stoutness"  to  discuss  corruption,
        alleging that such policies remain a threat to  the  legitimacy  of
        Senegalese political leaders.


     9. At pages 15 to 17 of the SSHD's bundle is an article headed "Africa
        is a country" dated 2nd April 2012 referring to  the  election  and
        the formation of Y'en a Marre. It recalls that since it was  formed
        its membership soared although several members of the founding core
        were arrested, beaten and  intimidated  by  the  state's  apparatus
        prior to the defeat of President Wade. Although the earlier article
        claims that the group are apolitical this article states:


              The single "Faux! Pas Force"  from  the  compilation  was  the
   group's anthem in its            protests and one  of  the  more  popular
   anthems for the  ouster  of  Wade  and  Wade.                Despite  the
   group's claim  at  neutrality,  indicated  by  the  support  for  various
   candidates by its members  during  the  first  round  of  elections,  one
   unifying factor              for it was the  ouster  of  Wade  and  Wade.
   Nothing inspires better warfare than a             common  enemy.   After
   the  first  round  of  elections,  the  group   in   an   unlikely   move
   actually came out and threw its weight  behind  Macky  Sall  while  still
   calling for             NTS (New type of Senegalese).  This was  followed
   up with the release of a new              rap single  entitled  "Doggali"
   (let's finish it) to emphasise finishing the job of             cleansing
   the country of Wade and Wade.....


              Now that Wade & Wade have been booted out, one cannot  but  be
   tempted to ask               "what's next" for Y'en A Marre?


              Well, that depends on who you ask. Some members of  the  press
   have begun to           erase to roll with this group  to  the  point  of
   diminishing  "Y'en  A  MArre"  to  just  a           rally  cry  by   the
   opposition.    Members   and   supporters   of   the   group,   including
   Keyti (a veteran rapper), believe the group will not disintegrate  as  it
   stood for           more than just ousting Wade and can be a platform  of
   actual social changes in              Senegal.   Other  more  established
   academics and political veterans, off the record,           believe  Y'en
   A Marre is  as  good  as  dead  in  the  new  political  make-up  of  the
   country unless it reforms itself and joins or support  small  traditional
   political           institutions in the country.


    10. Miss Pickering's submission that although there is a new  President
        he is part of the old administration and will have  the  tendencies
        of previous practices, I find not to be supported  by  the  country
        information at this stage and not to be substantiated to the extent
        she infers AKD will face the same risk as before.   I  accept  that
        the intentions of the  founders  of  the  group  were  not  overtly
        political but there is clearly a political element in what they did
        by supporting the removal of President  Wade  and  their  alignment
        with the current  President  Sall  in  the  latter  stages  of  the
        election process. It appears  that  the  group  see  themselves  as
        having an ongoing role as a social movement trying to  improve  the
        lives of the young people in Senegal and to encourage engagement in
        the political process. None of the material provided  substantiates
        the claim that if AKD was involved in such a role he  will  face  a
        real risk of persecution or ill-treatment, especially  as  none  of
        the country reports refer  to  such  difficulties  befalling  those
        members/supporters of YAM who have remained in Senegal and continue
        their campaigns since the elections.


    11. I do not find the evidence supports the claim that this  group  has
        an adverse profile, actual  or  imputed,  based  upon  the  country
        material made available.  It was AKD's case prior to the removal of
        President Wade that it was  YAM's  opposition  to  his  regime  and
        actions taken by core members that gave rise  to  a  real  fear  of
        persecution on return, not from another politician.  The  claim  he
        will face a risk  of  persecution  as  a  member  of  YAM  is  also
        undermined by the reference to Journal Rappe which is a four minute
        long news broadcast delivered in rhymes in both French and Wolof in
        which two hip hop stars use popular mediums such as music to inform
        their  audiences  and  to  hold  the  Senegalese  establishment  to
        account.  There is no evidence  such  activities  are  targeted  or
        suppressed and the fact critical broadcasts are permitted  supports
        the Secretary of States case that AKD faces no risk on return  even
        if active for YAM.


    12. AKD also relies upon an Amnesty  International  Report  dated  21st
        October 2013 in support of his claim to face such a risk on  return
        [AKD's bundle pages 8 - 28]. Page 5 of  the  report  (AKD's  bundle
        page 12) sets out the sources of information and at page 11 of  the
        report (AKD's bundle page 18) that the Appellant is  not  known  to
        Amnesty directly. I  note  this  comment  which  is  despite  AKD's
        alleged profile in YAM and Amnesty's contacts and work with YAM  as
        referred to above.


    13. Amnesty state that despite  the  election  of  President  Sall  the
        country faces long-standing human rights challenges. They claim the
        AKD may potentially be at risk on return or at some future junction
        on account of his actual or perceived opposition to President  Sall
        and may potentially be at risk on return or at some future junction
        from supporters of former President Wade on account of his specific
        past history and associated profile.


    14. Amnesty claim that as a result of his membership of  a  significant
        opposition group instrumental in the downfall of President Wade AKD
        will in all likelihood be viewed with some degree of  suspicion  by
        the current administration on account of  his  past  activities  of
        actual or perceived opposition to the government [page 14 report  -
        page 21 AKD's bundle] .


    15. Amnesty  also  refers  to  country  information  which  is  already
        available to the Tribunal before concluding,  at  page  21  of  the
        report [page 28 AKD's bundle], that  "Amnesty  International  would
        like to expresses concerns as to the possible  consequences  should
        the appellant return to Senegal at this time. We are of the opinion
        that the appellant may potentially be at  real  risk  of  treatment
        capable of amounting to persecution, serious  harm  or  other  ill-
        treatment for the reasons provided above "


    16. The Amnesty report makes reference to a statement provided  by  AKD
        for the purposes of  this  appeal  dated  20th  March  2013  [AKD's
        supplementary bundle pages 5 -7).  In the second paragraph of  that
        statement he claims to have taken part in a radio  programme  based
        in Washington DC that he called on a number of occasions and during
        which he claims to  have  raised  issues  regarding  the  political
        situation in Senegal. Even if such conversations  took  place,  and
        form part of a sur place claim, AKD has not substantiated his claim
        that  his  comments  will  have  come  to  the  attention  of   the
        authorities in Senegal such as to create an adverse profile  and  a
        real risk for him on return.


    17. AKD claims the main individuals involved in YAM remain in exile but
        as the country material referred to above shows a  number  of  high
        profile individuals remain in Senegal continuing the work  of  this
        group, with no evidence of adverse consequences being  suffered  by
        them. AKD claims he will be detained at the airport  and  that  the
        authorities are interested in his father because  he  financed  YAM
        but any claim relating to a fear of  persecution  for  AKD  or  any
        family members from the current regime has not been substantiated.


    18. The fact the current President may have  been  a  Minister  in  the
        government of President  Wade  in  2002  does  not  corroborate  or
        substantiate the claim that nothing has changed in  Senegal.  There
        may still be corruption which needs to be addressed but it does not
        mean members of YAM or AKD in particular are at risk on return.


    19. In paragraph 9 of his recent statement AKD claims to have  received
        threatening e-mails and telephone calls. He claims not to know  who
        sent the e-mails which are about six or seven in number.  Copies of
        e-mails are provided in the bundle from pages  77  to  83  but  all
        appear to be dated 2nd March 2012 and no more recent examples  have
        been provided or evidence to corroborate his claim  these,  or  the
        alleged telephone calls, create a real risk on return.


    20. As stated, the original claim in relation to  risk  on  return  was
        based upon AKD's activities and  those  of  YAM  in  opposition  to
        President Wade and his supporters and it was on the basis of such a
        risk that the First-tier Tribunal allowed AKD's appeal. It  is  not
        disputed there has been a fundamental change  in  Senegal  in  that
        President Wade is no longer in power and  although  AKD  claims  he
        still remains a risk, the language used  by  Amnesty  International
        that he may potentially (my emphasis) be at real risk on return  or
        at some future junction does not prove he is actually  at  risk  or
        faces a real risk that may manifest itself on return. In such cases
        as this an important question to be asked is  whether  there  is  a
        serious risk that on return the applicant would be persecuted for a
        Convention reason? It has not  been  proved  that  a  potential  or
        possible risk is serious on the evidence  made  available  in  this
        appeal.  The  existence  of  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
        requires the  establishment  of  what  has  been  described  as  "a
        reasonable degree of likelihood" as "a real and substantial danger"
        and a "real and substantial risk".  In PS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2008]
        EWCA Civ 1213 the Court of Appeal said  that  the  single  test  of
        whether a fear of persecution or ill treatment was well founded was
        whether on the evidence there was a real risk of its occurrence  or
        re-occurrence. I find the  country  information  does  not  support
        AKD's claim of a real risk of persecution or harm when referring to
        members of YAM who remain active in that country post-election  and
        I find AKD has failed to substantiate his claim to be  entitled  to
        grant of international protection for the reasons stated.


Decision

    21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make that order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)  following  application  for
        the same.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21st November 2013
