
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04195/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court|Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 September 2016                 |On 27 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     Men
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Bhachu, Counsel, instructed by J M Wilson,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Hills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 14 May 1982.  He arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on  22  November  2012  and  claimed  asylum  on  19
    December 2012.  On 17 February 2015 that claim for asylum was  rejected
    and a decision made on 27 February 2015 to remove him to Iran  pursuant
    to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    S D Lloyd ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 4 June 2015, following which  the
    appeal on asylum, human rights and humanitarian protection grounds  was
    dismissed.

 3. In order to put the appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    into context, I set out the basis of  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
    decision of the FtJ.

    The appellant's claim

 4. This summary of the appellant's claim is taken largely from the summary
    given by the FtJ, but I have also  had  reference  to  the  appellant's
    witness statements and the asylum interview.

 5. The appellant claims that he worked for a number of years  in  a  print
    shop, working on the nightshift  on  the  printing  presses.   He  also
    sometimes worked during the day.

 6. He was approached by a cousin who told him  that  one  of  his  friends
    wanted to print an anti-government leaflet. The appellant  spoke  to  a
    colleague, S, and they went to see the appellant's cousin's friend.  It
    was decided that it was too dangerous  to  print  a  leaflet  but  they
    decided to print a newspaper with a false name instead.

 7. They decided initially  to  print  a  "fake"  weekly  newspaper  as  an
    experiment to see  if  it  attracted  any  adverse  interest  from  the
    authorities.  A  thousand  copies  were  printed  and  the  appellant's
    cousin's friends distributed them.  There having been no reaction  from
    the authorities, they decided to  print  the  paper  with  a  political
    message.  Another thousand copies were distributed, but this  time  the
    newspaper contained an article  about  boycotting  the  elections.  The
    appellant and S printed it whilst they were working on  the  nightshift
    on 2 November 2012.  A third person, their manager, was  usually  there
    but was absent that night because they had told him  he  would  not  be
    needed.

 8. The appellant finished his nightshift between 4 a.m.  and  5  a.m.  and
    went home.  At 10 a.m. the owner of a neighbouring shop told  him  that
    the print shop was being raided by plain clothes police  and  that  all
    the workers had been arrested, with computers being taken.

 9. The appellant phoned a friend and went to see him at about midday.  His
    friend bought him a bus ticket to Tehran where he went and stayed  with
    his sister.  His mother spoke to his sister who told her that his house
    had been visited by plain clothes men who had  seized  his  laptop  and
    other property.  He also spoke to his brother who  told  him  that  all
    three people who had distributed the newspaper had  been  arrested.   S
    ran away and has not been seen since.

10. The appellant's brother-in-law paid an agent to  get  him  out  of  the
    country and he left Iran illegally on 10 November 2012, arriving in the
    UK on 22 November 2012, when he was arrested.




    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

11. At [17] - [20] the FtJ resolved in the appellant's favour a  number  of
    credibility issues raised in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.   These
    related, in summary, to the date of publication of the first newspaper,
    the appellant's description of the newspaper as a "weekly", and alleged
    inconsistency in terms of his knowledge of the arrests of the  men  who
    had distributed the newspaper.

12. As regards the delay of about one month before  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum after his arrival, the FtJ concluded that it was a  matter  that
    adversely affected the appellant's credibility although he said that he
    would afford that matter "only cautious adverse weight".

13. He then went on to make a series of adverse credibility  findings.   At
    [24] he said that he failed to understand why it was  claimed  to  have
    been thought that the distribution of the first edition  would  be  any
    indication at  all  of  being  able  to  distribute  more  inflammatory
    material safely.

14. At [25] he found that there was a "dearth of evidence"  in  respect  of
    how the newspaper was designed and who  was  responsible  for  actually
    printing the article which apparently led to the  adverse  interest  in
    the appellant by the authorities.  Although  there  was  an  indication
    that the appellant was very likely to have been involved in the  design
    and editing of the papers, there was no mention  by  the  appellant  of
    that process, or how he expected to be able to manage  both  to  design
    and print the publication without detection from his employer.

15. In the next paragraph the FtJ raised the question of why the  appellant
    ever became involved in the enterprise at all.  He  did  not  claim  to
    have been politically active before or after the events or to have  any
    strongly held views.   The FtJ said that he  would  have  expected  the
    appellant to have been aware of the dangers involved in the enterprise,
    which made his involvement and willingness to get involved in the group
    and their activities all the more surprising.  He concluded that  there
    was a rather "obvious hole"  in  the  account  in  terms  of  the  only
    apparent connection being that the man who had approached him initially
    was his cousin, although there was no other elaboration of this part of
    the account.

16. He concluded at [27] that it was unlikely that the appellant would risk
    being caught with a copy of the publication itself  when  he  left  the
    print works, let alone to have had it with him when  he  fled,  knowing
    that he would be making an illegal border crossing. This related to the
    appellant having taken a copy for himself of the second publication

17. The FtJ remarked on the fact that there was no  other  documentary  "or
    corroborative evidence". Despite risking bringing with him  a  copy  of
    the newspaper which was the apparent cause of the problems, he did  not
    bring with him anything  else.   Notably,  there  was  no  evidence  to
    support his claim of having worked at the printers for eleven years and
    no evidence that he had attempted to obtain  anything  to  support  his
    account. The FtJ said that this was surprising given that it  had  been
    over two years since his claim and he had been in touch with  at  least
    one member his family since entering the UK.

18. At [30] - [31]  the  conclusion  was  reached  that  the  timeline,  of
    finishing work at about 4 a.m. or 5 a.m. and being contacted before  10
    a.m. about his shop being raided, was very unlikely. The appellant  had
    explained that by saying that the men had been caught distributing  the
    paper, arrested, confessed under torture  and  given  his  details  and
    details of the print shop.  The FtJ said that  for  all  that  to  have
    happened, and for the raid, arrests and  seizures  all  to  have  taken
    place before 10 a.m.  "borders  on  the  barely  plausible,  let  alone
    credible".

19. The FtJ went on to state that the appellant had not been able  to  give
    any first hand evidence of the arrests, the raids, or any experience at
    all of interest in him from the authorities.  His evidence of what  had
    happened to S or the three distributors was also "hearsay at best"  and
    the appellant was not able to be certain of why the  other  print  shop
    workers were readily released but says it must have  been  because  the
    authorities had already been given his name  by  the  distributors.  He
    concluded that the absence of any "first hand evidence"  did  not  help
    his case at all. Although he claimed to have been  in  touch  with  his
    mother since arrival in the UK, there was no evidence  before  the  FtJ
    from his parents, brother or sister, whose evidence  he  concluded  may
    have assisted.  There was no suggestion that the appellant had made any
    attempt to get a statement or other evidence from them.

20. He thus concluded that  applying  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  the
    appellant's account was not credible, and he had not  established  that
    he was wanted by the authorities in Iran.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

21. The appellant's grounds, in essence,  complain  about  various  of  the
    FtJ's adverse credibility findings.  The  essential  complaint  is,  in
    summary, that the points taken against the appellant by the FtJ are not
    matters that the appellant was given the opportunity to deal with,  and
    are not matters that  were  identified  in  the  respondent's  decision
    letter.

22. The respondent's 'rule 24' response contends that there is no error  of
    law in the FtJ's decision and that  detailed  and  sustainable  reasons
    have been given  as  to  why  much  of  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    rejected. The grounds, it is asserted, amount only  to  a  disagreement
    with the FtJ's conclusions.

23. At the hearing before me Mr Mills provided the notes of the  Presenting
    Officer ("PO") from the hearing before the FtJ.  Those  included  typed
    preparatory notes and a  manuscript  record  of  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence, including in response to questions by the FtJ.

24. Mrs Bhachu  did  not  object  to  the  respondent's  reliance  on  that
    document, albeit that there was no witness statement producing it.  She
    accepted that it  was  an  accurate  record  of  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence, and indeed accorded with her own record.

25. She also accepted that one of the issues raised in the grounds in terms
    of the issue of no supporting documentary or other evidence referred to
    by the FtJ at [29], is a matter  that  was  in  fact  raised  with  the
    appellant.  It was submitted however, that the other points  raised  in
    the grounds about matters not being put to the appellant held good.

26. Mrs Bhachu relied on her skeleton argument, and the cases cited in  it,
    in particular MM (Unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) and AM
    (fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC), and  HK  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.

27. The latter decision concerns the assessment of issues of  plausibility,
    and the Upper Tribunal decisions relate to fairness in terms of a  case
    being put to an appellant.

28. It was submitted that there was a parallel with, for example, an  issue
    that may arise under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules,  where  the
    issue so  far  as  the  respondent  is  concerned,  was  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules,  whereas  the  judge  took  issue  with  the
    genuineness of the relationship, without the matter having been flagged
    up in advance. Such a parallel is even more potent, it was  argued,  in
    terms of an asylum case.

29. Particular features of the grounds with reference to the detail of  the
    FtJ's decision were referred to.

30. Mr Mills argued that, one  way  or  another,  the  FtJ  had  identified
    matters which were either raised in advance, for example in the  asylum
    interview, or which had been put to the appellant during the course  of
    the hearing.  It was accepted that further questions  could  have  been
    put to the appellant, or matters could have been followed  up  but  the
    matters were sufficiently flagged up in the asylum interview or at  the
    hearing.

31. Furthermore, a lack of  evidence,  or  vagueness  in  an  account,  for
    example as identified by the FtJ at [25], concerned  matters  that  the
    FtJ was entitled to find against the appellant on.

32. So far as the 'timeline' point is concerned, referred to by the FtJ  in
    [31], the FtJ was making the general point that an awful lot appears to
    have happened in a short space of time from the appellant  leaving  his
    work in the early hours of the morning and the raid on the shop.

33. In reply it was submitted that that last matter  was  not  specifically
    put to the appellant, although it is correct that he was asked  in  the
    interview why the police came  so  quickly.   Furthermore,  it  was  no
    answer to the appellant's grounds to say that further  questions  could
    have been asked at the hearing on behalf of the appellant, when it  was
    not apparent that those matters would feature in the FtJ's conclusions.

34. The matters identified in the grounds and in submissions  are  material
    in that it is not known what the outcome of the appeal would have  been
    had the points been put to the appellant and his answers assessed.

    Conclusions

35. It is necessary to explore in more  detail  the  particular  points  in
    issue so far as what was, or arguably should,  have  been  put  to  the
    appellant for his response.

36. I accept that as a general principle, matters which are said to reflect
    adversely on the credibility of an appellant's account should generally
    be put to an appellant. So much was also  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent before me.

37. However, there are of course limitations to that principle.  It  is  to
    be remembered that the burden of proof is on the appellant to establish
    his case to the lower standard. He can be expected to  advance  a  case
    that is free from inherent  implausibility,  and  consistent  with  the
    lower standard of proof an account  that  is  not  inherently  weak  or
    vague. The extent of any weakness, vagueness or  implausibility,  is  a
    matter for individual  judgement,  to  be  assessed  according  to  the
    specifics of the particular appeal.

38. The original grounds at [1] state that the FtJ's

         "objections to the appellant's testimony are marred by a subjective
         ethnocentric viewpoint which prevents him  from  understanding  the
         position of the oppressors in an authoritarian theocratic regime or
         the position of those oppressed by and  attempting  to  resist  it.
         His conclusions on plausibility drawn from this perspective  amount
         to an error of law."

39. I have no  hesitation  in  rejecting  that  overarching  contention  in
    relation to the FtJ's assessment of the  appellant's  account.  In  the
    first place, as I have already indicated, the FtJ resolved some matters
    in the appellant's favour, which had been identified by the  respondent
    in  the  decision  letter  as  adversely  affecting  his   credibility.
    Furthermore, it is apparent that the FtJ was aware,  and  took  account
    of, the political situation in Iran. So much is evident  from  [26]  of
    his decision in terms of  the  appellant's  awareness  of  the  dangers
    involved in anti-government activity. In that same paragraph  there  is
    reference to country guidance about the repressive Iranian regime.

40. The 'ethnocentric argument' relates specifically it would seem to  [30]
    - [31], which is the 'timeline' point. I do not consider that the FtJ's
    conclusions on that issue are marred by an  impermissible  ethnocentric
    approach.

41. Again, in relation  to  [30]  -  [31]  Mrs  Bhachu  accepted  that  the
    appellant was in fact asked at the hearing by  the  FtJ  the  following
    question: "Why do you think they came so  quickly?"  referring  to  the
    police raid on the shop, presumably. The appellant's answer as recorded
    in the manuscript notes of the PO was that "At first I thought they had
    been arrested and given away, then I was sure that I had guessed right.
     They have given anything [sic] away."

42. Mr Mills submitted that it is evident from  this  that  the  issue  was
    raised with the appellant at the hearing.  Mrs  Bhachu  contended  that
    that was dealing with a different point which was why  the  process  of
    arrest, obtaining of information and the raid was so quickly performed,
    rather than the simple question of why the police came to the  premises
    so quickly. It was submitted that the appellant was not actually  asked
    about the timeline itself.

43. I am not satisfied that there is any merit in the contention  that  the
    appellant was not alerted to the 'timeline' being a potential issue  in
    terms of credibility.  He was clearly asked why he thought  the  police
    came to the premises so quickly.  In other words, the FtJ was evidently
    pointing out that the time interval from the appellant having left work
    and the raid was a short one.  It was open to the appellant to  explain
    that, for example, the police act quickly, interrogate immediately  and
    act swiftly to quell, any sign of dissent.  I am satisfied that the FtJ
    was entitled to come to the conclusion that he did in relation  to  the
    'timeline'.

44. Again, taking the points raised in the grounds in turn,  the  complaint
    about [26] is in terms of the FtJ's questioning of  why  the  appellant
    ever became involved in  the  enterprise  at  all.  He  said  that  the
    appellant does not claim to have  been  politically  active  before  or
    after the events, nor to have held any strong views.   He  referred  to
    country guidance in terms of the risks that, for  example,  journalists
    or others  who  publish  anti-government  political  opinion  risk.  He
    concluded that the appellant would have  been  aware  of  the  dangers.
    Indeed, that he was aware is  clear  from  the  asylum  interview,  for
    example from questions 75 and 88, although there  are  other  examples.
    The FtJ concluded that the appellant being aware of the  dangers  would
    make his involvement and willingness to get involved in the  enterprise
    all the more surprising. He referred to the  only  apparent  connection
    being that the man who approached him initially  was  his  cousin,  and
    that there was no other elaboration on that aspect of the account.  The
    FtJ described that as an "obvious hole" in the account.

45. The complaint in the grounds at [3] states that:

         "[the FtJ] has no experience of living under such conditions or  of
         how the people who are required to do so feel and react.  He has no
         basis to belittle the appellant's anger and courage."

46. Again, I do not accept that insofar as the grounds complain that  there
    was an impermissible  ethnocentric  approach  to  this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's account, that  complaint  has  any  merit.   It  is  simply
    unarguable to suggest that  the  FtJ  was  unaware  of  the  fact  that
    individuals in Iran do take the risk  of  becoming  involved  in  anti-
    government activity. Again, I refer to [26] of his decision.

47. However, as is pointed out in the appellant's skeleton argument for the
    hearing before me at [4], this is in fact a matter that  the  appellant
    was asked about in his interview at question 94.  It  was  put  to  him
    that living in Iran, and working in the print industry,  he  must  know
    how harshly the regime dealt with those who  are  anti-government.   He
    was asked why therefore, he agreed to take part. His  answer  was  that
    "we were talking and I got influenced and said OK".

48. Mrs Bhachu's point about that aspect of the interview is that  in  fact
    the appellant's explanation as to why he got  involved  was  not  taken
    into account, or least is not reflected in the FtJ's decision.

49. I do consider that there is some merit in that aspect of  the  grounds.
    The appellant gave at least some explanation in answer to question  94.
    However, it seems to me that there is grater force in the  argument  on
    behalf of the appellant on this issue when other answers  in  interview
    are considered, and to which I was not referred.  It is  apparent  from
    earlier questions that the  appellant  said  that  he  was  scared  and
    resisted involvement, for  example,  in  answer  to  question  88.   At
    question 91 the appellant was asked why, if he was scared  and  neither
    he nor S were politically active, he agreed to help.   The  appellant's
    answer was that S insisted that they do the job.

50. In answer to question 93, when asked again why he agreed  to  help,  he
    said as follows:

         "To be honest, they said why are you scared, these are  things  no-
         one will notice.  They said that during the elections people poured
         onto  the  streets  and  some  were  raped  and   killed   due   to
         demonstrating."

51. There is then the answer to question 94 to which I have referred.

52. Where at [26] the FtJ said that he would have expected the appellant to
    have been aware of the  dangers,  and  taking  into  account  that  the
    appellant plainly indicated in interview  that  he  was  aware  of  the
    danger, one cannot avoid the impression that the  FtJ  failed  to  take
    into account these aspects of the interview in which the appellant gave
    an explanation as to why he became involved.

53. At [4] of the grounds it  is  asserted  that  the  FtJ's  reasoning  is
    contradictory.  Thus, it is said that at [27]  he  questioned  how  the
    appellant brought the newspaper (out of Iran) with him, yet at [29]  it
    is said that he should have brought more documents with him.

54. Mrs Bhachu accepted that the  point  about  why  no  other  documentary
    evidence was provided is something that was put to the appellant, as is
    clear from the PO's manuscript notes. Although there is in fact more to
    that aspect of the grounds than the question of whether the  issue  was
    put, i.e. the contention that the FtJ's reasons are contradictory, I do
    not accept that there is any merit in that  contention.   The  FtJ  was
    simply making the point that if the appellant had decided to  take  the
    risk of bringing a piece of incriminating material with him, there  was
    no apparent reason  as  to  why  he  did  not  bring  other  supporting
    evidence.  Furthermore, the FtJ was entitled to take into account  that
    there was in fact no evidence that the appellant had even attempted  to
    obtain further supporting evidence from his family in Iran, despite his
    claim for asylum having been made over two  years  ago  and  his  still
    being in touch with at least one member of his  family  since  entering
    the UK.

55. I note  that  at  [29]  the  FtJ  referred  to  there  being  no  other
    documentary  or  "corroborative"  evidence.   There  is  of  course  no
    requirement for corroboration but I do not consider that  that  is  the
    sense in which the FtJ used that word and no complaint is made  in  the
    grounds, or was made in submissions, about his use of that term.

56. The grounds take issue with [32], stating that  whilst  the  FtJ  casts
    doubt on the appellant's evidence as hearsay,  the  appellant  is  also
    criticised for not obtaining more "hearsay evidence" from  his  parents
    or other family members.  The point was taken up in submissions by  Mrs
    Bhachu in terms of the issue of  what  an  asylum  seeker  is  able  to
    produce in terms of evidence.

57. However, I do not consider that there is  any  merit  in  the  argument
    about the FtJ's conclusions in  term  of  the  appellant's  failure  to
    obtain evidence or information from family members in Iran, for reasons
    already explained in relation to [29].

58. However, at [32] the FtJ started that  paragraph  by  saying  that  the
    appellant was not able "to give any first-hand evidence of the arrests,
    the raids, or any experience  at  all  of  interest  in  him  from  the
    authorities".   He went on to state  that  his  evidence  of  what  had
    happened to S or the three distributors is also "hearsay at best".   He
    referred to the appellant's uncertainty as to why the other print  shop
    workers were readily released,  his  account  being  that  it  must  be
    because the authorities had already been given the appellant's name  by
    those distributors.  He went on to say that he  would  not  expect  the
    appellant to wait around to be arrested just to be able to give  better
    evidence, but that "the absence of any first hand evidence at all  does
    not help his case".

59. The basis of this aspect of the FtJ's adverse credibility assessment is
    not entirely clear. The appellant plainly could not,  on  his  account,
    give any first-hand evidence of the arrests, raids or interest  in  him
    from the authorities if by that the FtJ meant that  the  appellant  did
    not witness any of those things with his own  senses.   It  is  in  the
    nature the appellant's  account  that  he  was  not  present  when  the
    premises were raided or the others arrested. Nor was he present when he
    alleges visits to his house took  place  by  members  of  the  security
    forces.  Inevitably, all the appellant could say was what he  had  been
    told.

60. It does not seem to me that  the  FtJ  was  at  that  point  at  least,
    referring to  an  absence  of  evidence  from  others  who  could  give
    information about those facts, because the FtJ said that he  would  not
    have expected the appellant to wait around to be  arrested.   In  other
    words, it does seem that the FtJ  was  making  an  adverse  credibility
    finding on the basis that the appellant was not able  to  give  direct,
    first-hand evidence of those events. He concluded that the  absence  of
    such evidence did not help his case, but it is impossible  to  see  how
    the appellant could have provided such evidence on  the  basis  of  his
    account.

61. Furthermore, I accept that there is a degree of contradiction  in  [32]
    in terms of the FtJ's criticisms of  the  appellant  for  providing  no
    first hand evidence, yet also taking into account against the appellant
    that there is no second hand  evidence  from  other  sources.   He  was
    entitled to take into account  the  lack  of  supporting  evidence,  as
    already explained, but  the  point  about  the  contradiction  in  that
    paragraph is a different one.

62. The renewed grounds take issue with what the FtJ said at [24]  in  that
    it was not comprehensible as to why it was  thought  by  the  appellant
    that distribution of the first print run of the newspaper would be  any
    indication at all of the  ability  to  distribute  more  anti-authority
    propaganda, when no such material appeared in the first print run.  The
    grounds contend that this is one of the matters  that  was  not  raised
    with the appellant.  In fact, as Mr Mills pointed out  in  submissions,
    that was a matter that was raised in the asylum interview.

63. He referred to questions 96-98.  In fact, the matter  is  more  clearly
    raised at question 119 when the appellant was asked squarely  how  they
    were going to gauge if there would be a problem from  the  distribution
    of  the  first  newspaper  given  that  it  contained  nothing  of   an
    inflammatory nature  so  far  as  the  government  was  concerned.  The
    appellant's answer was that in Iran it is not  permissible  to  make  a
    joke against the president,  but  because  the  President  had  made  a
    comment (about a sand storm coming from Iraq) and that they had "put it
    in a different way".  He also said that it was in their  newspaper  and
    they wanted to see how they (the authorities) would react to it.

64. The point was again raised with the appellant at question 122, but also
    raised in the question of how it would be known that it was their print
    works that printed it.  The appellant repeated that it was decided that
    they needed to do that to see what the reaction was. He said that  they
    wanted to see if there was any difficulty with distribution and that it
    "just about distribution".

65. At [24] the FtJ said that he failed to understand why  it  was  claimed
    that its distribution would be any indication at all of being  able  to
    distribute more inflammatory material safely. The matter was put to the
    appellant in  interview  and  there  is  no  unfairness  in  the  FtJ's
    identification of this as an adverse credibility matter.

66. At [25] the FtJ referred to a dearth of evidence in terms  of  how  the
    newspaper was designed and who was responsible for actually penning the
    article which  led  to  the  difficulties  with  the  authorities.   He
    concluded that because there was  mention  of  genuine  articles  being
    taken from other  publications  produced  by  that  print  works,  this
    indicated that the appellant was very likely to have been  involved  in
    the design and editing of the papers. However, he stated that there was
    no mention of that process, or how he expected to  be  able  to  manage
    both to design and print the publication  without  detection  from  his
    employer. This again, is asserted as being a matter that was not put to
    the appellant.

67. It was not asserted before me on behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
    issues raised [25]  were  put  to  the  appellant.   It  was  contended
    however, that the FtJ was entitled to comment on a lack of evidence and
    on an issue of vagueness.  In this respect  however,  I  also  consider
    that there is merit in the complaint raised in the grounds.  It is  not
    apparent that the appellant was asked, either at  interview  or  during
    the hearing, about the process by which the newspapers  were  produced.
    The matter is not flagged up in the decision letter either. During  the
    course of the interview the appellant answered  the  questions  he  was
    asked about the creation of the newspapers but  he  was  not  asked  in
    detail about the process.  In contrast, I note that  he  was  asked  in
    detail about what his employment consisted of, for example at  question
    59 and onwards.  He gave further details  in  answer  to  question  72.
    However, those questions do not relate to the  particular  publications
    which are the subject of this appeal.

68. In terms of how the appellant expected to be able to  manage  both  the
    design  and  print  of  the  publication  without  detection  from  his
    employer, this it seems to me is an important issue which was  not  put
    to the appellant. I do note however, that at question 110 the appellant
    was asked who was present at  the  print  works  when  he  printed  the
    experimental paper.  The appellant  gave  details,  and  in  answer  to
    question 111 he said that a person called [H] was told by S not to come
    in "as he was our manager".  At question 95  the  appellant  was  asked
    whether anyone helped him at the print works after he agreed to produce
    the newspapers and the appellant said that no one else knew.  There  is
    therefore,  at  least  partially,  in  answer  to  question  111,  some
    explanation as to how the distribution  at  least  and  production  the
    night before the distribution, took place without anyone else  at  that
    particular time being aware of it.   That  is  not  a  matter  that  is
    referred to by the FtJ in his findings.

69. To summarise, I do not consider that every matter raised in the grounds
    has merit, for the reasons I have explained.   However, I  do  conclude
    that significant aspects of  the  FtJ's  adverse  credibility  findings
    suffer from the deficiencies to which I have referred.  In the order in
    which they appear in the FtJ's decision, these relate to [25]  and  the
    process of production and lack of detection by his employer;  [26]  and
    the reasons for the appellant's  involvement  in  the  enterprise;  the
    hearsay/first-hand evidence  point  with  reference  to  [32]  and  the
    separate issue in terms of inconsistency in the findings in  that  same
    paragraph.

70. The assessment of credibility  is  very  often  a  difficult  exercise,
    particularly in circumstances where  there  is  a  lack  of  supporting
    documentary evidence.  The FtJ in this case undertook  a  conscientious
    appraisal of the evidence, finding in favour of the appellant  on  some
    points.  Aspects of the credibility findings are legally sustainable in
    their own right.

71. However, the matters I  have  identified  as  being  deficient  in  the
    credibility findings are matters which it is evident  the  FtJ  thought
    significant in terms  of  the  assessment  of  credibility.   Where  he
    considered that a point was of perhaps marginal significance  in  terms
    of adverse credibility he said so, for example at [23] in terms of what
    was described as delay in claiming asylum.

72. However, it is important  to  remember  that  this  appeal  concerns  a
    protection claim in terms of an asserted risk from the  authorities  in
    Iran where the consequences of anti-government activity can be  severe.
    I should also say that in my appraisal of  the  FtJ's  findings,  I  do
    detect a degree of failure to appreciate, or engage with, the  contents
    of the asylum interview overall.

73. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law  in  his
    assessment of credibility.  The error of law is such as to require  the
    decision to be set aside. Given that the issue of credibility will have
    to be reappraised, I consider that the appropriate course  is  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

74. Although normally speaking on a remittal it  is  appropriate  to  state
    that no findings of fact are to be preserved, I do  not  consider  that
    that should be the case with respect to the FtJ's findings at  [17]  to
    [20], those findings being in favour of the  appellant.  Those  adverse
    credibility points raised by the respondent in the refusal letter  were
    easily disposed of by the FtJ in favour of the appellant, and it  seems
    to me that those matters do not raise anything of substance adverse  to
    the appellant's credibility.  Accordingly, the findings at [17] -  [20]
    in positive terms as to  the  appellant's  credibility  are  to  stand.
    Otherwise, no findings of fact are preserved, regardless of what I have
    said about the lack of merit in some  aspects  of  the  grounds.  There
    needs to be a wholesale reappraisal of the appellant's credibility.

    Decision

75. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.   Its decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge S D Lloyd.  No  findings  of
    fact are preserved except as indicated at [74] above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      26/09/16


