
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04943/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th September 2017                    |On 15th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     N S
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.



 1. The appellant appeals with leave granted by the Court of Appeal against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal on asylum
    grounds against the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  refugee  status,
    humanitarian protection or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant's history is summarised as set out in his core account at
    paragraphs 14 to 16 of the First-tier Tribunal decision and I  note  in
    particular that the appellant says that he become a volunteer assistant
    for the TGTE, which is a banned organisation in the United Kingdom, and
    that he has demonstrated in in the United Kingdom in 2009, 2010,  2011,
    2012, 2013 and 2014  and  involved  himself  in  the  TGTE's  Signature
    Campaign.

 3. The appellant's account is that he was the subject  of  persecution  on
    his return to Sri Lanka in 2014 based on that activity.  He produced  a
    report from Professor Sundaralingam, who  found  eleven  scars  on  the
    appellant's back and upper arms which were Istanbul Protocol consistent
    with being burnt with a heated metal rod more than a year  earlier  and
    therefore potentially in 2014 when the appellant says  he  returned  to
    Sri Lanka.  Professor Sundaralingam found those scars to be  clinically
    diagnostic of the incident but could not of course  state  whether  the
    appellant had requested that they be inflicted.

 4. The First-tier Judge made two  errors  of  law,  the  first  being  his
    finding at [25] that there was no evidence to show that agents  of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities had infiltrated proscribed organisations in  the
    United Kingdom, which is contrary to country  guidance  given  by  this
    Tribunal in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG (Rev 1)  [2013]
    UKUT 319 (IAC).

 5. The second error relates to the Tribunal's erroneous application of its
    negative  credibility  conclusion  to  the  reliability  of   Professor
    Sundaralingam's expert report.  In Mibanga v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367 in the Court of Appeal, Mr  Justice
    Wilson said this at [24]:

         "24. It seems to me to be axiomatic that  a  fact-finder  must  not
         reach his or her  conclusion  before  surveying  all  the  evidence
         relevant thereto. Just as, if I may take a  banal  if  alliterative
         example, one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient,  so  also
         frequently one cannot make a case, in the sense of establishing its
         truth, otherwise than by combination  of  a  number  of  pieces  of
         evidence. ... What the fact-finder does at his peril is to reach  a
         conclusion by reference only to the appellant's evidence and  then,
         if it be negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted
         by the expert evidence. Mr Tam has drawn the court's attention to a
         decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely HE  (DRC  -
         Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321 in which,
         in paragraph 22, it said:

         "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant to
         credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with  it  as  an  integral
         part of the findings on credibility rather than just as an  add-on,
         which  does  not  undermine  the  conclusions  to  which  he  would
         otherwise come.""

    That is precisely the error into which the First-tier Tribunal fell  in
    this appeal.

 6. On the basis of these two errors this determination  cannot  stand  and
    the appeal will be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  remaking
    afresh.  No findings of fact or credibility are to be preserved.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date:         14 September 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

