


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/04365/2015
                                                               AA/04368/2015
                                                               AA/04356/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 25 February 2016                    |On 16 March 2016          |
|Prepared on 26 February 2016           |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    C. A.
                                    A. A.
                                    K. A.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellants entered the UK illegally, and claimed  asylum
           on 25 September 2014, asserting that they were  citizens  of
           the DRC who were under 18 years of age.
        2. Those applications were refused on 26 February 2015, and  in
           consequence removal decisions were made in relation  to  the
           Appellants.  Whilst  the  Respondent   accepted   that   the
           Appellants were citizens of the DRC, she was  not  satisfied
           the Appellants had told the truth about their ages, the date
           upon which they had entered the UK, or, their experiences in
           the DRC. Although their true  names  were  not  specifically
           disputed, the  documents  that  they  had  produced  to  the
           Respondent as their  birth  certificates  were  specifically
           disputed, and the Respondent also noted that A3 maintained a
           Facebook account in a different name to that under which  he
           had claimed asylum.
        3. The Appellants appealed to the Tribunal against the  removal
           decisions and their appeals were heard  on  15  April  2015.
           They were dismissed on all grounds by decision of Judge Cope
           promulgated on 6 July 2015.
        4. The Appellants duly lodged applications with the First  Tier
           Tribunal for permission to appeal, in which they  sought  to
           challenge only the dismissal of  their  Article  8  appeals.
           Permission was granted by Judge Lambert on 3 August 2015.
        5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of 19 August  2015  in
           which she accepted that the Judge had not made reference  to
           the decision of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630. This decision had
           not been promulgated by the date  of  hearing,  but  it  was
           promulgated two months later  on  24  June  2015,  and  thus
           before the Judge had written his decision. Nevertheless  the
           Respondent argued  that  this  did  not  give  rise  to  any
           material error of law because on the facts of these  appeals
           no material error of law arose because the Article 8 appeals
           were bound to be dismissed.
        6. Thus the  matter  comes  before  me.  It  follows  that  the
           decision to dismiss the asylum, Article 3, and  humanitarian
           protection  grounds  of  appeal  is  unchallenged,  and   is
           confirmed.


      The evidence of Ms M & the Appellants
        7. Ms M claimed asylum in March 2004 as a citizen of  the  DRC.
           Her application was refused, and her subsequent  appeal  was
           dismissed by decision of Judge Zucker on the basis that  her
           account of events in the DRC was a complete fabrication. Her
           account had centred upon the  claim  that  her  husband  was
           involved in political activity in the DRC, and that  he  had
           been killed by the authorities as a  result,  and  that  she
           would also face a risk of harm from them  in  the  event  of
           return.
        8. In the course of her asylum application, and her appeal,  Ms
           M gave details of four children of her marriage, who she had
           left behind in the DRC. These were  the  Appellants  and  an
           elder brother I shall refer to as Mr X.  She  gave  specific
           dates of birth for each of them.
        9. In the course of his decision Judge Cope accepted that Ms  M
           was in truth the mother of each of the Appellants,  although
           he made no specific finding  upon  whether  they  had  given
           their true names when claiming asylum.  (The  question  over
           their true identities arose because A3 used a different name
           for his Facebook account, and because all of the  Appellants
           were found to have used a false date of birth.)
       10. The Respondent did not remove Ms M to the  DRC  despite  her
           lack of any immigration status, and the  exhaustion  of  her
           appeal rights, and there was no evidence before  Judge  Cope
           to suggest that she had returned voluntarily to DRC  at  any
           stage. I am told that in due course Ms M was granted ILR  by
           the Respondent under the  "legacy  programme"  and  she  has
           since  naturalised  as  a  British  citizen,   although   no
           documents relating to that process have been  placed  before
           the Tribunal, and one might have expected the pursuit  of  a
           false asylum  claim  based  upon  her  falsehoods  to  count
           against her as regards the character test.
       11. There is no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that  Ms
           M has ever renounced her citizenship of the DRC, or that the
           authorities in the DRC have ever  been  made  aware  of  her
           naturalisation as a British citizen.
       12. Mr Selway accepts before  me,  that  Ms  M  has  never  been
           acknowledged as a refugee from the DRC. He was right  to  do
           so. As Judge Cope identified [117] the claims that were made
           by the Appellants, and Ms M, to him to the contrary  in  the
           course of these appeals were quite simply untrue.
       13. Ms M gave written and oral evidence to Judge  Cope,  as  she
           had  done  to  Judge  Zucker.  Judge  Cope   comprehensively
           rejected her evidence, and declined to revisit or to  remake
           in her favour any of the adverse findings of fact about  her
           evidence that had been made by Judge Zucker in 2005.
       14. Judge Cope make a series of adverse findings of  fact  about
           specific issues raised by the evidence  offered  to  him  by
           both Ms M, and the Appellants. He  plainly  found  all  four
           witnesses to be dishonest, and he rejected as  untrue  their
           accounts of the experiences in  the  DRC  of  the  different
           members  of  their  family  [112-3].  In  my  judgement  the
           following findings of fact were relevant  not  only  to  the
           protection claim, but were also relevant to  the  Article  8
           claims that were made by the Appellants.
       15. The dates of birth that Ms M had originally  given  in  2004
           and 2005 for the Appellants  were  completely  different  to
           those which she  now  said  were  accurate,  and  which  the
           Appellants had each given as their own when they had claimed
           asylum. Thus she originally said A1  was  born  on  13  July
           1994, although it was now said he was born  on  16  November
           1997. She originally said A2 was  born  on  10  April  1995,
           although three other dates of birth had been  given  in  the
           course of his asylum claim, 24 December  1999,  19  December
           1999, and 19 December 1998. She originally said A3 was  born
           on 26 November 1996, although it was now said he was born on
           28 October 2000.
       16. Judge Cope rejected as untrue Ms M's account of how she  had
           "found"  the  birth  certificates  she  asserted  were   the
           Appellants' genuine identity documents [57]. He  noted  that
           the  document  said  to  be  A2's  birth   certificate   was
           inconsistent with any date  of  birth  previously  given  by
           either herself for A2, or by A2 for  himself.  He  concluded
           that all of these documents were unreliable, and he rejected
           the accuracy of the dates of birth recorded upon them  [58].
           Although he did  not  spell  this  out  in  terms  it  is  a
           necessary consequence of his findings, when they are read as
           a whole, that he concluded that these were  false  documents
           advanced dishonestly by Ms M and the Appellants to support a
           false claim that A1 and A2 were children, and  that  A3  was
           younger than seventeen, and  thus  that  all  of  them  were
           entitled to a grant of DLR.
       17. The Judge concluded that each of the Appellants was an adult
           by the date of the hearing [65]. There is  no  challenge  to
           that finding. Nor to his finding that A1 and  A2,  supported
           by Ms M, had each falsely claimed to be under the age of  18
           upon arrival in the UK and when claiming asylum. He went  on
           to find that it was most likely  that  the  dates  of  birth
           given in 2004/2005 were accurate. As to A3 he concluded that
           there had again been a false date of birth given.  The  date
           of birth given in 2004/2005 would, if accurate, mean that he
           was just short of  eighteen  on  the  date  he  had  claimed
           asylum.
       18. It follows that  Judge  Cope  accepted  on  the  balance  of
           probabilities that when Ms M left DRC in 2004, she had  left
           behind A1 when he was ten years old, A2  when  he  was  nine
           years old, and A3 when he  was  eight  years  old.  It  also
           follows that Judge Cope accepted that A1 and  A2  were  over
           eighteen when they claimed  asylum  on  25  September  2014,
           although A3 was then two  months  short  of  his  eighteenth
           birthday.
       19. Judge Cope also rejected the account of when the  Appellants
           had arrived in the UK,  as  inconsistent  with  entries  and
           photographs on the Facebook account of A3 that  showed  that
           A3 was in her company in the UK three  months  earlier  than
           the date for entry that she  and  they  had  given.  He  was
           unable to make a positive finding however as  to  when  they
           did arrive in the UK. Even if the Appellants had entered the
           UK in March 2014 rather than June 2014, it would still  have
           meant that A1 and A2 were over eighteen  when  they  entered
           the UK, although A3 was not.
       20. Judge Cope also rejected  the  claim  that  the  Appellants'
           elder brother, Mr  X,  had  disappeared.  He  accepted  that
           entries on the Facebook account of A3 showed that A3 was  in
           contact with Mr X [91-5]. It followed that  both  Ms  M  and
           each of the Appellants were always in contact with Mr X.
       21. Judge  Cope  also  rejected  as  fabrication  the  following
           claims;
              i) that any member of the family with whom the  Appellants
                 had lived since 2004 had been politically active,
             ii) that any member of the family with whom the  Appellants
                 had lived in DRC since 2004 had  come  to  the  adverse
                 attention of the authorities,
            iii) that the Appellants had been required to live in hiding
                 from the authorities at any stage, and,
             iv) that  the  authorities  in  the  DRC  had  any  adverse
                 interest in either the Appellants, any member of  their
                 own family, or, any member of the family with whom they
                 had lived since 2004.
       22. Thus Judge Zucker's finding that the husband of  Ms  M,  and
           the father  of  the  Appellants,  had  not  been  killed  as
           claimed, was confirmed. No finding was ever made  by  either
           Judge to the effect that this individual had died later,  or
           in some other circumstances. Although  Judge  Cope  did  not
           spell this out in terms, it followed that the only  sensible
           inferences that could be drawn were that the father  of  the
           Appellants was still alive, and living in the DRC, and  that
           the Appellants had always been in contact with him.
       23. Moreover the claim that the Appellants' elder brother  Mr  X
           had disappeared was rejected by Judge  Cope  as  untrue.  It
           was, as he noted, plainly inconsistent with the  entries  on
           the Facebook account of A3. Again, although Judge  Cope  did
           not spell this out in  terms,  it  followed  that  the  only
           sensible inferences that could be drawn were that he too was
           alive and living in the DRC, and  that  the  Appellants  had
           always been in contact with him.


      The Article 8 decision
       24. This then was  the  context  in  which  Judge  Cope  had  to
           approach the  Article  8  appeals  of  the  Appellants.  The
           Appellants were all by the date of the hearing adults.  They
           had entered the UK illegally, and they had then relied  upon
           false dates of birth, and false identity documents (the  so-
           called birth certificates) when making claims to asylum that
           were based upon a series of falsehoods about their  family's
           circumstances, and their own lives in DRC. They had in  fact
           lived in the DRC in safety all of their life, despite  being
           abandoned by their mother as children in 2004. They had both
           a father, and an elder brother to return to in the DRC,  and
           they could return to that country in safety. By the date  of
           the hearing they would all do so as adults. It  was  a  very
           short step to infer (and as set out  above  I  am  satisfied
           when the decision is read as a  whole  that  the  Judge  did
           infer) that whilst living in  the  DRC  the  Appellants  had
           always been in contact with  both  their  father  and  their
           elder brother, and that they had always  retained  a  family
           relationship with them both.
       25. At the date of the hearing,  although  ironically  they  had
           denied it, the result of Judge Cope's findings was that  the
           Appellants had been in the UK for a little over a year. They
           had lived with their mother Ms  M  throughout,  and  in  the
           course of that year A3 had also become an adult.
       26. Judge Cope was not satisfied  that  "family  life"  for  the
           purposes of Article 8 existed at the  date  of  the  hearing
           between the Appellants on the one hand, and their mother, Ms
           M, on the other [142]. He accepted that  they  must  have  a
           family relationship together as adult brothers living in the
           same house as their mother [143], but he sought  to  draw  a
           qualitative  difference  between  that,  and  the  test  for
           "family life" for the purposes  of  Article  8.  He  did  so
           because he was not satisfied that either of  the  Appellants
           had demonstrated the existence at the date of the hearing of
           additional ties of dependency or support over and above  the
           normal relationship between  an  adult  children  and  their
           parent [147].
       27. Judge Cope reached a similar conclusion in relation  to  the
           relationships between the Appellants as adult siblings [149]
           although as he noted, since they each faced removal to  DRC,
           their removal together could not  affect  their  ability  to
           pursue their relationships as siblings together [150].
       28. Thus Judge Cope's conclusion was that the Article  8  rights
           of the Appellants and Ms M were not engaged by  the  removal
           decisions. He did not go on to consider the  proportionality
           of those  removals  in  the  alternative  event  that  their
           Article 8 rights were engaged.


      Error of Law?
       29. Although the grounds of appeal suggested a broad attack  was
           to be advanced upon  "all  of  the  material  findings  with
           regard to the Article 8 appeal" that  approach  was  clearly
           never open to the Appellants. The argument that was actually
           advanced by Mr Selway was much more narrow.
       30. The grounds of appeal raise no suggestion that either of the
           Appellants had established by the  date  of  the  hearing  a
           "private life" that was sufficient either to engage  Article
           8,  or  to  render   either   of   the   removal   decisions
           disproportionate, and it was not argued before me  that  the
           evidence that was  before  Judge  Cope  meant  he  made  any
           material error of law in failing to reach such a conclusion.
           I note that none of the witness statements had  offered  any
           detail of how the Appellants spent their  time  since  their
           arrival in the UK.
       31. It was not argued before me that there was any error in  the
           conclusion that even if the Appellants as adult siblings had
           at the date of the hearing  established  that  their  inter-
           sibling  relationships  constituted  "family  life",   their
           removal together would not engage their  Article  8  rights,
           because their removal would not interfere with their ability
           to pursue those relationships as  adult  siblings  with  one
           another in the DRC.
       32. Indeed, as Mr Selway acknowledged before me, the  Article  8
           appeals were only ever argued on the basis that the  removal
           of  the  Appellants  to   the   DRC   would   constitute   a
           disproportionate  interference  in  the   ability   of   the
           Appellants to pursue their relationships as  adult  children
           with Ms M their  mother,  which  parent/child  relationships
           amounted to "family life".
       33. Thus it was accepted  before  me  that  the  only  challenge
           pursued was to the approach  that  had  been  taken  to  the
           evidence relied upon  in  support  of  the  claim  that  the
           Appellants had established by the  date  of  the  hearing  a
           "family life" with  their  mother  that  was  sufficient  to
           engage Article 8, and/or, to render  the  removal  decisions
           disproportionate.  As   argued,   this   amounted   to   the
           deceptively simple  complaint  that,  despite  an  extremely
           lengthy  decision,  Judge  Cope  had  failed  to  apply  the
           approach of the Court of Appeal in  Singh  to  the  evidence
           before him.
       34. Broken down I understand the limbs of this argument to be;
                 i) that the decision did not demonstrate any  reference
                 to the decision in Singh, or, to the principles set out
                 therein, and,
                 ii) that as a matter of law it was enough  to  found  a
                 "family life" of  sufficient  quality  both  to  engage
                 Article   8,    and    to    render    their    removal
                 disproportionate,  for  the  Appellants  to   establish
                 merely that they were  living  in  the  home  of  their
                 mother as young adults at the date of the hearing.
       35. The second limb is  based  upon  the  following  passage  in
           Singh;
           24.   ......In  the  case  of  adults,  in  the  context  of
           immigration  control,  there  is   no   legal   or   factual
           presumption as to the existence or absence of  family   life
           for the purposes of Article 8. I point out that the approach
           of the ECHR cited approvingly in Kugathas  did  not  include
           any requirement of exceptionality. It  all  depends  on  the
           facts. The love and  affection  between  an  adult  and  his
           parents or siblings will not of itself justify a finding  of
           a family life. There has to be something more. A young adult
           living with his parents or siblings  will  normally  have  a
           family life  to  be  respected  under  Article  8.  A  child
           enjoying a family life with his parents  does  not  suddenly
           cease to have a family life at midnight as he turns 18 years
           of  age.  On  the  other  hand,   a   young   adult   living
           independently of his parents may well not have a family life
           for the purposes of Article 8. [emphasis added]
       36. Mr  Selway's  argument  focused  simply  upon  the  sentence
           emphasised. He went so far as to assert that as a result the
           Court of Appeal in Singh had  disapproved  of  the  Kugathas
           approach, and had established a new  test,  because  in  the
           case of a young adult living with his parents there was  now
           a presumption that "family life" existed. I  regret  to  say
           that  I  consider  this  assertion  ill  founded,  since  it
           conveniently ignores the  context  in  which  this  sentence
           appears and the clear statement to the contrary  with  which
           the  paragraph  he  has  focused  upon  commences.  Kugathas
           remains in my judgement good law.


      Conclusions
       37. It is common ground that in the course of his decision Judge
           Cope made no reference to the Court of  Appeal  decision  in
           Singh. The decision in Singh had not been available  at  the
           date of the hearing, although it had been promulgated by the
           date of his decision. The mere lack of a direct reference to
           Singh is not however of itself an error  of  law.  The  real
           issue is whether the substance of Judge Cope's  decision  is
           consistent with the statement  of  principles  to  be  found
           therein.
       38. I accept that Judge Cope did treat each of the Appellants as
           being in the same  position  concerning  their  relationship
           with Ms M. He was, in my judgement, arguably wrong  to  take
           such a course, given his own findings of fact  as  to  their
           ages. The law required a more nuanced approach, even if  the
           analysis of the evidence overall would  lead  ultimately  to
           the same conclusion.
       39. A de facto "family life" for Article 8  purposes  between  a
           mother and child is traditionally accepted as being  created
           upon the birth of  that  child,  even  if  it  is  perfectly
           possible  for  that  "family  life"  to  cease,  or  to   be
           diminished to extinction, subsequently.
       40. The evidence relied upon by the Appellants was that they had
           enjoyed no contact with Ms M between her departure  in  2004
           and  their  unexpected  appearance  upon  her  doorstep   in
           Newcastle in 2014. The explanation offered by Ms M  for  her
           departure from the DRC, and their own explanations for their
           departure from the DRC were all rejected by the Tribunal  as
           untrue.  There  was  therefore   no   credible   explanation
           available for why Ms M had abandoned her children in the DRC
           in 2004. In these circumstances  I  am  not  satisfied  that
           there was any viable alternative to the conclusion that long
           before 2014 any "family life" created between Ms M and  each
           of  the  Appellants  upon  their  birth  had  either  ceased
           altogether, or, had diminished in quality to the point  that
           it was no longer sufficient to engage Article 8.
       41. That being so, there was no evidence that would have allowed
           Judge Cope to distinguish between the positions of  A1,  and
           A2, as adults who had arrived in the UK without an  existing
           "family life" with Ms M, at the  point  at  which  they  had
           taken up residence in her home in Newcastle.
       42. What then was the result of their doing so? No evidence  was
           offered by  any  witness  to  suggest  that  one  enjoyed  a
           different relationship to  Ms  M  to  the  other.  Moreover,
           having reviewed the evidence relied upon  it  is  noteworthy
           that no evidence was offered to  explain  the  relationships
           the Appellants had then formed with Ms M, or she with them.
       43. In those circumstances there was no evidence that would have
           permitted the conclusion that the relationships formed  when
           A1 and A2 did move into the home of Ms M in the UK as adults
           in 2014 had the necessary  qualities  by  the  date  of  the
           hearing in April  2015  to  constitute  "family  life".  The
           finding made by Judge Cope that their relationship  did  not
           have the requisite additional ties of dependency or  support
           to do so was the only one open to him on the  evidence,  and
           in my judgement it must stand. There was in my judgement  no
           viable alternative finding.
       44. The only basis upon which a distinction could have been made
           between the positions of A1 and A2 arriving into the home of
           Ms M in 2014 as her adult children on the one hand, and that
           of A3 on the other hand, was that Judge Cope  had  concluded
           that A3 was seventeen and a half years old  at  that  point.
           That  distinction  was  not  made.  However  the   available
           reliable evidence fell well short of demonstrating that  the
           consequence of making that distinction, was that by the date
           of the hearing A3 enjoyed a "family life"  with  Ms  M.  The
           finding made by Judge Cope that their relationship  did  not
           have the requisite additional ties of dependency or  support
           at the date of the hearing was therefore well open to him on
           the evidence and in my judgement it too must stand.
       45. Those conclusions are in my judgement fatal to the appeal. I
           would however observe that even if Judge  Cope  were  wrong,
           and on these facts "family life" between the  Appellants  as
           adult children and Ms  M  did  exist  at  the  date  of  the
           hearing, the evidence fell well short of demonstrating  that
           the decisions to remove  the  Appellants  from  the  UK  was
           disproportionate.
       46. Even if "family life" had  been  created,  or  had  resumed,
           between A3 and Ms M  upon  his  becoming  a  member  of  her
           household in 2014, when he was seventeen  and  a  half,  the
           evidence placed before the Tribunal failed to establish that
           it had any particular quality  or  strength.  There  was  no
           evidence of any particular emotional ties, or reliance by A3
           upon Ms M. His witness statement was not  only  silent  upon
           the question of how he spent his time, but silent  upon  the
           nature of the relationship he had with her.  Thus  the  mere
           fact that he remained a member of her  household  after  his
           eighteenth birthday  on  18  November  2014  was  of  little
           consequence. This was not the situation that  the  Court  of
           Appeal had discussed in Singh of a child who had  lived  all
           of their life with their parents, and had  then  remained  a
           member of their household as a young adult. Whilst  none  of
           the jurisprudence suggests  that  the  mere  fact  that  his
           mother had lived in the UK  for  the  preceding  ten  years,
           whilst A3 remained in the DRC, was sufficient to prevent the
           re-creation of "family life", the  evidence  fell  short  of
           establishing that the relationship that had been created  in
           the UK had the necessary strength and quality to render  the
           removal decision disproportionate.
       47. Moreover it would be  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the
           proportionality  of  the  removal  to  recognise  that   the
           Appellants had entered illegally,  had  failed  to  seek  to
           regularise  their  position  upon  arrival,  and  had   then
           actively pursued as adults an attempt to  deceive  both  the
           Respondent and in due course the Tribunal, as to their  true
           ages, and their circumstances in the DRC. None of  them  was
           ever a "qualifying child" for the purposes of s117A-D of the
           2002  Act.  They  were  neither  fluent  in   English,   nor
           financially self sufficient. They could all return in safety
           to the DRC, where they would be re-united with their  father
           and  elder  brother,  resuming  the  lifestyles   they   had
           abandoned in 2014. Indeed the rational  inference  was  that
           they would return to whatever shelter and support  they  had
           previously enjoyed. It was also clearly  perfectly  possible
           for Ms M to visit them there in  safety,  even  if  she  had
           somehow lost her DRC nationality since 2004. She  had  never
           been recognised as a refugee. If she had  in  fact  retained
           her DRC citizenship she could visit as often as she  wished,
           or settle there, without any visa requirements.
       48. Thus, looking at the matter in the round, I am not persuaded
           that the Tribunal if properly directed, could properly  have
           reached the conclusion that the removal  of  either  of  the
           Appellants was disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  public
           interest in maintaining effective immigration  controls;  AM
           (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260. Accordingly, for the reasons
           set out above I am not satisfied that the approach taken  by
           the Judge to the evidence in  the  course  of  his  decision
           discloses an error of law that requires that decision to  be
           set aside and remade. If I were  to  remake  the  Article  8
           decisions upon the evidence that was before Judge Cope I  am
           satisfied that I would be bound to dismiss them.



   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated
      on 6 July 2015 contains no error of law in the decision to dismiss
      the Appellants' Article 8 appeals which requires that decision  to
      be set aside and remade. It is accordingly confirmed.



   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 February 2016


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal directs  otherwise  the  Appellants
      are granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No  report  of
      these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them. This
      direction applies both to the Appellants and  to  the  Respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  proceedings
      being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 February 2016



