
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04427/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     P Y
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah (Counsel) instructed by Vine Court
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart promulgated on 29 October 2015, which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 18 August 1952 and is a national  of  China.
On 2 March 2015 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application
for Asylum.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 18 November 2015 Judge  Cox  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia
    "... The Judge clearly formed a jaundiced view of A,  finding  at  [72]
    that the only  consistency  in  his  case  was  that  "he  takes  every
    opportunity  to  try  to  bring  himself  to  the  attention   of   the
    authorities" as a practitioner of Falun Gong. She may or may  not  have
    been correct in that assessment but in this essentially sur place claim
    it is the perceived profile of A rather than his intention that counts.
    I therefore conclude that grounds 4 and 5 are arguable, to which may be
    added 3 as it is somewhat linked. Grounds 1 & 2 have essentially to  do
    with lack of adequate reasons for findings. They may be weaker but I do
    not exclude them at this stage"

The Hearing

6.    (a)   Miss Appiah, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal  and
told me that at [74] the Judge was wrong to find that a  significant  amount
of the materials produced by the appellant to  support  his  claim  postdate
his asylum interview. She  drew  my  attention  to  witness  statements  and
photographs  contained  in  the  respondent's  bundle  which   predate   the
interview, and argued that the conflict created  by  what  is  said  by  the
Judge at [74] indicates that the Judge did  not  take  account  of  evidence
which goes directly to the core of the appellant's claim.

    (b)    Ms Appiah challenged the Judge's credibility  findings  at  [71]
and argued that the Judge's finding that  the  appellant's  history  of  the
practice of Falun Gong in China is irrelevant, because this is a  sur  place
claim.  She  was  critical  of  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  background
information relied on by the appellant at [80] of the decision,  and  argued
that the Judge has failed to consider the guidance given in YB  (Eritrea)  v
SSHD [2008] ECA Civ 360. She argued  that  [there]  was  a  wealth  evidence
placed before  the  Judge  from  which  the  Judge  should  have  drawn  the
conclusion that the Chinese authorities have an adverse  interest  in  Falun
Gong practitioners in the UK.

    (c)    Miss Appiah argued that the Judge failed to take account of  the
risk on return created by the  appellant's  dedication  to  the  Falun  Gong
movement in the UK. She told me that although  the  Judge  found  (at  [74])
that the appellant's account at  asylum  interview  was  "vague  and  lacked
detail", the evidence presented to the Judge  indicated  the  contrary;  and
that although the Judge refers to major inconsistencies in  the  appellant's
evidence, the Judge does not give adequate reasons for  finding  that  there
are major inconsistencies; that the finding of the Judge at  [82]  that  the
appellant is not a genuine follower of Falun Gong is  without  support  from
the evidence placed before the Judge.

7.    (a)   For the respondent, Ms Fijiwala opposed the appeal. She told  me
that at [74]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  is  clearly  stating  that  the
appellant's performance at asylum interview with vague  and  lacked  detail,
and that the Judge went on to  consider  other  evidence  elsewhere  in  the
decision. She referred me to [73] to [76] and told me that that was  careful
exegesis of the evidence placed before the Judge, which  led  the  Judge  to
the conclusion that the appellant was not a credible witness.

    (b)    Ms Fijiwala told me that, when read as  a  whole,  the  decision
sets  out  reasons  for  the  Judge's   finding   that   there   are   major
inconsistencies in the totality of evidence placed before the  Judge  -  and
referred me to [28] to  [36]  where  there  is  a  discussion  of  the  oral
evidence heard by the Judge.

    (c)    Ms Fijiwala conceded that the Judge has not  cited  YB  Eritrea,
but argued that the  Judge  has  considered  the  correct  case  law,  taken
guidance therefrom and then applied the principles set out  in  both  Danian
and  YB  Eritrea.  She  told  me  that  the  Judge  acknowledged  that   the
appellant's claim was a sur place claim, and told  me  that  the  Judge  had
considered the appellant's activities in the UK in the correct context.  She
told  me  that  at  [18]  the  Judge  correctly  considers  the   background
materials; and told me that the decision does not  contain  errors  material
or otherwise. She urged me to dismiss the appeal and to allow  the  decision
to stand.

Analysis

8.    At [82], after taking guidance in the case of Danian  [2000]  IAR  96,
the Judge says "I find that the appellant  is  not  a  genuine  adherent  to
Falun Gong. There is no objective evidence to support  his  claim  that  his
sur place activities in the United Kingdom places him at risk on  return  in
China."

9.    Between [20] and [66] the Judge sets out the evidence that  she  heard
from the appellant his wife and six witnesses. Between  [67]  and  [82]  the
Judge sets out findings after identifying the risk categories set out in  LL
(China) CG [2005] UKIAT 00122. At [71] the  Judge  rejects  the  appellant's
claim to have practised Falun Gong in China but appears to accept that,  for
his own disingenuous reasons, the appellant  has  created  a  profile  of  a
Falun Gong practitioner in the UK. The last two  sentences  of  71  say  "in
that regard the appellant has I find sought to create a considerable  public
profile and for the reasons that follow, I find  the  appellant  not  to  be
credible. I find that his activities have been self-serving  with  the  sole
motivation being to bolster his claim."

10.   For the  reasons  given  by  the  Judge,  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant is a bogus Falun Gong practitioner in the UK, but  finds  that  he
participates in a vigil outside the Chinese embassy,  that  he  (along  with
others) handed in a petition to Downing  Street,  that  several  times  each
week he distributes leaflets in Chinatown, and at  least  twice  a  week  he
participates in a public "truth telling" demonstration.

11.   In Danian v SSHD [2002] IMM AR 96 the Court of Appeal said that  there
is no express limitation in the Convention in relation to persons acting  in
bad faith, despite Counsel's attempt in Danian to have one implied.  In  the
court's opinion the answer to the 'riddle' lay in the judgement of Millet  J
in Mbanza (1996) Imm AR 136. Millet J said "The solution  does  not  lie  in
propounding some broad principle of abuse of the  system....but  in  bearing
in mind the cardinal principle that it is for the applicant to  satisfy  the
SSHD that he has a  well  founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
reason.  Whether he can do so  will  largely  turn  on  credibility  and  an
applicant who has put forward a fraudulent and baseless claim for asylum  is
unlikely to have much credibility left."  The court  referred  to  a  letter
from the UNHCR which stated  that  regard  should  be  had  to  whether  the
person's actions had actually come to the notice of the authorities  in  his
home country and how they would view  such  actions.   It  does  not  matter
whether an appellant has cynically sought to enhance  his  asylum  prospects
by creating the very risk he then seeks to rely on, although  bad  faith  is
relevant when evaluating the merits/credibility of the claim,  as  explained
in Danian.  However, as Bingham J also said in Danian - the actual fear  has
to be shown to be genuine and not  one  that  was  manufactured  by  conduct
designed to give plausibility.

12.   In YB (Eritrea) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360  the  Court  of  Appeal
sounded a note of caution in relation to the argument that, if an  appellant
was found to have been  opportunistic  in  his  sur  place  activities,  his
credibility was in consequence low.  Credibility about what, said the  Court
of Appeal.  If he had already been  believed  ex  hypothesi  about  his  sur
place activity, his motives might be disbelieved, but  the  consequent  risk
on  return  from  his  activity  sur  place  was  essentially  an  objective
question.

13.   In this case, the Judge did not find the appellant to  be  a  credible
witness, and found the appellant to be a man who is cynically  exploiting  a
profile which he has disingenuously created, but that is not the  test.  The
test is whether or not the appellant's activities are known to  the  Chinese
authorities, and whether that  knowledge  creates  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution.

14.   At [70] the Judge quotes from the conclusion of the  respondent's  own
operational guidance note on China. "Credible Falun Gong  practitioners  who
have come to the attention of  the  authorities  are  likely  to  face  ill-
treatment amounting to persecution in China."

15.   At [80] the Judge finds "there is no  objective  evidence  of  Chinese
authorities monitoring Chinese citizens who practice Falun Gong  outside  of
China", but the Judge appears to accept  the  evidence  that  the  appellant
participates in a vigil demonstration outside the Chinese Embassy in  London
three days a week. The Judge does not explain why the conclusion is  reached
that the Chinese authorities are not aware of the appellant when  he  stands
outside the embassy in London three days a week, publicly declaring that  he
is an active Falun Gong practitioner  seeking  to  recruit  others  to  that
movement.

16.   The fact that the Judge found the appellant  to  be  opportunistic  in
his sur place activities is not determinative of this appeal,  although  the
judge found it to be so. The decision therefore contains  a  material  error
of law and must be set aside. There is  sufficient  material  before  me  to
enable me to substitute my own decision.

17.   The Judge's unchallenged findings of fact indicate that the  appellant
associates with  Falun  Gong  practitioners  in  London.  That  he  publicly
practices Falun Gong practically every day  and  that  he  has  deliberately
brought  himself  to  the  attention   of   the   Chinese   authorities   by
participating in a  visible  and  obvious  Falun  Gong  ritual  outside  the
Chinese Embassy in London three days a week.

18.   The appellant is not therefore a person who practices  following  Gong
in private and with discretion. In LL (China) CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00122   the
Tribunal found that if there was a real risk of  persecutory  ill  treatment
by reason of Falun Gong activities on the facts of a  case,  then  it  would
properly be held to be a  reason  of  imputed  political  opinion  and  thus
engage a 1951 Convention reason  as  well  as  Article  3  ECHR.   That  was
because there was considerable evidence that the Chinese government  imputed
political opinion to practitioners of Falun Gong and of the  extent  of  its
hostility towards them.  The  Tribunal  said  that  absent  special  factors
there would not normally be any risk sufficient to amount  to  a  real  risk
from the Chinese authorities for  a  person  who  practiced  Falun  Gong  in
private  and  with  discretion.   Nonetheless  the  risk  of  material   ill
treatment escalated significantly when a practitioner engaged in  activities
that were reasonably likely to bring him to the notice of  the  authorities,
such as the public practice of Falun  Gong  exercises,  recruitment  of  new
members and dissemination of Falun Gong information.   In  LW(China)  [2012]
EWCA Civ 519 the Court of Appeal held that it was open to  the  Tribunal  on
the information available to follow LL (China) CG [2005] UKIAT 00122.

19.   The appellant quite clearly falls within the risk category  identified
in LL and so is at risk of escalating ill-treatment.  The  respondent's  own
operational guidance note indicates that a Falun Gong practitioner  who  has
come to the attention of the authorities is  likely  to  face  ill-treatment
amounting to persecution in China.

20.   What is determinative of this case is the profile  which  the  Chinese
authorities are  likely  to  attribute  to  the  appellant.  The  weight  of
evidence  indicates  that  the  appellant  will  be  seen   as   an   ardent
proselytising Falun Gong member. The risk categories identified in  LL  (and
the respondent's own operational guidance note)  indicate  that  rightly  or
wrongly the appellant has created a profile which  places  him  at  risk  on
return to China. The appellant therefore discharges the  burden  of  proving
that he has a well-founded fear of persecution.

21.   The decision  does  not  contain  a  consideration  of  ECHR,  and  no
submissions made to me under the 1950 convention.

22.   The appeal is allowed in asylum grounds only.

Decision

23.   There is a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal. I therefore set that decision aside

24.   I substitute the following decision.

25.   The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Signed      Date 8 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

