
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04078/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 October 2014                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     E m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, E M, was born in 1972 and is a male citizen of  Eritrea.
    The appellant left Eritrea in October 2008 and travelled to the  United
    Kingdom via Sudan, arriving in February 2009.  Shortly  after  arrival,
    he claimed asylum, his application was refused,  though  the  appellant
    was granted two more periods  of  further  leave  to  remain  the  last
    terminating on 29 November 2014.  The appellant appeals  under  Section
    83 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  against  the
    rejection of his asylum claim.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock)
    in a determination  dated  1  August  2014  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals  against  that  decision,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State rejected the appellant's asylum claim  primarily
    because she considered that he was excluded under  Article  1F  because
    there were "serious reasons to consider the appellant's guilty  conduct
    that amounts  to  a  serious  non-political  offence".   Judge  Turnock
    followed the guidance provided in AH (Article 1F(b) - "serious" Algeria
    [2013] UKUT 00382 (IAC):


    In considering exclusion under Article 1F(b), the test is whether there
    are 'serious reasons to  consider  that  the  appellant  is  guilty  of
    conduct that amounts to a serious non-political offence'.  'Serious' in
    this context has an autonomous international meaning and is not  to  be
    defined purely by national law or the length of the sentence.  Guidance
    on the meaning of 'serious' in relation to Article 1F(c) may  be  found
    in the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Al-Sirri  and  another  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 54 at  paragraph
    [75].  Arts 1F(a) and (c) serve to illustrate the level of  seriousness
    required to engage Article 1F(b); the genus  of  seriousness  is  at  a
    common level throughout.

2.             A  claimant's  personal  participation  in  acts  leading  to
    exclusion under Article 1F(b) must be established to the ordinary civil
    standard of proof, that the material facts are more probable than  not.
    The appellant's guilt need not be  proved  to  the  criminal  standard.
    Personal participation in a conspiracy to  promote  terrorist  violence
    can be a 'serious crime' for the purpose of Article  1F(b).  Where  the
    personal  acts  of  participation  by  a  claimant  take  the  form  of
    assistance to others who are planning violent crimes, the nature of the
    acts thereby supported can be taken into account.  The  relevant  crime
    may be an agreement to commit the  criminal  acts  (in  English  law  a
    conspiracy), rather than a choate crime.

3.             In the absence of some strikingly unfair  procedural  defect,
    United Kingdom courts and tribunals should accord a significant  degree
    of respect to the decision of senior sister Courts  in  European  Union
    legal systems; there is a particular degree of  mutual  confidence  and
    trust between legal systems that form part  of  the  same  legal  order
    within the European Union.  However, the ultimate question  of  whether
    the conduct of which the United Kingdom court or Tribunal is  satisfied
    is sufficiently serious to  justify  exclusion  is  a  matter  for  the
    national court or tribunal.

4.           The examination of  seriousness  should  be  directed  at  the
    criminal  acts  when  they  were  committed,  although  events  in  the
    supervening passage of time may be relevant  to  whether  exclusion  is
    justified: a formal pardon, or subsequent  acquittal,  or  other  event
    illuminating the nature  of  the  activity  may  be  relevant  to  this
    assessment.  Despite  suggestions  to   the   contrary   by   respected
    commentators, it does not appear to be the case  that  service  of  the
    sentence, or indeed a final acquittal, brings the  application  of  the
    exclusion clause to an end.




 3. The grounds of appeal record that  Judge  Turnock  made  the  following
    findings of fact: (i) the appellant was conscripted into  the  Eritrean
    Army; (ii) the appellant was a platoon leader  who  had  responsibility
    for prisoners as head guard; (iii) torture is used as a  standard  form
    of  military  punishment  against  prisoners   and   National   Service
    conscripts; (iv)  the  appellant  had  "significant  autonomy"  in  his
    treatment of prisoners under his control.  The grounds take issue  with
    this latter finding on the basis that it is  not  consistent  with  the
    judge's finding that  the  appellant  had  been  conscripted  into  the
    Eritrean Army.  The position of "platoon leader" had been allocated  to
    him.  The appellant had no choice of the role in the army to  which  he
    would be allocated.  The judge had failed to take into account the fact
    that the role of "platoon  leader"  did  not  have  any  military  rank
    associated with  it.   Relying  on  MT  (Article  1F(a)  -  aiding  and
    abetting) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 15 (IAC), the appellant asserts that  he
    had no moral choice but to carry out acts of violence against prisoners
    because he was acting under duress.

 4. In her oral submissions, Ms Khan, for the appellant, told me  that  the
    evidence showed that "platoon leader" was the lowest rank of  authority
    within the Eritrean Army.  Even when the appellant had not been in  the
    presence of a commanding officer, the influence of senior authority  in
    the army and the fear of punishment should he  not  act  in  accordance
    with the wishes of that authority  would  have  led  to  the  appellant
    committing acts of violence against detainees in circumstances where he
    had not received direct orders to do so.

 5. Ms Khan referred me at length  to  the  appellant's  interview  record.
    That record had also been analysed  in  considerable  detail  by  Judge
    Turnock at [44] et seq.  The judge found that, subsequent to the asylum
    interview, the appellant had arguably sought to play down his authority
    and role within his platoon.  He had, for example, stated in  interview
    [150] that if a prisoner had been "non-compliant"  then  the  appellant
    would have struck him.  Asked [151] whether he had ever  hit  prisoners
    without permission of the head of company, the  appellant  had  replied
    "you're not allowed but there are exceptional circumstances if  someone
    is agitated and becomes violent when the head  of  company  is  out  of
    reach  you  have  to  beat  them".   The  appellant  claims  that   the
    interpreter at his asylum interview had failed to translate his answers
    accurately.  The appellant had also described  a  punishment  known  as
    "Otto" in which a prisoner's arms and legs were tied  behind  his  back
    and he was placed on the floor.  In interview,  the  appellant  claimed
    [146-147] that he had used this technique  against  prisoners.   Before
    the First-tier Tribunal [50], the appellant  said  that  he  was  never
    asked whether he had used this technique.

 6.  Judge  Turnock   had   [152]   found   the   appellant's   explanation
    (poor/inaccurate interpretation) was not  credible.   He  gave,  in  my
    opinion, entirely adequate reasons for  rejecting  credibility  of  the
    appellant's explanation.  The appellant had  been  accompanied  at  the
    interview by a solicitor and  had  been  provided  with  notes  of  the
    interview.  The appellant accepted that he had not taken issue with the
    content of the interviews at the time but claimed that he had  realised
    that the record contained mistakes.  It was open to the judge to reject
    that explanation as incredible.  Likewise, the appellant's denial  that
    the "Otto" technique had been referred to  in  the  interview  was  not
    credible given  the  frequency  with  which  that  technique  has  been
    referred to in the interview record.  The judge  found  [53]  that  the
    appellant was in a position of authority and significant autonomy.   He
    accepted that the appellant was a conscript as  he  claimed  but  that,
    having been conscripted, he had chosen to assault prisoners  under  his
    control including at times when he had not  been  in  the  presence  of
    senior officers or acting under duress.  At [57] the judge found:

         I did not accept his evidence that he  was  not  permitted  to  hit
         prisoners without the permission of the head of company  given  the
         authority, which was vested in  him  as  platoon  leader  and  head
         guard.  Moreover the evidence of the appellant at the  hearing  was
         that the company head was not always present  at  the  prison.   In
         those circumstances  the  appellant  would  be  in  a  position  of
         significant authority.

    The judge went on [58] to find that "the appellant was acting under his
    own authority when using the "Otto" technique  on  prisoners,  was  not
    acting under duress or in response to superior orders but rather of his
    own volition".

 7. Judge  Turnock  had  the  opportunity  and  advantage  of  hearing  the
    appellant give oral evidence.  I am satisfied that  he  has  considered
    all the evidence in this appeal  very  carefully  before  reaching  his
    conclusion.  I find that there is  no  contradiction  (as  the  grounds
    assert) between the judge finding that the appellant was a conscript to
    the Eritrean Army who chose to act violently  towards  prisoners  under
    his control as a "platoon leader" and that  there  had  been  occasions
    when he had done so when he had not been acting the  direct  orders  of
    superior officers or whilst under duress.  The judge  has  given  clear
    reasons why he has accepted the appellant's claim to be a conscript  to
    the army whilst, at the same time, rejecting  his  attempts  to  resile
    from the answers he gave at the asylum interview.   There  is,  in  any
    event, no reason to suppose that a conscript to an army  cannot  behave
    with unnecessary or gratuitous brutality towards others  whilst  acting
    in a role of authority that he or she has not chosen  to  occupy.   The
    findings which the judge made were open to him on the evidence and I do
    not find that he has erred in law either for the reasons stated in  the
    grounds of appeal or at all.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 10 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

