
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04118/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR ASB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mrs N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:   Mr K Gayle, instructed by Mansouri and Son Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  on  asylum  grounds  the  claimant's
    appeal against her decision to set removal directions  to  Afghanistan,
    the claimant's country of origin, after refusing  him  refugee  status,
    humanitarian protection or leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal, first  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    "may have failed to give the due care and attention required  in  order
    to deal with the facts of this case and if he had done so may well have
    reached a different conclusion", and second, that  internal  relocation
    to Kabul and  sufficiency  of  protection  there  had  not  been  fully
    considered.

Internal relocation

 3. The Secretary of State contends that the judge failed to  deal  'fully'
    with  possible  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  and   sufficiency   of
    protection there.  No case law is expressly relied upon but  the  judge
    self-directed  that  the  relevant  case  is  LQ  (Afghanistan)  -  see
    paragraph 7 of the decision.

 4. The second  ground  does  not  explain  why  his  decision  is  legally
    erroneous having regard to the guidance given in that decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal.  There is no merit in the  internal  relocation  ground
    and, although not expressly abandoned, it was  not  pursued  before  me
    with any enthusiasm.

Judge's care and attention at the hearing

 5. In relation to the due care and  attention  ground,  the  Secretary  of
    State seeks to rely on a comment by the  claimant's  representative  to
    the Home Office Presenting Officer  at  the  end  of  the  hearing,  as
    follows:

         '1.  It is respectfully submitted that at the end of  the  hearing,
         the [claimant's representative] asked the Presenting Officer if she
         had noticed that the Judge sleeping during  his  submissions.   The
         Presenting Officer responded by saying she had not seen  this,  but
         she had noticed the Judge was not taking many notes  during  either
         sets of submissions. (Please see Presenting Officer's minute of the
         hearing attached, under the heading 'Procedural')."

    That is an odd position for the Secretary of State to have  taken:   in
    effect, she complains that her own representative did not  notice,  but
    the  successful  party  did,  that  during   the   successful   party's
    submissions the Judge was not taking  many  notes  and  may  have  been
    asleep.  Despite this lack of attention (if that is what it  was),  the
    claimant's appeal succeeded.

 6. The Secretary of State relied upon the Upper Tribunal's guidance in  KD
    (inattentive judges) Afghanistan [2010] UKUT 261  (IAC),  although  Mrs
    Willocks-Briscoe did not bring a copy to the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.
    The judicial headnote in KD, which Mr Gayle was able to find  and  read
    to me at the hearing, is as follows:

         "1.  The parties to an appeal are entitled to expect the Judge both
         to  be  alert  during  the  hearing  and  to  appear  to   be   so.
         Consequently, if  a  Judge  actually  falls  asleep  or  gives  the
         appearance of not giving the appeal his full attention,  there  may
         be grounds for setting aside the determination on  the  basis  that
         there has not been a fair hearing.

         2.   It is preferable  for  any  concern  about  the  behaviour  or
         inattention of the Judge to be raised at the hearing.

         3.   When such a ground of appeal is raised, it is only  likely  to
         succeed if there is cogent  evidence  of  the  actual  or  apparent
         behaviour in question."

 7. I have seen the file notes taken by  the  two  representatives  at  the
    hearing.  The file note taken by the claimant's  representative  is  as
    follows:

         "I was left with the impression that the IJ lacks empathy  with  my
         client.  During the respondent's submissions he was alert and  took
         notes but during my submissions he did  not  seem  to  take  notes,
         seemed to lack interest and seemed to look  at  me  with  a  glazed
         appearance.  After the hearing I raised this  with  the  Presenting
         Officer as we were leaving the room in presence of the  client  and
         she stated 'I don't  know,  I  was  not  concentrating  and  didn't
         notice'.  I also mentioned to the clerk who had  not  been  present
         and he laughed if off saying 'no that's just his manner'."

    The record by the Secretary of State's Presenting Officer,  so  far  as
    material, reads as follows:

         "Procedural

         At the end of the hearing the rep asked me if I had noticed the FTJ
         sleeping during his submissions.  I advised the rep that I had  not
         seen this, but I had noticed that he was not taking many  notes  of
         either sets of submissions."

    The Judge's Record of Proceedings which is on the file  includes  notes
    of both parties' submissions.  The judge has been given an  opportunity
    to comment on this allegation but no comment  has  been  received  from
    him.

 8. There are many reasons why a Judge may not take copious notes,  one  of
    which is that he needs little more persuasion by the party  making  the
    submission, as seems to have been the case here. The  extensiveness  or
    otherwise of the record of proceedings  is a matter for  the  judge  at
    the hearing and the judge is required to take only such  notes  as  are
    necessary, which, on the basis of the Record of Proceedings before  me,
    he did.

 9. Both parties agree that the respondent's representative did not see the
    judge being either inattentive or sleeping.  In addition, the lapse  of
    attention perceived by the claimant's  representative  was  not  raised
    with the Judge at the hearing. I am  not  satisfied,  on  the  evidence
    before me, that there is cogent evidence that the judge was  asleep  at
    any point during the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  I find  in  relation
    to ground 1 that the KD standard is not met.

10. Even if the evidence had shown, which I find here  that  it  does  not,
    that  the  Judge  was  inattentive  or  asleep  during  the  claimant's
    submissions, such inattentiveness would not have been material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  The Secretary of State is obliged, in order  to
    succeed, to advance the unattractive argument  that  the  claimant  was
    less likely to have succeeded if the Judge had been  awake  during  the
    claimant's representative's submissions, than if he slept through  them
    and was completely unaware of those submissions.

11. That amounts to a submission that the Secretary of State's case at  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  could   not   succeed   unless   the   claimant's
    representatives made some unspecified point  during  their  submissions
    which bolstered the case of the claimant's  opponent.   If  anyone  was
    disadvantaged by the Judge's alleged lapse in concentration, it was the
    claimant, but the claimant won his appeal.  On  any  view,  such  lapse
    would therefore be immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.

12. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.

Decision

The making of the previous decision involved the making of  no  error  on  a
point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:  Judith AJC Gleeson    Date: 25 January 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
