
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04149/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 November 2014                           |On 6 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                fatima faisal
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Javed, Reiss Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Fatima Faisal, was born on 31 October  1981  and  is  a
    female citizen of Pakistan.  I shall hereafter refer to  the  appellant
    as the respondent and to the  respondent  as  the  appellant  (as  they
    appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had entered the  United  Kingdom  in  June  2011.   By  a
    decision dated  7  May  2014,  the  respondent  refused  to  grant  the
    appellant asylum following a claim which she had made for protection on
    31 October 2011.  The decision was also made to remove the appellant by
    way of directions under Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The appellant appealed against that decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cox) which,  in  a  determination  dated
    11th September 2014, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. Judge Cox found the appellant to have been a victim of  domestic  abuse
    at the hands of her husband.  At  [28]  he  was  "satisfied  that  [her
    husband] had assaulted her in the United Kingdom ... I also accept that
    prior to leaving, [the husband] threatened to kill  the  appellant  and
    that he would take the children  away  from  her  if  she  returned  to
    Pakistan".  The appeal turned on the level of  threat  either  directly
    from the husband or indirectly as the  single  mother  of  three  young
    children without support which the appellant might face upon return  to
    Pakistan and the extent, if any, to which  she  might  be  assisted  by
    members of her family in Pakistan.   The  appellant  claimed  that  her
    parents are deceased.

 4. Having found that the appellant was a victim  of  domestic  abuse,  the
    judge also noted that her husband had been granted a contact  order  in
    November 2012 in the County Court and a Prohibited Steps Order had also
    been made on 15 November 2012 preventing either  parent  from  removing
    the children from the  United  Kingdom  without  the  other's  consent.
    Following the making of the contact order, her husband  had  last  seen
    the children in the United Kingdom in 2013.  At [34], Judge Cox found:

         In my view, these  documents  [Contact,  Residence  and  Prohibited
         Steps Orders] are highly significant.  The appellant's husband  was
         prepared to issue proceedings in the UK so as to enable him to have
         contact with the children and I have no doubt that he would  pursue
         the children in Pakistan.  Especially as these proceedings  started
         the year after the incident of domestic  violence  and  there  were
         earlier incidents of abuse.

    This led the judge [35] to find that he was  "satisfied  the  appellant
    had shown a real risk of continuing hostility from her husband such  as
    to raise a real risk of serious harm in her former home".

 5. I consider the judge's finding to be problematic.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    should certainly hesitate before interfering with the findings of  fact
    of the First-tier Tribunal which has  the  advantage  of  hearing  oral
    evidence from witnesses.  However, in this instance, the facts  recited
    by the judge do not appear to justify the finding which  he  has  drawn
    from those facts.  I am satisfied that  the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    evidence related to domestic violence but I do not understand  why  the
    issue of contact proceedings following the  separation  of  the  couple
    would lead the judge to conclude the appellant's husband, who could  be
    expected to have no way of discovering that the appellant and  children
    had returned to Pakistan, would "pursue" the children in Pakistan.   It
    is true the contact proceedings were started  a  year  after  the  last
    incident of domestic violence (indicating perhaps that the father  had,
    notwithstanding the separation, a continuing  interest  in  seeing  the
    children) but it is also the case that, notwithstanding the  making  of
    the contact order, the appellant's husband had not  seen  the  children
    for at least a year before the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.   An
    obvious inference to draw from that fact is that the husband  had  lost
    interest in exercising contact at all.  It does not follow,  therefore,
    that there should be "no doubt" (as the judge expressed  it)  that  the
    husband would "pursue the children in Pakistan" because he had obtained
    a county court contact order (which he was fully entitled to obtain  as
    an estranged father) which he had subsequently allowed to lapse.

 6. At [31] the appellant had told the judge that  the  husband  "probably"
    knew where the appellant's family lived in Pakistan  but  that  he  had
    "not been to see them".  The judge considered that  this  evidence  was
    "plainly relevant" in assessing whether there  was  a  real  risk  from
    continuing hostility from the husband in Pakistan but  I  have  to  say
    that it does not seem to  be  particularly  strong  evidence  that  the
    husband, who would be unaware that the family had returned to Pakistan,
    would learn that they had returned given that he had  no  contact  with
    her family there.

 7. In the  light  of  these  observations,  I  consider  that  this  is  a
    relatively rare case where the judge has given inadequate  reasons  for
    the findings of fact upon which he has determined the appeal.  I am not
    satisfied that the judge was able to conclude, for the reasons which he
    has given, that there was a real  risk  that  the  appellant's  husband
    would pursue her and the children in Pakistan.  That is not to say that
    such a finding could never be made on the evidence but only that it was
    not a reasonable finding for the judge to make on the evidence which he
    cites in support.

 8.  I  am  also  concerned  regarding  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's family would be unable to support her in Pakistan.  At [37]
    the judge found that "the appellant has not  provided  any  documentary
    evidence of her family's circumstances".  However, he went  on  to  say
    that he was satisfied

         that there is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the  male
         members of her family (brothers and uncles) would not  be  able  to
         provide her with effective protection.  I appreciate they would  be
         able to provide her with some support.  However,  in  my  view,  at
         best this would be on a 'temporary basis' (see paragraph 54 of  the
         refusal letter).

    Paragraph 54 of the refusal letter notes the  appellant's  evidence  to
    the effect that her family  were  not  "in  a  financial  position"  to
    support her and the children.  There is no suggestion that  the  family
    members would be unwilling to help the appellant.  Paragraph 54 goes on
    to state, "it is considered that [your family] may be able  to  provide
    accommodation for you and your children, even  on  a  temporary  basis,
    regardless of their financial position".  It  is  not  clear  from  the
    judge's determination at [37] of  why  he  concluded  that  the  family
    members would be "able to provide her with some support".  To say  that
    this would be "at best" temporary is, in my view, to  misinterpret  the
    contents of paragraph 54 of the refusal letter.  It is clear  that  the
    respondent takes the view that, in  the  absence  of  evidence  of  the
    circumstances of the appellant's family members, there is no reason  to
    suppose that they would not be able to assist her  financially  and  by
    providing accommodation; there is a difference in meaning  between  the
    provision of help on a  temporary  basis  "at  best"  and  "at  least".
    Furthermore, the judge's finding at [38] that the  appellant  had  "not
    sought the support  of  her  family"  following  domestic  abuse  which
    occurred in the United Kingdom does not appear to support  the  judge's
    consequent finding that, "as such, I believe a reasonable inference  to
    draw that her family were not  able  to  effectively  protect  her  and
    provide her with sufficient financial support".  It is difficult to see
    what effective support family members in Pakistan might have been  able
    to provide to the appellant while she was living with  her  husband  in
    the United Kingdom.   In  addition,  there  is,  on  the  face  of  the
    evidence, no reason to suppose  that  the  appellant's  family  members
    would fear hostility  from  her  husband  should  they  assist  her  in
    Pakistan because the appellant has not  established  that  her  husband
    would even know that she was in Pakistan.  Once again, I  do  not  rule
    out the possibility that  a  valid  finding  might  be  made  that  the
    appellant's family could  not  offer  support;  I  simply  observe  the
    judge's reasons for his findings are not adequate.

 9. In the circumstances, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal determination
    although I preserve the findings as regards past domestic  violence  in
    the United Kingdom (see [28]).  I consider it appropriate for the First-
    tier Tribunal to remake the decision and to examine again the  question
    of the support which the appellant might receive in Pakistan both  from
    her family  and  from  other  sources  and  to  determine  whether  the
    appellant  is  able  to  prove  to  the  necessary  standard  that  the
    appellant's husband would  (a)  be  aware  that  she  had  returned  to
    Pakistan and (b) would seek to pursue and harm her there.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal dated 11 September 2014 is  set
aside.  The findings of domestic violence [28]  are  preserved.   All  other
findings are set aside.  The matter  will  be  returned  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal and for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 20 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

