
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: AA 04703 2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Notice sent                  |
|On: 3 October 2013                            |On: 7 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                 ESOHE OKERE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a citizen Nigeria of born 14 April 1982.  She  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of  State
    of 2 May 2013 refusing her asylum claim and to remove  her  to  Nigeria.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  this  appeal  in  a  determination
    promulgated  on  5  March  2013.  Judge  Pullig  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. By way of a letter to the Upper Tribunal dated  17  September  2013  the
    appellant's  representatives  request   permission   to   withdraw   the
    appellant's appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 3. On the 18 September 2013 the  Upper  Tribunal  sent  directions  to  the
    parties indicating it proposed to consent to the appellant's request  to
    withdraw her appeal, subject to consideration first being given  to  any
    response received by 25 September 2013. Neither party responded to those
    directions

 4. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as  a  whole,
    and observing that the Secretary of State has not filed  a  response  to
    the directions accompanying the grant of permission, I give  consent  to
    the appellant to withdraw her case.

 5. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 6. The effect of the  appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

Date: 3 October 2013









