
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/04618/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 November 2013                           |On 21 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

        The Hon Lord Matthews sitting as Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                   Between

                                     S N
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant:     Ms M Nollet, Legal Representative
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This appeal comes before us following the grant of permission  to  the
    appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 16 August 2013.

2.    The appellant is an Iranian national born  on  4  September  1981.  He
    entered the UK as a student on 10 April  2011  and  claimed  asylum  in
    December 2011 some six weeks prior to the  expiry  of  his  visa.   His
    application was refused on 26 April 2013 and directions  were  set  for
    his removal.  The appeal against that decision was heard by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page at Newport on 4 July and  dismissed  by  way  of  a
    determination promulgated on 24 July.

3.    The appellant's case is that he had  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities in Iran on account of his political support for  the  Green
    Party and that he had been arrested  in  2009,  detained  and  tortured
    before his release on payment of a surety. He was then  served  with  a
    summons and convicted by a court which sentenced him to 74 lashes and a
    five year suspended prison sentence. In February 2011 he claims to have
    attended a demonstration where he was recognised. As a result  of  that
    he applied for a student visa and entered the UK. In  August  2011  his
    mother informed him that a summons had been  delivered  to  the  house.
    Thereafter, the house was raided and his computer equipment  and  discs
    containing photographs of the demonstration were seized.  His  computer
    from his workplace was  also  taken.  In  October  2011  the  appellant
    claimed asylum. He  has  also  attended  a  demonstration  outside  the
    Iranian Embassy in the UK.

4.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the respondent  produced
    the appellant's visa application form whish appeared to show  that  the
    application had been made on 28 January 2011, almost a month before the
    demonstration which led to the appellant's flight from Iran.

5.    The grounds argue that, in reaching his conclusions, the judge  failed
    to take account of relevant information and resolve conflicts  of  fact
    on a material matter, that he gave inadequate reasons for rejecting the
    expert report and the medical evidence and that he  failed  to  make  a
    finding on a material matter.

6.    At the hearing before us, Ms Nollet  expanded  on  the  grounds.  With
    regard to the first ground, she submitted  that  the  visa  application
    form and related document adduced by  the  presenting  officer  at  the
    hearing itself contained two differing dates for the application  -  28
    January 2011 and 28 February 2011 (in fact there is also a  third  -  2
    March 2011). She submitted that the judge only referred to the  January
    date and used that to find that the  visa  application  had  been  made
    prior to the demonstration which the appellant had claimed led  to  him
    fearing for his life. She argued that whilst it was open to  the  judge
    to choose to rely on one date  over  another,  there  had  to  be  some
    analysis of the conflict of dates which appeared  on  the  respondent's
    documents and a reason given for why one was preferred.  That  had  not
    been done.

7.    The second ground relates to the judge's approach to the reports  from
    the expert and from the Medical Foundation. The expert has  asked  that
    his name and details are not made known to  the  appellant  and  so  we
    refer to him as Mr X. Copies of the summons and the court verdict  were
    made available to Mr X who found that they appeared  authentic  on  the
    face of it. The judge found  that  the  expert  was  not  objective  or
    impartial, that he was "obviously someone with  no  sympathy  with  the
    Iranian regime" and that he had instead wanted to assist the  appellant
    with whom he sympathised. Ms Nollet argued that  the  judge  failed  to
    explain how he reached this conclusion.  Further,  although  the  judge
    maintained that the expert  had  not  considered  that  even  authentic
    looking documents (such as the appellant's were found to be)  could  be
    obtained to assist fake asylum claims, Mr X had in fact  shown  in  his
    report that he was aware that fake documents  were  sometimes  provided
    and that he himself had come across some in his capacity as an  expert.
    In respect of the medical evidence, Ms Nollet submitted that the  judge
    had  wrongly  disregarded  the  assessment  of  post  traumatic  stress
    syndrome on the basis that it was  predicated  upon  the  asylum  claim
    being true. She also argued  that  before  the  doctor  had  found  the
    appellant's ankle injury to  be  highly  consistent  with  the  alleged
    cause, he had considered other possible causes. She submitted there had
    been no physical examination of the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    sodomised by a truncheon because he had been upset when recounting  the
    incident and  so  an  examination  was  thought  to  be  inappropriate.
    Reliance was placed upon  JL  (medical  reports  -  credibility)  China
    [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC) where the expertise of the Medical Foundation was
    acknowledged.

8.    Finally, Ms Nollet submitted that the judge failed to make  a  finding
    on whether or not he accepted the appellant's claim of events of  2009;
    that was central to his claim of current risk as  if  it  was  accepted
    that he had received a five year suspended prison sentence,  there  was
    an arguable risk to him on return at the present time.

9.    In response Mr Deller fairly accepted that the expert report  was  not
    flawed in the manner claimed by the judge in that Mr X had acknowledged
    the existence of  fake  documents.  He  was  less  impressed  with  the
    submission in respect of the ankle injury, arguing that such an  injury
    could have any number of causes. However, he accepted  that  the  judge
    had been wrong to reject the diagnosis of PTSD simply on the basis that
    the appellant's account was untrue. He acknowledged that there had been
    a duty on the judge to consider the evidence in the round and  to  look
    at the PTSD diagnosis on its own merits. Mr  Deller  also  acknowledged
    that there were difficulties in the judge's  approach  to  the  Embassy
    visa documents in that the conflict between the different dates had not
    been resolved. Finally, Mr Deller accepted that there had been no clear
    finding on  the  2009  events.  He  submitted  that  he  would  not  be
    comfortable defending the determination and that he supported  remittal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing afresh.

10.   Ms Nollet confirmed she was content with that course of action.

Conclusions

  11. We are grateful to  the  parties  for  their  helpful  and  very  fair
      submissions. As indicated at the conclusions of  the  hearing  we  are
      satisfied  that  Judge  Page  made  errors  of  law  such   that   the
      determination has to be set aside in its entirety. The judge failed to
      resolve the conflict arising between the three differing dates on  the
      visa documents and to explain why he chose to rely on the date  of  28
      February to undermine the credibility of the appellant's account  when
      at least one of the other dates supported  it.  His  approach  to  the
      medical evidence was flawed inasmuch as it was incumbent upon  him  to
      have considered the PTSD diagnosis in the round  with  all  the  other
      evidence and not to have simply found it was made solely on the  basis
      of the appellant's untruthful oral account. With regard to the  expert
      evidence of Mr X, the judge failed to identify the basis on  which  he
      found that the expert's conclusions were subjective  and  partial.  He
      also plainly erred when he found the expert had not shown an awareness
      of falsified documents being available, there being a clear  reference
      to this in the report itself. Finally, the judge erred in  failing  to
      make any findings on  the  incidents  of  2009.  That  is  significant
      because if the appellant had been convicted and sentenced  as  claimed
      at that time, he may have a political profile which  would  now  place
      him at risk. For these reasons we find that the appeal has to  be  re-
      heard and that fresh findings have to be made on all material matters.

  12. Whilst it is not in the ordinary practice of  the  Tribunal  to  remit
      cases to the First-tier Tribunal, there are reasons why in  this  case
      such a course should be adopted, having given particular regard to the
      overriding objective of the efficient disposal  of  appeals  and  that
      there are issues of fact that are central to this appeal that  require
      determination which have not been taken into account or assessed  when
      the case was before the First-tier Tribunal.  In that sense  the  case
      falls within the Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2(b) (as amended).

  13. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside,  none
      of the findings shall stand and the case is  to  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal  for a hearing in accordance with Section 12(2)(b)
      of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act at paragraph 7.2  of  the
      Practice Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).



Decision

12.   The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and  the  determination  is
    set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision to be made on all issues.

Signed:




Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge
13 November 2013

