

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               AA/04606/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 7th November 2014                         |On: 13th November 2014       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Ali Palas
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:       Ms Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Sutovic and
                       Hartigan


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Turkey. On the  12th  August  2014  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herbert)  allowed  his  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  following  a
    refusal of asylum.  The Secretary of State  now  has  permission[1]  to
    appeal that decision.


 2. The basis of the Respondent's claim was that he was a Turkish Kurd  who
    had suffered recent persecution for reasons of his  political  opinion.
    He claimed that he had been detained and ill-treated  by  the  security
    services in his home area of Gaziantep and had  been  questioned  inter
    alia about his support for the PKK. He had come under pressure  to  act
    as an informant for the authorities.

 3. The Secretary of State issued an unusually detailed and cogent  refusal
    letter on the 16th June 2014. From paragraph 19 to 34 numerous  reasons
    are given for doubting the claimant's credibility as a  witness.  These
    included:

        i) The contradiction in the claim that  the  Respondent  went  into
           villages to talk to people about the PKK when he never supported
           the armed struggle of the PKK;
       ii) The inconsistent evidence about whether he had talked about  the
           PKK or the BDP;
      iii) Whether he had ever distributed leaflets or not;
       iv) Vague evidence in respect of core matters such as his  detention
           and torture;
        v) Apparent conflicts in his account of his arrest on the 4th April
           2011;
       vi) Conflict between the claim that he was detained whilst  a  minor
           and the country background material;
      vii) Plausibility of the gendarmes asking him to become an  informant
           when he was very young and had been able to  provide  them  with
           absolutely no evidence during three previous detentions.

 4. In his determination of the 12th August 2014 Judge  Herbert  finds  the
    evidence to have a "high level of consistency"; he did not consider the
    Respondent to have exaggerated any element of his claim; he  found  the
    evidence was to some extent corroborated by a witness, the Respondent's
    cousin who gave evidence before him; and  the  account  was  consistent
    with the background material.   Applying the lower standard of proof he
    allowed the appeal.


 5. The Secretary of State now makes two,  inter-related  complaints  about
    the way in which the First-tier Tribunal approached the appeal.  First,
    it is submitted that the Tribunal failed to resolve  conflicts  in  the
    evidence that were clearly set out in the reasons for  refusal  letter;
    secondly there was a failure to give adequate reasons.

 6. I have given careful consideration to the submissions made on behalf of
    the Respondent, and in particular to Ms  Nnamani's  thoughtful,  cogent
    and articulate response to the grounds. I am nonetheless satisfied that
    this decision must be set aside.

 7. Had the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  been  less  detailed,  and  the
    challenges to the Respondent's  credibility  couched  in  more  general
    terms,  I  daresay  the  reasoning  at   paragraphs   59-75   of   this
    determination would have been  sustainable.  In  this  case  there  was
    however a very detailed refusal letter, wherein specific challenges are
    made to the account given.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  entitled  to
    understand why the Tribunal did not attach weight to those points.   Ms
    Nnamani may be correct to say that  there  were  points  raised  as  to
    peripheral matters; it might  have  been  unfair  to  characterise  the
    Respondent's  evidence  as  "vague".  We  cannot   know   because   the
    determination does not address  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  in
    detail or at all.  There is no duty on the Tribunal to go through  each
    and every point made, but the losing party must be able  to  understand
    why he or she has lost.  A finding that there has been a "high level of
    consistency" is hard to understand if no examples  are  given,  and  no
    mention is made of the various inconsistencies raised in the  Secretary
    of State 's submissions. For that reason I set the decision aside.


 8. The parties agreed that  in  the  circumstances  the  most  appropriate
    disposal,  having  regard  to  the  extent  of  judicial   fact-finding
    required, was to remit the matter to be determined de  novo  at  Taylor
    House before any Judge other than Judge Herbert.



      Decisions

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

10. The matter is to be re-made before the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor
    House on the 24th November 2014.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             7th November
                                    2014
                           -----------------------
[1] Granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin on the 9th September 2014

