
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04657/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |  Determination Promulgated   |
|On  9 November 2015                          |  On 7 December 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     PR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss BE Jones, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
Peirce Sols.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 19 February  2015  refusing  to  grant  him
    asylum and to remove him to Sri Lanka.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1990. He states that he
    last lived in Karaveddi and his family still  live  there.  His  family
    were visited by the Sri Lankan army in May/June 2007; the appellant was
    suspected of passing information about visitors to his uncle who worked
    for the intelligence  service  of  the  LTTE.  The  appellant  was  not
    arrested. He then joined the LTTE in December 2007 because  his  family
    encouraged him. His uncle arranged  for  two  men  to  take  him  to  a
    training camp in Viswamadu where he received three months training  but
    not weapons training. His role was to deliver food to the LTTE fighters
    and to transport injured fighters for medical treatment. He surrendered
    on 20 April 2009 and was sent to Joseph detention camp in Vavuniya.  He
    was detained for six months, tortured and sent to Palalay  in  November
    2009 and Kiyhavay detention centre in February 2010 for rehabilitation.
    He was trained in carpentry and growing crops. He was released  in  May
    2011 and returned to the family farm.

 4. The appellant claims that he was arrested in June 2013 and detained  at
    an army camp for 5 months where he was beaten and sexually abused.  His
    father paid a bribe and the appellant was taken out  of  the  camp  and
    handed to an agent. He stayed with the agent for  a  week  in  Vavuniya
    before flying to Chennai in India. He stayed in India  for  two  months
    before flying to Turkey, Germany  and  then  by  train  to  France.  He
    travelled on a false Indian passport. He travelled to the UK by  hiding
    in a car and arrived on 19 February 2014, claiming asylum  on  5  March
    2014.

 5. The respondent did not accept that the  appellant  had  served  in  the
    conflict zone or that he was detained in June 2013. He  was  previously
    released because he was not considered to  have  a  LTTE  profile,  was
    never charged with any offence and there is no arrest  warrant  against
    him. His account was not credible or consistent.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. He attended an  oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on  11  August  2015  but  did  not  give  oral
    evidence on the basis that he was unfit to give  evidence  due  to  his
    mental condition. The  judge  found  that  there  were  inconsistencies
    between the asylum interview and the  witness  statement  of  3  August
    2015. The appellant was unable to answer basic questions about the LTTE
    in interview and it was not credible that the authorities in Sri  Lanka
    had any further interest in him in June 2013. If he had  been  detained
    for five months as claimed then there would be  some  evidence  of  him
    having been charged and an arrest warrant would be  in  place  for  his
    arrest as an escapee. If the appellant had  been  in  genuine  fear  of
    persecution in Sri Lanka then he would have sought asylum in the  first
    safe country that he reached. The appellant had fabricated his claim.

 7. The judge found that the conclusions in the psychiatric report dated  3
    August 2015 from Dr Dhumad were inconsistent with the detailed 18  page
    witness statement from the appellant. If Dr Dhumad had read the witness
    statement then he would have asked the appellant how  he  was  able  to
    recall such fine detail about events in Sri Lanka and how he  was  able
    to take part in activities in the UK, some activities  being  organised
    by him. The attempts to commit suicide were all in the presence of  his
    family and he had close family in Sri Lanka who could assist  him  with
    his mental condition and  depressive  moods.  The  information  in  the
    expert report from Dr Chris Smith was eight years old and the appellant
    was not on the wanted list. The appellant was not of  any  interest  to
    the Sri Lankan authorities, he was just an economic migrant.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 13 September  2015.  There
    were 8 grounds of appeal including the refusal to grant an adjournment.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimmett
    on 24 September 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge
    failed to properly consider the psychiatric evidence as he appeared  to
    suggest that the psychiatrist had  not  read  the  appellant's  witness
    statement  even  though  the  psychiatrist  stated  that  he  had.  The
    reference to the country expert's report appeared not to  fully  engage
    with that document. All grounds were arguable except that  relating  to
    the adjournment.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 2 October 2015, the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the judge had set out all
    of the evidence,  detailed  submissions  by  both  representatives  and
    proceeded to make findings taking into account that the appellant was a
    vulnerable witness. The consideration of the evidence was adequate  and
    the findings were properly open to the judge. The  appellant's  account
    was found to have no merit.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

12. Ms Harris based her submissions on the remaining 7 grounds  of  appeal.
    Grounds 5-7 were separate grounds  relating  to  Article  3.  Ground  8
    reflected the failure to engage with the appellant's mental health  for
    the purposes of Article 8. The appeal should be remitted for a de  novo
    hearing to enable the cousins to give evidence.

13. Mr Avery submitted that ground 2 was a  challenge  to  the  credibility
    findings and it was clear from paragraph 36 of the  decision  that  the
    judge had the expert  evidence  in  mind.  The  grounds  are  simply  a
    disagreement because the judge was entitled to find that there  was  no
    fear of deportation at the asylum interview stage. Looking at paragraph
    45, the judge said that the  psychiatrist  had  the  witness  statement
    before him but had apparently not read it.

14. In relation to ground 3, it was clear from paragraph 47 of  the  report
    that the judge did have regard to the cousin's statement and the  other
    evidence would not have made a difference to the judge's assessment. In
    relation to ground 4, given the  credibility  findings  the  sur  place
    activities would not cause any concern to the Sri  Lankan  authorities.
    Mr Avery accepted that the sur place activities were not  mentioned  in
    the decision.

15. In relation to ground 5, given the adverse credibility  findings  there
    was no reason why the appellant  would  be  detained.  In  relation  to
    grounds 6 and 7, the case law really says that there must  be  a  basis
    for the fear. There must be a link between the mental health  condition
    and the risk on return. There  was  no  link  because  of  the  adverse
    credibility findings. In  relation  to  ground  8,  the  findings  were
    adequate - there must be  something  to  engage  Article  8.  Mr  Avery
    submitted that, overall, there was no material error  of  law  and  the
    decision should be upheld.

16. I have considered AM, R v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ  521;  expert's  views
    should be considered to be independent views of an  independent  expert
    that arise out of an expert examination and assessment. I  accept  that
    the psychiatric report was not simply based upon the appearance of  the
    appellant and what he told the psychiatrist, contrary to what was  said
    by the judge at paragraph 46 of the decision. The judge  further  erred
    in finding that Dr Dhumad  had  apparently  not  read  the  appellant's
    witness  statement.  I  find  that  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the
    psychiatric evidence as part of a holistic assessment of credibility. I
    find that the judge failed to give adequate consideration of the expert
    report of Dr Chris Smith which is very briefly dealt with at  paragraph
    48 of the decision. Ground 2 therefore succeeds.

17. The appellant submitted witness  statements  from  two  cousins  and  a
    letter from the ICPPG dated 4 August 2015. I find that the evidence was
    material because it supports the appellant's account  of  detention  in
    2013. There is no reference to the evidence in the decision and that is
    a further material error of law. Ground 3 therefore succeeds.

18. It is common ground that the judge  failed  to  make  any  findings  in
    relation to the sur place activities. The appellant gave  a  clear  and
    detailed account of those activities in his witness statement  and  the
    judge should have considered that evidence in the context of  GJ.  That
    is a further material error of law and ground 4 succeeds.

19. I find that the judge did not adequately engage  with  the  appellant's
    submission that removal would amount  to  a  breach  of  Article  3  on
    medical grounds or to make reasoned findings.  The  judge  acknowledged
    the recent suicide attempt but failed to consider Y and another v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362. The consideration and findings in relation to  the
    mental health and suicide issues are not adequate. That  is  a  further
    material error of law and grounds 6 and 7 also succeed.

20. Grounds 5  and  8  have  less  merit  but  that  is  not  a  matter  of
    significance given the number of material errors of  law  that  I  have
    identified. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved  the  making  of  errors  of  law  and  its
    decision cannot stand.

Decision

21. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

22. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.

Signed


[pic]


Deputy of the Upper Tribunal Judge Archer                          Date:  26
November 2015





