
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04069/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th October 2014                            |On 12th November 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          nadine tumukunde kayitare
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEpartment
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway of Christian Gottfried & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ms Nadine Tumukunde Kayitare date of birth 27th  January
    1996, is a citizen of the Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo.  Having
    considered all the circumstances I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge L K Gibbs promulgated on 21st July 2014.  The judge
    dismissed the appeal of the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 6th June 2014 to remove the appellant from the  United
    Kingdom as an illegal entrant or person susceptible  to  administrative
    removal as an overstayer.

 3. By decision of 15 September 2014 permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the case now appears before me to  determine
    in the first instance whether or not there was an error of law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The permission granted identifies a large number of issues  challenging
    the findings of fact made by the judge. I draw attention to  the  cases
    of VW (Sri Lanka)v SSHD C5/2012/3037 , Biogen Inc v Medeva 1997 RPC  1,
    Green (Article 8 -- new rules)[ 2013] UKUT  284  and  Krasniqi  v  SSHD
    2006 EWCA Civ 391. All the cases emphasise that the weight to be  given
    to evidence is a matter for the judge at first instance.

 5. The  challenges  by  the  appellant's  representative  to  the  factual
    findings begin paragraph 7 of the ground.  In  paragraph  7  refers  to
    paragraph 31 of the determination. The issue raised is the  appellant's
    confusion over the name of the place in which she was living whether it
    was Goma or Gisenye. The grounds argue that by reference  to  Wikipedia
    it can be seen that Goma and Gisenye are very  close,  although  either
    side of the DRC and Rwanda border. It is submitted that a  minor  could
    readily "conflate the two places as one "as they are a  short  distance
    from each other.

 6. Within paragraph 31 the judge has specifically noted that the appellant
    was a minor at the time of interview and has  taken  that  factor  into
    account. Subsequently the judge  notes  that  the  appellant  has  been
    privately educated to a reasonable standard. The judge goes on to  note
    that Goma is the capital of North Kivu Province in  the  DRC  but  that
    Gisenye whilst nearby is  actually  in  Rwanda.  The  judge  considered
    carefully that evidence and considered in light of the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been privately educated and lived in an  educated  family
    with a father that worked in government, she did not find  it  credible
    that even a minor, who would have been 16 at the time she left the DRC,
    would not know in what town she was living or would be unable  to  name
    the road on which she lived or any roads in the town.

 7. It is suggested further in paragraph 10 of the grounds that no  account
    should be given to the interview as  the  interview  failed  to  follow
    proper procedure with regard to interviewing a minor as  there  was  no
    signature  of  a  responsible  adult.  It  is   suggested   that   this
    fundamentally undermines the findings that the last  address  given  by
    the appellant was then Gisenye Town Ngoma the Congo.

 8. The judge has considered the age of the  appellant  and  clearly  taken
    account of the appellant's vulnerability. However even taking that into
    account the judge has made the findings of fact that she  has  and  has
    given valid reasons for coming to the conclusions that she did. In  the
    circumstances the judge was entitled to deal with the issues in the way
    that she has.

 9. Paragraph 11 of the grounds challenges the  judge's  reference  to  the
    fact that the Appellant had not heard any local radio or seen any local
    TV and made findings as a result in paragraph 32 of the  determination.
    In challenging the findings reference is made to question  120  of  the
    Asylum Interview Record (AIR). It is suggested on the grounds that  the
    appellant is saying that she knew about the wars in  Goma  because  she
    "would  see  it  on  the  TV".  It  is  clear  that   the   appellant's
    representatives are seeking to suggest that the appellant  was  clearly
    referring to local TV in the DRC.

10. One has to look at the answer  to  question  120  carefully.  The  full
    answer given by the appellant is: --

         Has  anything  ever  happened  in  Goma?  Examples  given  --  war,
         incidents?

         Mostly it's all about my tribe, like many years ago, my mother told
         me there were many wars there, but it started getting  bad  by  the
         time I came here, I would see it on the TV

11. If one examines the subsequent answers [120-122] the  appellant  admits
    that she was seeing things on the news "here" in the United Kingdom and
    she was talking to the social worker because she was worried about  her
    family as it was getting or had  got  worse.  In  the  light  of  those
    answers it is clear that the issue raised by the judge  was  valid  and
    the findings justified.

12. The suggestion that the judge has started from a false  starting  point
    is not made out. The suggestion by the solicitors that  the  judge  has
    failed to read the evidence is not made  out.  Clearly  the  solicitors
    appear to be somewhat circumspect in which parts of the interview  they
    were seeking to rely upon and failed to look  at  the  answers  in  the
    context of the whole.

13. The representative has raised an issue with regard to  the  school  but
    the point being made by  the  judge  was  that  in  her  statement  the
    appellant referred to all her  siblings  bar  one  being  at  the  same
    school. That was not consistent with her evidence in the interview. The
    appellant said that she had three brothers and  they  attended  another
    college [see D8 question 35 wherein it is clear that the brothers  were
    attending a different school]. The judge has gone on to make the  point
    that the Appellant did not despite been 16 years of age know  the  name
    of the head teacher  of  her  school.  The  judge  did  not  find  such
    credible. Again those were findings of fact that the judge was entitled
    to make on the basis of the evidence presented

14. I note within the determination the judge has approached  other  issues
    and made findings to the  benefit  of  the  appellant.  Certainly  with
    regard to the Spakab report the judge had place no  reliance  upon  the
    Sprakab report and the judge found that  there  were  features  of  the
    report which were contradictory. Accordingly the judge made findings to
    the benefit of the appellant.

15. The judge has gone  on  to  assess  the  evidence  otherwise  from  the
    appellant and given valid reasons for making the findings of fact  that
    she has made.

16. The representatives  have  raised  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  an
    individual  that  has  been  privately  educated  is  to   be   treated
    differently from others. Again the judge was not making the point  that
    individuals were to be treated differently but rather  a  well-educated
    individual would benefit from a greater education and knowledge and one
    can expect that to be reflected in the answers  given.   The  point  is
    made validly by the judge that an individual that  has  been  privately
    educated may be  expected  to  know  certain  details  including  basic
    details about where she lived. The issue cannot be viewed in isolation.
    The judge  has  otherwise  made  other  adverse  findings  against  the
    appellant. The judge noted that the appellant was unable to name any of
    the major streets within the place that she lived.  The  conclusion  by
    the judge, that a person  with  the  background  of  the  type  of  the
    appellant would be able to provide details of where they lived and  the
    failure of the appellant to be able to do so undermined the appellant's
    account, is justified.

17. The grounds of appeal are in the main challenges  to  the  findings  of
    fact made by the judge. The judge has probably considered the  evidence
    found that the findings of fact were open to the judge to make  on  the
    evidence presented

18. Before me the appellant's representative raised the issue  of  tracing.
    It was submitted that the respondent had failed to take any  action  in
    an  effort  to  trace  the   appellant's   family.   The   respondent's
    representative relies upon the case of EU & Others  (Afghanistan)  2013
    EWCA Civ 32. It is the respondent case that the appellant has not given
    a truthful account of her origins and as the appellant  had  failed  to
    provide information necessary to enable proper tracing  of  her  family
    members to be undertaken there was no breach of any  duty  to  seek  to
    trace in those circumstances.  As  the  judge  has  come  to  the  same
    conclusions with regard to the appellant's claimed background in  light
    of the case law I find that there was no  error  in  the  approach  the
    respondent or the judge to the issue of tracing. The appellant had  not
    given a truthful account of where her family emanated from and  in  the
    light of that the prospects of tracing were unrealistic.

19. The judge was entitled to deal with the appeal in the manner  that  she
    did. She has made valid findings of fact on the basis of  the  evidence
    presented and there is no arguable error of law. Accordingly  I  uphold
    the decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure          28th October 2014

