
[pic]
IAC-AH-PC-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04770/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th April 2015                    |On 17th July 2015                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           mr mohsen sadeghinejad
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Medley-Daley
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on  11th  February  1968.   The
    Appellant's claim for asylum is based upon a fear that if  returned  to
    Iran he would face mistreatment due to his conversion  to  Christianity
    and an adulteress affair.  The Appellant's immigration history is  that
    he claims to have left Iran illegally crossing the border  into  Turkey
    on foot and thereafter making his way to the UK where he claimed asylum
    on arrival on 2nd April 2014.

 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum was refused by the Secretary of  State
    on 20th June 2014.  In a detailed Notice of Refusal the credibility  of
    the Appellant's account is not believed as is the Appellant's claim  to
    have converted from Islam to Christianity and  to  have  an  adulteress
    affair.  Therefore it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    accused of anti-Islamic conduct and it is not accepted by the Secretary
    of State that the Appellant would be at risk on return for exiting Iran
    illegally.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Law sitting at Manchester on  12th  August  2014.   In  a
    detailed determination promulgated on 16th August 2014 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  and  the
    Appellant was found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 4. On 1st September 2014 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 12th September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page
    refused permission to appeal.  On 23rd September 2014  renewed  Grounds
    of Appeal were lodged.

 5. On 5th December 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted  permission  to
    appeal.  The judge's reasons were that it was arguable that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in failing to  engage  with  and  make
    reasoned findings on the submission and Ground of  Appeal  relating  to
    illegal exit.  The other grounds raised were considered by Judge  Coker
    to be weak but permission was granted on all grounds.

 6. On 24th December 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of  Appeal  under  Rule  24.   It  was  submitted  therein  that  in  a
    comprehensive determination the judge had found the Appellant to be not
    credible and that the judge had concluded, as was open to him,  on  the
    basis of the presented evidence that the Appellant was  not  a  genuine
    convert to Christianity.  The Secretary of  State  concluded  that  the
    judge had applied the ratios of relevant case law and concluded that he
    will not be at risk for illegally exiting Iran.

 7. On 13th January 2015  the  Appellant's  solicitors  lodged  a  Rule  25
    response submitting that the response under Rule 24  failed  to  engage
    properly with the Grounds of Appeal and that the  issue  remained  that
    although the ratio of the case law may have been applied the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to engage with the arguments that  the  situation
    had materially changed since those ratios  were  determined  over  five
    years ago.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  The Appellant appears by his  instructed  solicitor
    Mr Medley-Daley.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Medley-Daley submits that the determination makes  no  reference  to
    additional  evidence  found  in  up-to-date  CIF  Reports  and  Amnesty
    International Reports.  He submits that there is no  reference  to  the
    change that has taken place in prison conditions and all these  factors
    were ignored by the judge  and  that  he  has  not  given  reasons  for
    rejecting these factors.  He places considerable weight on the decision
    of the Administrative Court in Keivan Mahmoudi CO/1700D/2013 where  the
    Honourable Mr Justice Blake stated that there is a risk  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges summarily disposing of claims by a citation of SB (risk
    of return - illegal exit) Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053  when  a  more
    detailed consideration is called for in a case where this is  the  sole
    or central issue.  He submits that this is a trap that  the  judge  has
    fallen into which he was warned against in that authority.  He  further
    submits that the case law of SA (Iran) v the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department has been  ignored  where  at  paragraph  24  the  judge
    stated:

         "There must be a real risk that if she had professed herself to  be
         a Christian, and conducted herself as one, that profession, whether
         true or not, may be taken in Iran as evidence of apostasy."

10. Mr Medley-Daley  submits  that  the  judge  made  no  findings  on  the
    Appellant's risk on return  and  that  he  had  not  engaged  with  the
    evidence even if he has rejected  the  Appellant's  conversion  as  not
    being genuine and that the Appellant may still be  at  risk  despite  a
    lack of a credibility finding on his behalf.  Mr  Medley-Daley  accepts
    that the judge was entitled to have made his findings as  he  did  with
    regard to the Appellant's credibility.

11. He states that he seeks a rehearing so  he  can  bring  in  a  Dorodian
    witness namely a pastor.  He asked me to find that there is a  material
    error of law and to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Mr Harrison responds by stating it is necessary  to  read  Judge  Law's
    decision in its entirety in particular his findings which are  set  out
    in paragraphs 17 to 34 of his detailed determination.  He submits  that
    the judge has gone through the  claim  thoroughly,  made  findings  and
    given reasons and he particularly refers me to paragraph 23 with regard
    to the important findings he has made on  credibility.   He  thereafter
    takes me to paragraph 24 pointing out that the judge has not just given
    a cursory glance at the decision in SB but has considered the  elements
    required.

13. He submits that the judge has made criticisms leading to a very low (if
    any) finding of credibility of the Appellant and he has  made  findings
    relating to that noting that the Appellant has in his view  lied  about
    his conversion and other claims and that he made  findings  leading  to
    the dismissal of the appeal that he was entitled to.  He  submits  that
    the determination does not fall into error and that  I  should  dismiss
    the appeal.

14. Mr Medley-Daley responds by pointing out that the main  thrust  of  the
    Appellant's arguments are that relying on the Respondent's own evidence
    in the COIF reports no findings had been made and that there  has  been
    no consideration of the updated evidence and the  Appellant's  risk  on
    return despite the lack of credibility finding.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

17. It is the contention of Mr Medley-Daley that the judge  has  failed  to
    follow the guidance given by Mr Justice Blake in Mahmoudi by  disposing
    of the claim by a citation of SB when a more detailed consideration  is
    called for.  He further considered there has been a failure to consider
    updated evidence and the risk on return despite the fact there has been
    an adverse finding of credibility which I acknowledge is a factor to be
    considered even if there is an adverse finding of credibility.

18. I agree with the principles expressed by Mr Medley-Daley.   What  I  do
    not agree with is his submission that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has
    failed to carry out a  proper  analysis.   The  judge  has  made  quite
    damning and critical findings of  credibility  against  the  Appellant.
    The judge has heard the evidence.  He has  analysed  and  set  out  his
    reasons  for  doubting  the  Appellant's  credibility  particularly  at
    paragraphs 20, 23 and 25.  A proper approach to credibility requires an
    assessment of the evidence and of the general  claim.   The  judge  has
    carried this out.  In asylum claims, relevant factors are  firstly  the
    internal consistency of the claim, secondly the  inherent  plausibility
    of the claim and thirdly the consistency of  the  claim  with  external
    factors of the sort typically found in country guidance.  Theoretically
    it is correct that a claimant need do no more than state his claim  but
    that claim still needs to be  examined  for  consistency  and  inherent
    plausibility.   This  analytical  approach  has  been  thoroughly   and
    properly carried out by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  judge  has
    made  conclusions  based  on  the  evidence  that  the  Appellant   had
    manufactured an account to facilitate a claim for asylum.   Those  were
    findings that are open to him.

19. Against that background he has gone on to consider in some  detail  the
    question of persecution and the reference to SB (Iran) and the  finding
    therein that Iranians facing enforced return do not in general  face  a
    real risk of persecution or ill-treatment.   I  acknowledge  that  that
    authority is now some six years old but there  is  nothing  to  suggest
    that the judge did not consider all the evidence that  was  before  him
    and the submission made by Mr Medley-Daley that the judge had  made  no
    findings on the Appellant's risk of return is quite clearly  incorrect.
    Such findings are to be found in the detailed reply  at  paragraph  24.
    Further at paragraph 27 the judge has emphasised that he has taken into
    account all the evidence before him  including  background  information
    and he has noted the position that the Iranian authorities take towards
    Christians.  However this has  to  be  factored  against  the  lack  of
    finding of credibility and the finding that the judge made and which he
    was entitled to make, that the Appellant would not be  placed  at  risk
    upon return for having forsaken his religion.

20. The burden of proof was on the Appellant albeit on a lower standard and
    the judge makes it perfectly clear that the  Appellant  has  failed  to
    discharge that burden of proof.  The decision was one that was open  to
    him on the presented evidence, namely that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    genuine convert to Christianity and  applying  the  evidence  that  was
    before him including relevant case law the judge was perfectly entitled
    to find that the Appellant would not be at risk  on  return.   In  such
    circumstances the submissions  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  amount  to
    little more than disagreement and argument.  I  consequently  find  for
    all the above reasons that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge discloses no material error of law and the  appeal  is  dismissed
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is applied for and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

