
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04954/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 July 2016                            |On 31 August 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           s k q z + 3 DEPENDANTS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Hassan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   I will refer to the  parties  to  this  appeal  by  their  designations
    before the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).

2.   The present appeal last came before me for  hearing  on  12  May  2016.
    However,  before  that  hearing  the  appellant's  representatives  had
    applied to set aside my earlier decision promulgated on 1  April  2016.
    In that decision I found a material error of law in the decision of the
    FtT such that it was required to be set aside.  However, Mr Turner, who
    appeared on behalf of the appellant at that  hearing,  indicated  that,
    contrary to the directions given at the hearing on 21 March  2016,  the
    appellant had not prepared any updated material.  He also indicated  he
    was no longer maintaining his application to set-aside.  He invited  me
    to embark on a de novo hearing of the entire appeal or remit the matter
    to the FtT.  I decided to make appropriate  directions  for  a  further
    hearing.  I also directed that both parties be given  leave  to  adduce
    brief updating evidence relevant to the  issues,  including  any  issue
    relating to Article 8 of the ECHR.  Accordingly, the case was adjourned
    on 1 July 2016 when it was listed with a three-hour time estimate.

3.   On 1 July 2016 both parties were  represented  and  I  heard  extensive
    submissions   from   those   representatives.    The   hearing   lasted
    approximately two and a half hours.

The Hearing

4.   Unfortunately, the start of the hearing had to be  delayed  because  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller said she had not seen all the documents in the  case.
    I therefore allowed  her  approximately  40  minutes  to  consider  the
    documents.

5.   Ms Hassan submitted that  the  respondent  had  been  given  more  than
    adequate time to consider the first instance reports (FIRs).  She  also
    indicated that the document verification  reports  (DVRs)  contained  a
    number of discrepancies.  It seems that a number of these reports  were
    carried out by a person with the same initials.  For example, the  same
    individual seemed to have telephoned two different police  stations  at
    the same time.  Clearly,  this  was  not  possible.   This,  Ms  Hassan
    suggested, made  this  evidence  questionable.  She  said  that  proper
    submissions had been made before the FtT, which had reached conclusions
    having considered the shortcomings in the documentation.

6.   After the hearing resumed at 11.23am  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  said  that
    the first instance reports were false and the  appellant's  account  of
    how  those  reports  were  created  was  also  incredible.   There  was
    considerable confusion over which document  verification  report  dealt
    with which FIR. I pointed out to the parties that it  would  have  been
    very helpful if the Tribunal had been provided with a schedule  setting
    out the date of each FIR and the corresponding DVR, particularly  since
    there was considerable confusion about this.

7.   Ms Hassan referred me to objective evidence which  suggested  that  the
    only person who is entitled to a copy of an FIR is the  complainant  in
    each case.  Therefore, she questioned whether the respondent  would  be
    able to obtain such material.  Ms Hassan then took  me  to  the  actual
    FIRs in a bundle of documents dated 18 September 2014 at page  32.   Ms
    Hassan explained that the FIRs were completed in  Urdu  but  have  been
    translated into English.  She pointed out that many of  the  complaints
    were of some age.  Ms Hassan pointed out that there was no database  of
    FIRs.  They  had  to  be  accessed  manually.   The  records  were  not
    computerised.  Therefore, every police station contacted would have  to
    search for physical records.  Also, there was no sharing of information
    between  police  districts.   Ms  Hassan  referred   me   to   document
    verification report number 3 (actually number 8).   This  refers  to  a
    report to Gowal Mandi Police Station, yet an official of  Allama  Iqbal
    Town Police Station was contacted.  Also, Ms  Hassan  pointed  out  the
    date and time of contact was 29 May 2014 at 12.20pm.  That was  exactly
    the same time as a contact with Allama Iqbal Police  Station  had  been
    made in relation to document verification report number 4  (also  known
    as document verification report number 7).  In her  submission  it  was
    not credible that two separate contacts relating to separate  incidents
    would both relate to the same minute of the same day.  No attempt seems
    to have been made to find out whether the person spoken to even  worked
    for the police.  Therefore, she said, the FtT had correctly  questioned
    the authenticity/accuracy of these DVRs.  An additional  point  related
    to the identity of the person contacting the police station.  It seemed
    the writer as described is a "Mohrir".  The same writer seems  to  have
    contacted all the police stations.  Furthermore, her  client  had  made
    very detailed complaints.  There was nothing that  the  respondent  had
    produced which undermined the accuracy  of  the  detailed  reports  the
    appellant had generated.  As far  as  Masti  Gate  Police  Station  was
    concerned Ms Hassan  did  not  accept  that  the  number  given  by  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller (042-37660300), which she had obtained from a  Google
    search the day before the  hearing,  was  necessarily  accurate.   That
    number contradicted the number given by the  appellant  (042-99239651).
    Ms Hassan explained the discrepancy by saying that the explanation  may
    be perfectly innocent.  The number may have changed.

8.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller responded to say that in relation to DVR  3  (also
    known as DVR 8) the substance of the investigation  revealed  that  the
    FIR number supplied (1013 of 2002) was not registered as claimed.   The
    FIR was forged and not genuine.  I was also referred to FIR at page  59
    (reference FIR 117 of 2003) which corresponds with DVR 2 (also known as
    DVR 9).  The DVR in question clearly shows  that  no  such  report  was
    made.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller also said that the Allama Iqbal Station was
    contacted. It may be that the organisational structure  of  the  Lahore
    Police explained why a particular police station had been contacted  in
    relation  to  a  particular  FIR.   There  was  a  certain  amount   of
    speculation about how various discrepancies had arisen but her  general
    submission was that there was no requirement for the whole of  the  FIR
    to be placed  before  a  police  station.   Clearly,  the  respondent's
    investigations had revealed significant discrepancies and there was  no
    reason to doubt the evidence she had obtained.

9.   Ms Hassan responded to say that while she accepted that the  respondent
    would not necessarily have fabricated evidence, human errors  may  have
    occurred.  Given the gravity of the issues in the case I was  asked  to
    give the appellant the benefit of any doubt.  It was not good enough to
    say that there "may be errors".  Where anonymous reports were relied on
    at least the rank of the person who made the report for the DVR  should
    have been given.  It was not credible that the police  contacted  would
    have been able to obtain the information requested so  quickly  and  at
    such short notice.  It was more than mere  coincidence  that  two  DVRs
    were at exactly the same time.  This made them highly  suspicious.   In
    the circumstances I was asked to conclude that the evidence adduced  by
    the respondent in the form  of  DVRs  was  not  reliable  and  did  not
    undermine the appellant's evidence.  For those reasons I was invited to
    dismiss the respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

10.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion

11.  It seems to be common ground that the burden of proving that  the  FIRs
    were  false  rather  than  genuine  rested  on  the  respondent.    The
    respondent claims that it makes a material difference to  the  veracity
    of the appellant's  case  that,  the  FIRs  having  been  submitted  to
    document verification analysis, had been shown to be false rather  than
    genuine.  The DVRs confirmed  that  the  FIRs  were  not  genuine  and,
    furthermore, that warrants were forged and not genuine.  The respondent
    claims that the flawed assessment of the DVRs undermines the assessment
    of credibility made by the  Immigration  Judge  so  as  to  lead  to  a
    material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   Indeed,  the
    respondent claims, the Upper Tribunal ought to substitute its  decision
    to dismiss the appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum/human rights protection for the decision of  the  FTT  to  allow
    that appeal.

12.   The  Tribunal  cannot  make  its  own  assessment  of  any   witness's
    credibility when it has not heard that witness give evidence but it  is
    possible, in analysing the facts, to reach a different conclusion  than
    the FTT. If, as Ms Brocklesby-Weller suggests, the FIR's  are  in  fact
    false that may be a decisive factor in deciding whether the FTT reached
    a conclusion it was entitled to come to. Mrs Brocklesby Weller suggests
    that the false FIR's  are  sufficiently  decisive  to  lead  the  Upper
    Tribunal to a different conclusion than the FtT.

13.  I have been provided with  Country  Information  and  Guidance  summary
    (Pakistan) - February  2015.   It  appears  from  this  that  Sectarian
    attacks on Shia Muslims  and  other  minorities  are  common  place  in
    Pakistan.  Security laws enshrining major powers to the security forces
    do not help the Shia community and discrimination and  persecution  are
    consequences of this.  The law appears to be applied  in  an  arbitrary
    way and arbitrary arrest and detention occurs more often than should be
    the case.  The protections enshrined in law are unfortunately far  from
    the reality for many minority groups.  The police do not always achieve
    the high standards which ought to be expected of them.

14.  At the hearing the appellant  did  not  maintain  the  request  in  the
    correspondence for a playing of  a  video  during  the  Upper  Tribunal
    proceedings.

15.  Following the earlier hearing  I  explained  (at  paragraph  25  of  my
    decision) that it was necessary to set aside the findings and  decision
    in relation to the FIRs and any  findings  consequential  thereof.   In
    coming to the result of this analysis, it may be that the appellant  no
    longer qualifies as a refugee/person in need of human rights protection
    in the UK.  I indicated in paragraph 24 of my earlier decision that  it
    will be necessary to revisit the other findings in the  case  when  the
    document verification reports have been fully considered.  I  now  turn
    to consider those documents.

16.  I have looked carefully at the FIRs  and  the  corresponding  DVRs.   I
    have not found this an easy process as the numbers on the  respondent's
    supplementary bundle index did not match up. This was a case apparently
    crying out for a straightforward schedule indicating  the  grounds  for
    each complaint cross referring to relevant documents.  Nevertheless,  I
    have successfully identified which number relates to which FIR.   Given
    the  serious  allegations  of  forgery  that  have  been  made,  it  is
    unsurprising that the identity of security personnel in  Pakistan  have
    not been revealed.  In addition, it is common in  these  cases  not  to
    reveal details of the document verification process  since  this  might
    reveal forgery methods to the other party.  It would have been open  to
    the respondent to request a hearing  in  private  where  these  methods
    could have been revealed in greater detail  or  for  the  appellant  to
    request this to be done.  This did not take place  in  this  case  and,
    therefore, it is necessary to consider whether  the  criticism  of  the
    respondent as to the lack of clarity as to the identity of some of  the
    officials involved with the investigation on the respondent's behalf is
    justified. It needs to be asked whether sufficient  detail  was  given.
    Further, I have  carefully  looked  at  each  of  the  FIR's  with  the
    equivalent DVR's.  There is a common theme.  For example, the FIR at 57-
    002008 it is said to relate to an incident on 12 February 2008  but  it
    has been revealed that  the  documents  concerned  were  forgeries/non-
    genuine.  The DVR  correctly  corresponds  to  the  Masti  Gate  Police
    Station.  In incident 1056/2011, which took place on  12  August  2011,
    also correctly refers to the Allama Iqbal Police Station.  It  confirms
    that no registration number  of  the  type  contained  in  the  FIR  is
    registered and  that  it  was  forged  or  non-genuine.   The  document
    verifier had  extensive  experience.   In  relation  to  997/2007,  for
    example, which relates to an incident on 17 December  2007,  this  also
    refers to the correct police station  (Mochi  Gate  Police  Station  in
    Lahore).  Again, the number was not registered and the forged and  non-
    genuine warrant and summons were referred  to.   Ms  Hassan  identified
    discrepancies or possible discrepancies in  relation  to  some  of  the
    DVRs.  For example, she pointed out that the incident 1013 of  2002  of
    22 December 2002 had been reported to the Gowal Mandi Police Station in
    Lahore.  However, an official of the Allama Iqbal Town  Police  Station
    Lahore, had been contacted.  There may a perfectly innocent explanation
    for this, for example, relating to the  organisation  with  the  Lahore
    Police Divisions.  This could have been raised with the  respondent  by
    way of a request for information, if desired.

17.  I accept that the contents  of  the  DVRs  are  hearsay  evidence  with
    unidentified officials from different police stations  in  Pakistan.  I
    also accept that Ms Hassan has raised doubts over some of  these  DVRs.
    However, there is a striking consistency throughout the  DVRs  and  the
    FIRs are of questionable authenticity. The fact remains  that  numerous
    documents relied on  by  the  appellant  appear  to  have  been  forged
    Furthermore, as I  have  suggested,  the  Immigration  Liaison  Officer
    appeared to have relevant experience of dealing with such forgeries.

18.  The respondent had the burden of showing on a balance of  probabilities
    that the FIRs were unreliable.  I am satisfied that the respondent  has
    discharged this burden.  It must follow that less weight should  attach
    to those documents or they should be disregarded altogether.  It  seems
    most unlikely that different police  stations  in  different  parts  of
    Lahore should reach the same view as to the non-genuine nature  of  the
    FIRs.

19.  During the case  the  appellant  has  not  been  able  to  provide  any
    evidence of conspiracy between the respondent and the Pakistan  police.
    At paragraph 18 of her decision, the Immigration Judge commented on the
    lack of evidence of conspiracy. There is no evidence  to  back  up  the
    assertion that the document verification process was  inadequate.     I
    see no reason why the documents produced by the respondent  should  not
    be documents that should be given weight.  In the  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied the respondent discharged the burden of proving that the DVRs
    can be relied upon.  This means that the decision was  reached  on  the
    basis of a flawed assessment of an important piece of evidence provided
    by the respondent.

Article 8 rights

20.  An additional point is raised in the grant  of  permission.   This  was
    not addressed fully at the hearing. It related to the  failure  of  the
    Immigration Judge to properly consider the effect of  Section  117B  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   That  section
    provides for a number of public interest  considerations  to  apply  to
    assessments under Article 8 of the ECHR.

21.  It does not appear that the appellant's human rights  under  Article  8
    outweighed all other considerations.  The appellant had been in the  UK
    for ten years and had had two children since arriving  in  to  the  UK.
    The Immigration Judge correctly pointed out that their  welfare  was  a
    primary consideration under Section 55 of the Borders  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  However, it  had  to  be  balanced  against  the
    respondent's   duty   to   enforce   effective   immigration   control.
    Additionally, the children were quite young (approximately 8 years  old
    at the date of the hearing) and the appellants could, if  they  wished,
    return as a family unit to Pakistan.  Indeed, there was every  prospect
    that this is  what  would  happen.   In  the  circumstances  I  am  not
    satisfied that the Immigration Judge was right  to  conclude  that  the
    circumstances were exceptional so as to require the respondent to allow
    the appellant and his family to continue their private or  family  life
    in the UK as opposed to in Pakistan.

Conclusions

22.  I have concluded  that  the  incidents  the  First  Appellant  says  he
    reported to the Pakistan police either did not in fact take  place  or,
    if they  did  take  place,  they  were  not  reported  to  the  police.
    Therefore, there is no adequate evidence that the police had  a  proper
    opportunity  to  investigate/prosecute  the  offenders  concerned.  The
    Immigration Judge made favourable  credibility  findings.  However,  it
    seems that her favourable findings  were  fundamentally  undermined  by
    this  evidence.   Accordingly,  having  carefully   re-considered   the
    evidence in the case, including any evidence filed in  accordance  with
    my directions following the hearing on 21st March 2016, I have  decided
    to re-make the decision which is  to  dismiss  the  appellants'  appeal
    against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  the  appellants  refugee
    status in the UK. The other findings  made  by  the  Immigration  Judge
    cannot be allowed to stand in the light of my decision in  relation  to
    the DVRs. I find that the appellants are  not  refugees  and  that  the
    family are not entitled to refugee status.

24.  The Immigration Judge  rightly  rejected  the  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection.

25.  It follows that the claim under Article 3 of the  ECHR  ought  also  to
    have been rejected by  the  Immigration  Judge  and  I  find  that  the
    appellants would not be subject to inhuman and degrading  treatment  in
    Pakistan.

26.  The claim under private or family life in the  UK  also  fails  because
    the respondent has successfully invoked Article 8(2) of  the  ECHR  and
    the appellant can continue his family life with his wife  and  children
    in Pakistan.

Notice of Decision

The appeal against the decision of the FtT by the respondent is allowed.   I
substitute the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  which  is  to  dismiss  the
appeal by the appellant against the  respondent's  refusal  of  the  refugee
claim/human rights claim.

An anonymity direction was made by the FTT and I  see  no  reason  to  alter
that direction. Accordingly, the direction  at  the  end  of  that  decision
stands.


Signed                                  Date 24.7.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable in this case and the decision by the FTT to  make  a  fee
award stands.


Signed                                  Date 24.7.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

