








UPPER Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04960/2014
                                                               AA/04961/2014
                                                               AA/04962/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2 October 2014                            |On: 19 November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                   darshani Nisanasala Hendawitharana (1)
                     Mohammed Faizal Mohammed Thaha (2)
                         Mohammed Hamzah Faizal (3)
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr N Paramjorthy, counsel (instructed by Dasuki
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of  Sri  Lanka.  The  first  appellant  is
    married to the second and they have a child, born on  31st  July  2011,
    who is a dependant on the claim.


 2. In a determination  promulgated  on  11th  September  2014,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burns dismissed the  appeals  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant asylum and to remove the appellant.


 3. On 2nd October 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal. He  was  satisfied  from  reading  the
    determination that the Judge did not engage with all the evidence  that
    was before him. In particular, it was asserted that he did not  in  his
    findings  engage  with  the  appellants'  medical  records,  the  court
    proceedings and documentation and a letter from an MP. Further, he gave
    inadequate reasons for his findings.


 4. Mr Paramjorthy, who prepared helpful grounds of appeal, stated  at  the
    outset that there was "a consensual agreement" between the parties.  It
    is conceded on behalf of teh respondent that there were material errors
    of law such that the determination should be set aside and re-made  "de
    novo".


 5. Ms Sreeraman confirmed that the respondent did not seek to  uphold  the
    determination.


 6. The parties submitted that this was an appropriate case for the  appeal
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as the "core  documents"  had
    not  been  considered.  The  findings  would  not  be  preserved.   The
    appellants had accordingly not had the benefit of a determination based
    on all the evidence, including the documentary evidence and reports.


 7. I have had regard to the grounds in the application for permission, and
    in particular paragraphs 5, 6 and 9 (iv).


 8. The appellant provided a detailed witness statement which  had  engaged
    with and particularised her  response  to  adverse  paragraphs  in  the
    respondent's refusal letter.


 9. Her witness statement had not been  available  at  the  date  that  the
    refusal letter was written. Her husband's  detailed  witness  statement
    was not available.  Nor  were  the  report  of  Dr  Dhumad,  the  Court
    summons, the Court proceedings and translations available.


10. It was thus contended that the Judge had  materially  erred  by  simply
    relying upon the "rationale" of the respondent in dismissing the appeal
    without regard to the further evidence.


11. Further, the respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  had  criticised  the
    appellant for not producing court documents at the  time  of  her  full
    interview. However, she did in fact produce the  documentation  at  the
    date of the appeal hearing. In her witness statement, she explained the
    provenance of the documentation. However, the Judge at paragraph 72  of
    the determination placed no weight on the arrest warrant on account  of
    its late production and his adverse credibility findings  that  he  had
    already made.


12. It is contended in particular that the Judge  failed  to  consider  the
    Court proceedings and documentation set  out  at  pages  53-72  of  the
    appellant's bundle. Further, the Judge had not had regard at all to the
    appellant's own NHS medical  records.  Those  were  important  as  they
    particularised PTSD symptoms and accordingly the Judge's findings  that
    the report of Dr Dhumad was "overblown" and not objective had not  been
    considered in the context of the core NHS assessment from 2012, showing
    that the appellant had presented with various symptoms;  that  she  had
    been prescribed Citalopram and was diagnosed with PTSD.  The  assertion
    by the Judge that there was no body of supporting evidence  to  justify
    the claim and diagnosis made is accordingly not tenable in the light of
    the evidence as a whole.


13. I find for the above  reasons  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did involve the making of material errors of law.


14. I accordingly set aside the determination. The parties  submitted  that
    there will have to be a full re-hearing. None of the findings  of  fact
    made by the First-tier Tribunal are  preserved.  All  the  live  issues
    identified from the refusal decision 'are in play'.


15. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  practice  statement
    regarding the remitting of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision. In applying that approach,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    extent of judicial fact finding which is necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision to be re-made is extensive.  There  will  be  a  complete  re-
    hearing with no findings preserved. I  have  also  had  regard  to  the
    overriding objective and conclude that it would be  just  and  fair  to
    remit the case.


16. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a  fresh  decision  to  be  made.  The
    agreed hearing date is the 28th April 2015.


    Decision


    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the  making
    of material errors of law and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to
    Hatton Cross for a fresh decision.


    Signed        Date 10 November 2014

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer



