
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04115/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mS H u A
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreerahman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Kadic of Counsel at Shervins Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade dated 25 January 2016.  The
    appeal relates to a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Omotosho
    whereby a Decision was promulgated on 16 December 2015.  The  Judge  at
    the First-tier Tribunal had allowed the appeal on asylum  grounds.  The
    Secretary of State has appealed, but to ease following this decision  I
    shall continue to refer to Ms Alasow as the Appellant and the Secretary
    of State as the Respondent.

2.    The Respondent had appealed against the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision and relied on grounds which can be summarised as follows:

    (1)    The Judge had failed to adequately reason her  determination  in
         the light of the Country Guidance;

    (2)    The Judge's decision in respect of the  Appellant's  ability  to
         relocate to Mogadishu was not adequate.

3.    At the hearing before me Ms Sreeraman said she relied on  the  grounds
    of appeal. She said that the Judge had failed  to  follow  the  Country
    Guidance in MOJ and others (Somalia) CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC). It was
    unclear and on what  terms  that  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds. At paragraph 34 the Judge said that the Appellant hailed  from
    a minority clan, but there was nothing in clear terms as to why she had
    come to that  decision.  There  was  no  reference  to  any  particular
    objective evidence. The reference to the daughter was to be noted  that
    there was no actual evidence of a grant of asylum to the  daughter.  As
    for paragraph 41 of her decision, the Judge had made findings that  the
    Appellant had no ties to Mogadishu and that Internal Relocation was not
    available but the Judge again failed to make adequate findings  and  so
    the decision was fundamentally flawed. That was because again the Judge
    had failed to follow the Country Guidance.

4.    In her submissions in response Ms Kadic took me  through  the  Judge's
    decision and submitted that the Judge did properly consider  the  claim
    for asylum. Although the Judge had not referred  to  Particular  Social
    Group, that is what she must have meant. The Judge did not  spell  this
    out but that did not matter.  The Appellant was from  a  minority  clan
    and therefore at risk in Mogadishu.  There was no support structure for
    the Appellant in Mogadishu. The friend of the deceased husband who  had
    helped the Appellant to leave Somalia was not now there. The  Appellant
    has a daughter in the UK and she herself has three children. She is  on
    benefits. There was something missing from paragraph 39 of the decision
    but it was of no consequence.

5.    Ms  Kadic  agreed  that  there  was  no  finding  of  the  Appellant's
    daughter's asylum status in the UK although it had  been  mentioned  in
    the witness statement. It was also the case that there  was  no  actual
    finding in respect of the daughter's ability to financially assist  her
    mother in Somalia, but again this was covered in  the  evidence.   This
    was an elderly Appellant and she would be at risk on return to Somalia.
    I ought to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

6.    I had reserved my  decision  but  had  invited  the  parties  to  make
    submissions as to what ought to be the outcome if I had found there  to
    be a material error of law. Both  parties  submitted  that  the  matter
    ought to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing.  Ms  Kadic
    said that the favourable findings ought to stand whereas  Ms  Sreeraman
    submitted that the findings in  respect  of  the  inability  to  access
    support and funds ought to be set aside as it was wrongly made.

7.    I had reserved my decision which I now give.

8.    In my judgment the Judge materially erred in law in failing to  follow
    the Country Guidance decision in MOJ and others (Return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT  00442  (IAC).  The  Judge  did  refer  to  this
    decision but in my judgment, it is plain that she has failed  to  apply
    it in its entirety in respect of the steps that needed to be  taken  in
    respect of a proposed returnee to Mogadishu. I can well understand that
    the Judge was dealing  with  a  76  year  old  Appellant  with  medical
    ailments and that may have caused her to be swayed, but the answers  to
    the matters the Judge was looking for  were  within  that  Presidential
    Tribunal's decision. Of course everyone would feel sympathy in  such  a
    case.  I readily acknowledge that the Country Guidance is guidance  but
    there had to be good reason to depart from it. There is no good  reason
    for such a departure that I can detect from the Judge's decision.

9.    The Country Guidance makes clear in the body of the decision but  also
    in the headnote that,

         "(ii)    Generally, a person who is "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.
         not associated with the security forces; any aspect  of  government
         or  official   administration   or   any   NGO   or   international
         organisation) on returning to Mogadishu after a period  of  absence
         will face no real risk of persecution or risk of harm  such  as  to
         require protection under Article 3 of the ECHR or Article 15(c)  of
         the Qualification Directive. In particular, he will not be at  real
         risk simply on account of having lived in a European location for a
         period of time  of  being  viewed  with  suspicion  either  by  the
         authorities as a possible supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al  Shabaab
         as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose  Islamic  integrity  has  been
         compromised by living in a Western country."

10.   This Appellant was not more than "an  ordinary  civilian"  and  indeed
    she had  left  Somalia  relatively  recently  in  2014.  Nor  did  this
    Appellant come within the categories mentioned of,

         "(iv)    The level of civilian casualties,  excluding  non-military
         casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab target  groups  such
         as politicians, police officers,  government  officials  and  those
         associated with NGOs and  international  organisations,  cannot  be
         precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence   which   is
         incomplete and  unreliable.  However,  it  is  established  by  the
         evidence considered as a whole that there has been a  reduction  in
         the level of civilian casualties since 2011,  largely  due  to  the
         cessation  of  confrontational  warfare  within  the  city  and  Al
         Shabaab's resort to  asymmetrical  warfare  on  carefully  selected
         targets. The present level of  casualties  does  not  amount  to  a
         sufficient risk to ordinary  civilians  such  as  to  represent  an
         Article 15(c) risk."

11.   Therefore the Judge needed to set out what it  was  that  placed  this
    Appellant at a particular risk in Mogadishu. The failure to do so was a
    material error of law.

12.   Further, the Country Guidance made plain that,

         "(ix)    If it is  accepted  that  a  person  facing  a  return  to
         Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear family or  close
         relatives in the city to assist him in re-establishing  himself  on
         return, there will need to be a careful assessment of  all  of  the
         circumstances. These  considerations  will  include,  but  are  not
         limited to:

             .   circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

             .   length of absence from Mogadishu;

             .   family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

             .   access to financial resources;

             .   prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
             employment or self employment;

             .   availability of remittances from abroad;

             .   means of support during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
             Kingdom;

             .   why his ability to fund the journey to the West no  longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.

         (x)      Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return
         to explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
         opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.

         (xi)     It will, therefore, only be those with no clan  or  family
         support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and
         who have no real prospect of securing access  to  a  livelihood  on
         return who will  face  the  prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
         falling below that which is acceptable in  humanitarian  protection
         terms.

         (xii)    The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those
         who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live
         in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)  risk  or
         facing a real risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocation in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no former  links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards."

13.   Again there are no adequate findings that get near dealing with  these
    matters. Paragraph 41 of the Judge's decision is not reflective of  the
    Country Guidance in terms of risk on return to Mogadishu.   As  I  have
    said  above,  I  note  that  Ms  Kadic  states   that   some   of   the
    resources/finances matters were dealt with in the  witness  statements.
    If that is correct then  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to  make
    findings in respect of those witness statements and the  evidence.  The
    failure to do is also a material error of law.

14.   Having reflected on the matter I am of the clear view that  there  are
    material errors of law in the Judge's decision. I do not consider  that
    the Judge's decision can stand. The findings made have to be  revisited
    and so there has to be a complete  re-hearing.  That  re-hearing  shall
    take place at the First-tier Tribunal. None of the findings stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal shall be re-heard at the First-tier Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 22 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

