
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04860/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                    A A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson counsel instructed by Broudie,
Jackson and Cantor
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. An anonymity direction  was  previously  made  and
    will continue.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Levin promulgated on 30 January 2015 which dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum on all grounds .



Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 27 December 1983 and is a national of  Yemen.
    Her child A M Y born 7 January 2008 is a dependent in the appeal.

 4. On 3 July 2012 the Appellant applied for asylum.

 5. On 16 January 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application and made directions for her removal.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Levin ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge made a mistake  of
    fact in asserting that  the  certified  translations  of  the  Facebook
    account had not been signed; that the Judge was in error in not raising
    this issue at the hearing ; that the judge was not entitled to make  an
    assessment of the child's best interests and  that  the  matter  should
    have been remitted to the Respondent to make that decision;  the  Judge
    failed to assess  the  Appellant's  risk  from  the  Houthis  who  were
    opponents of the former regime.

 8. On 26 February 2015 First -tier Tribunal Judge Osborne gave  permission
    to appeal.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Nicholson on behalf  of  the
    Appellant and on behalf Ms Johnstone on behalf  of  the  Respondent.  I
    took those submissions into account.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. The Appellant is a national of Yemen who it was accepted was a  distant
    relation of former President Saleh and claimed  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom claiming that she had to flee the country  as  she  was  to  be
    arrested and questions in relation to a number of allegations amounting
    to treason.

12. In a  lengthy,  detailed  and  cogently  reasoned  decision  the  Judge
    assessed the Appellant claim against the background material and  I  am
    satisfied taking full account of the expert report from Dr Seddon which
    he refers to on a number of occasions in the decision. The  event  that
    underpinned the Appellant's flight from Yemen, the  key  event  of  her
    claim, was her claim that she had left on 8 May 2012 after receiving  a
    telephone called  from  a  colleague  in  the  Intelligence  Department
    informing her that the head of the Department, 'Tariq' had accused  her
    of  treason  and  ordered  her  arrest  and  interrogation.  The  Judge
    considered the factual backdrop to her claim taking  into  account  the
    expert report of David Seddon. He set out a  detailed  summary  of  the
    historical background to the Appellant's claim based largely it appears
    on the contents of Dr Seddon's report. Therefore I do  not  accept  the
    argument that the Judge either did not give  sufficient  weight  to  Dr
    Seddon's report or that his approach to it was flawed. Thus  the  Judge
    considered the fact that there was an immunity law passed on 21 January
    2012 granting immunity from prosecution to former President  Saleh  and
    anyone who worked for him during  his  33  year  rule.   He  took  into
    account Dr Seddon's suggestion that it was over optimistic  to  suggest
    that the Appellant could rely on the law for protection but found  that
    Dr Seddon's views were entirely  speculative  and  did  not  take  into
    account the other evidence that he had before him at paragraph 48.

13.  The Judge gave detailed reasons for why he did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant had given a credible account of why she fled from  Yemen  and
    where he rejected Dr Seddon's views gave clear reasons why he  did  so.
    He found it surprising that the Appellant was not  arrested  in  the  5
    days following her warning phone call and her flight from Yemen and  he
    rejected the Appellant's explanation for this as  speculation  and  was
    entitled to do so. The authorities had shown no adverse interest in her
    mother or brothers who were successful  businessmen  in  Yemen  and  he
    found that this cast doubt on the credibility of  her  claim  that  the
    authorities suspected her of being a traitor and had issued  a  summons
    to arrest her: he was entitled to draw that conclusion.

14. The Judge considered the 7  matters  that  the  Appellant  claimed  the
    authorities wished to interrogate her about. He set out  in  detail  at
    paragraphs 27 why he did  not  find  her  claim  to  be  credible.  The
    Appellant's claim to have been accused  of  treason  against  President
    Saleh in May 2012 was inconsistent with the fact that Saleh  had  ceded
    power to his successor in February 2012.He found that there was a  high
    level of violence in Yemen and the two incidents where shots were fired
    at a presidential vehicle in which she was travelling were not targeted
    at her but rather  the  vehicle.  He  found  that  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant who claimed to be well known in Yemen was able to  leave  the
    country  without  any  difficulty  on  an  international   flight   was
    inconsistent with her claim to be of interest to the  authorities.  The
    Judge concluded that he did not accept the Appellant  fled  from  Yemen
    because she was about to be arrested  for  treason  and  that  she  had
    fabricated this claim. These were findings that were open to him

15. I turn to the issue  of  risk  on  return  where  Mr  Nicholson  argued
    initially that the Judge made a factual mistake in failing to take into
    account the Facebook evidence on the basis that the translations before
    him did not bear the signature of the translator. It became clear  when
    I examined the file in court that in fact the Judge did not have signed
    copies of the Facebook entries  and  Mr  Nicholson  conceded  that  the
    solicitors representing her appeared to have forgotten  to  serve  them
    although Mr Nicholson who appeared in the First-tier believed that they
    had been served on all parties.

16. I accept however that even though the Judge did not have signed  copies
    of the Facebook entries and therefore failed to take them into  account
    it could arguably be a procedural error though no blame attached to the
    Judge. However I am satisfied that the evidence in issue could not have
    made a material outcome  to  the  decision  given  the  nature  of  the
    evidence itself and  the  other  findings  that  the  Judge  had  made.
    Although the Appellant suggests in her witness statement  at  paragraph
    36 'I was given a name on Facebook as A S' the evidence simply shows  a
    Facebook account the Judge identified was not in the  Appellant's  name
    but in the name of another person, it is  not  an  account  purportedly
    created by her in another name and it would be  difficult  to  see  how
    that could be rationally argued given its contents. The photographs and
    entries ridicule the  former  President  and  tribal  elders  but  also
    include photographs of the Appellant  herself  and  comments  that  are
    critical of her role in the former regime. A Tribunal would  have  been
    entitled to conclude that it was not credible that the Appellant  would
    be held responsible for entries that were not only critical of her  and
    thus unlikely to have been created by her and therefore she  would  not
    be at risk arising out of the contents. It would have also been open to
    a Tribunal to conclude that given the finding that  the  Appellant  had
    fabricated the reasons given for her flight from Yemen her  claim  that
    she had been threatened as a result of the  contents  of  the  Facebook
    account which she had not even created  was not credible.

17. Mr Nicholson suggested to me  that  Dr  Seddons  report  supported  the
    Appellant's argument that she was at risk from  the  Facebook  evidence
    and indeed he suggested that at paragraph 6.24 Dr Seddon  said  it  was
    plausible that the Facebook account  put  her  at  risk.  I  have  read
    paragraph 6.24 of the report and Dr Seddon does not state that,  indeed
    he states:

         "I cannot comment on the Facebook issue as  I  have  not  seen  the
         posts: I do not therefore wish  to  conjecture  as  to  the  likely
         response of the tribal leaders".

18. Therefore I am satisfied that  even  had  the  Facebook  material  been
    considered it would have made no material outcome to the decision.

19. It was  finally  that  the  Tribunal  was  precluded  from  making  the
    assessment of the child's best interests and this had to be carried out
    by the Respondent relying on JO (section 55 Duty)  Nigeria  UKUT  00517
    (IAC) . This was an argument advanced before the Judge  in  the  First-
    tier and recorded by the Judge at paragraph 57-58. The Judge gave clear
    reasons both relying on JO  and  on a decision of the Court  of  Appeal
    AJ (India) and others v SSHD [2011] EWCA  for concluding  that  he  was
    entitled to make that assessment himself. I was  also  referred  to  MK
    (section 55-tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT (IAC) which I am
    satisfied justified the approach taken by a Tribunal  Judge  who  feels
    that he is 'sufficiently equipped to make an adequate assessment of the
    best interests of any affected child.'

20. Indeed both Mr Nicholson and the Judge were in error in suggesting that
    the Respondent did not consider the best interests of the child in  the
    refusal letter: at page 2 reference is made to  s  55  of  the  Borders
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  then  at  paragraph  62.  The
    Judge was also entitled to take into account that the Appellant's child
    had entered the United Kingdom in June 2013  posing  as  the  child  of
    another family and it is unclear at what stage the  existence  of  this
    child was drawn to the  Respondent  and  what  information  was  placed
    before the Respondent in making the decision. The  Judge  then  in  his
    decision went on at paragraphs 60-66 to make a detailed, meticulous and
    well balanced assessment of the needs of a child very recently  arrived
    in the United Kingdom who was only 7 years old,  had  no  family  other
    than his mother in the United Kingdom but had  an  extended  family  in
    Yemen. I am satisfied that he was entitled to make the  assessment  and
    that the findings were open to him.

21.  It was finally argued in the grounds as  amended  by  the  Appellant's
    representatives (though not a matter pursued  by  Mr  Nicholson  as  he
    conceded that the original grounds as drafted by him  did  not  contain
    this paragraph) that the Judge had not made findings on a 'key part' of
    the Appellant's claim that she was at risk from the Houthis 'as  raised
    in the witness evidence and the objective  material.'  I  am  satisfied
    that this ground is simply an attempt to re argue  the  case  that  the
    Appellant was at risk from other Islamic groups. There was no  evidence
    placed before the Judge to suggest that  all  returned  asylum  seekers
    were at risk on return because of the general country  situation  I  am
    satisfied that in his assessment of the risk  on  return  at  paragraph
    39(d) and 51onwards the Judge adequately  addressed  the  risk  of  the
    Appellant being targeted by 'Islamic groups' and/or Al Qaeda and  found
    there was no such risk to the Appellant.

22. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 27.10.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

