

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/04154/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 November 2014                  |On 18 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD BURNS

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 CASTRO MOYO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Rehman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 26  November  1980.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 April 2006 when he  claimed  asylum.
    His application was refused and his appeal was dismissed on 15  October
    2006.  A further three submissions were made by him, each of which were
    refused.  By decision of 4 June 2014 the respondent  refused  to  grant
    him refugee status under paragraph 336 of the Immigration  Rules  HC395
    but granted him discretionary leave to remain until  4  December  2016.
    He appealed against that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Tribunal, chaired by Judge Hague, sat to consider his case on 28 August
    2014.

2.    Upon  application  for  asylum  being  made  on  25  April  2006,  the
    respondent refused that application in a letter dated 16 June 2006.  He
    appealed against that refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.  That  appeal
    was heard on 19 October 2006 before Judge Frankish who refused it.   We
    were provided with a copy of the determination and  reasons.   We  will
    make reference to its terms in due course.  However, we observe at this
    stage that the  appellant  gave  evidence  before  Judge  Frankish  and
    stated, among other things, that he was beaten up in 2003  when  people
    were looking for his uncle William Dube who was, at  the  time  of  the
    appeal, in the United Kingdom.  He claimed that Mr  Dube  had  been  "a
    very high person to [sic] the MDC in Bulawayo", often arranged meetings
    and distributed literature about the MDC and was the point  of  contact
    in the appellant's locality for people wanting to join  the  MDC.   The
    appellant claimed he was very close to and greatly  influenced  by  his
    uncle rendering it inevitable that the appellant would become a  member
    of the MDC and "fight for the cause".  They worked  together  extremely
    closely both politically and through Mr Dube's business.  Upon Mr  Dube
    leaving Zimbabwe, the appellant claimed to have assumed Mr Dube's  role
    in the MDC.

3.    However, at the time of the appeal  in  October  2006,  the  appellant
    stated that, although Mr Dube was in the United  Kingdom,  he  had  not
    established contact with him and, accordingly, Mr Dube was not led as a
    witness on the appellant's behalf.  Judge Frankish was unable to accept
    that the appellant had completely lost touch with  his  uncle  and  was
    understandably sceptical of the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  so
    greatly influenced by his uncle, to have worked so closely with him, to
    have largely followed in his footsteps, and to know that his uncle  was
    in the United Kingdom yet not to have  any  idea  where  he  then  was.
    Judge Frankish concluded that the uncle was "nothing more than  a  prop
    to bolster the claim of MDC activism."

4.    At the hearing of 28 August 2014 before  Judge  Hague,  the  appellant
    again gave evidence.  He maintained that he was at risk of  persecution
    in Zimbabwe on the grounds of his actual or imputed  political  opinion
    as a person opposed to the Mugabe regime.  He claimed that he had  come
    to the adverse attention of the authorities prior to his departure from
    Zimbabwe on the same basis as he had maintained before Judge  Frankish.
    Accordingly, he advanced the same contentions before Judge Hague to the
    effect that his close connection with his uncle, Mr Dube, and the  fact
    that he had taken over the role of his uncle within the MDC had brought
    him to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe  which
    rendered him at risk on return.

5.    Judge Hague noted at paragraph 7 that Judge Frankish  had  disbelieved
    the appellant and had considered the appellant to be  no  more  than  a
    general MDC supporter.   He  considered  that  the  findings  of  Judge
    Frankish formed the starting point of consideration of the  case  since
    the facts relied on by the appellant were not materially different  and
    much of the same evidence was relied upon.  Accordingly, these  matters
    did not fall to be re-litigated but that his findings should be made in
    line with them.  He referred to Devaseelan v SSHD  2002  UKIAT  000702.
    However, William Dube attended the hearing before Judge Hague and  gave
    evidence.  It was argued on behalf of the appellant that  the  evidence
    of William Dube permitted  Judge  Hague  to  depart  from  the  earlier
    findings of Judge Frankish and that he ought to have made an assessment
    of  Mr  Dube's  credibility  and  to  have  dealt  with  the   evidence
    accordingly.  However, Judge Hague  considered  that  the  comments  by
    Judge Frankish about the absence of William  Dube  were  only  part  of
    Judge Frankish's reasoning.  That reasoning was  not  vitiated  by  the
    appearance of William Dube at the hearing in August 2014.  Since  Judge
    Hague had, independently, found the appellant to lack  credibility,  he
    proceeded upon the factual basis found by Judge Frankish and  concluded
    that the appellant was no more than a general  MDC  activist  while  in
    Zimbabwe.

6.    The appellant also advanced arguments in  relation  to  his  political
    activity in the UK with "Zimbabwe Lets Unite" (ZLU), a  pressure  group
    allegedly set up with the object  of  uniting  opposition  against  the
    Mugabe regime.  It was contended  that  this  would  be  known  to  the
    authorities in  Zimbabwe  and  would  cause  him  to  be  arrested  and
    persecuted if returned.  Judge Hague rejected these contentions for the
    reasons that he gives.  These findings are the subject of criticism  in
    this appeal to the extent set out in the second ground of  appeal  with
    which we deal below.

7.    Mr Rehman argued before us that Judge Hague had erred in his  approach
    to the previous appeal determination by Judge Frankish because  of  the
    evidence given by William Dube.  He pointed out that Mr Dube's evidence
    had been unchallenged by the respondent.  It was clear that he did have
    the role attributed to him by the appellant, that the Mugabe regime was
    aware of the connection between Mr Dube and the appellant and  Mr  Dube
    had been granted refugee status in the United Kingdom.  The evidence of
    Mr Dube  accordingly  justified  the  revisiting  of  Judge  Frankish's
    findings in relation to the appellant's evidence that he  had  come  to
    the attention of the authorities before he left Zimbabwe and  therefore
    would be at risk on return.  Judge Hague had made  no  findings  on  Mr
    Dube's credibility.  He was obliged to do so and  that  failure  was  a
    material error of law.

8.    Reference was made to the statement of Mr Dube dated  19  August  2014
    which was submitted to Judge Hague.  Since this is  the  foundation  of
    what is claimed to be a material error of law by  Judge  Hague  in  his
    assessment of the appellant's appeal, we set  out  the  terms  of  that
    statement in full:

         "I William Dube currently residing at [ - ] will say as follows:

         1. I arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 January 2004  and  claimed
             asylum at the airport.  My claim was initially refused and  my
             appeal was dismissed.  I  believe  the  main  reason  for  the
             refusal was that it  was  not  accepted  I  was  a  Zimbabwean
             national.  I subsequently made a fresh claim and  was  granted
             five years leave to remain as a  refugee.   I  have  now  have
             indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

         2. I was heavily involved in MDC  campaigns  in  Felabusi.   I  had
             started this in 1999 but became heavily involved  in  2002  to
             2003.  I  was  involved  in  youth  campaigns  and  organising
             rallies in the area.  There was no  specific  title  that  was
             given to me but I had got very excited at the creation of  the
             party and wanted to get involved as much as I could.

         3. I was captured by  Zanu  PF  militia  in  the  area  on  several
             occasions and tortured.  I kept reporting this to  the  police
             station and they kept saying  they  would  look  into  it  but
             nothing was ever done.

         4. Eventually I decided I could not take it anymore so I decided to
             flee Zimbabwe.  I left with some other guys and  travelled  to
             South Africa.  I stayed with some MDC members there for  about
             six months.  I then  travelled  to  the  UK  where  I  claimed
             asylum.

         5. The basis for my claim for asylum was that I feared for my  life
             as a result of the treatment that I had previously received in
             Zimbabwe due to my involvement with the MDC.

         6. Castro Moyo's father  is  my  cousin.   In  Western  culture  he
             (Castro) would refer to me as his uncle, but in our culture he
             refers to me as his young father.

         7. I'm aware that Castro said that  he  was  targeted  by  Zanu  PF
             militia in Zimbabwe after I had left, who wanted to know where
             I was.  I was not aware at the time that this had happened  to
             him because I was not in contact with  him.   However,  it  is
             entirely plausible that this could have happened because  Zanu
             would have been aware that he was related to me.

         8. I got back in touch with Castro in 2008 and since then  we  have
             continued to be in touch.

         9. I believe that Castro Moyo would be at risk  in  Zimbabwe  as  a
             result of his association with me and also his  activities  in
             the UK."

9.    Mr Rehman argued that  Mr  Dube's  statement  confirmed  that  he  was
      involved with MDC and that his application for refugee status had been
      granted on that basis.  The appellant's claim  to  have  come  to  the
      adverse attention of the Zimbabwe authorities as a consequence of  his
      connection with his uncle was also confirmed  by  the  statement.   In
      addition, the fact that Mr Dube himself had been an  activist  in  the
      MDC was  also  confirmed  thus  supporting  the  contention  that  the
      appellant would be at risk on return to Zimbabwe  on  account  of  his
      association with the work of his uncle, whose role the  appellant  had
      assumed.  These considerations demonstrated that the approach of Judge
      Hague in proceeding upon the factual basis  found  by  Judge  Frankish
      erroneous in law.  The evidence of  William  Dube  provided  a  proper
      basis upon which the findings of Judge Frankish could be overturned.

10.   Judge Hague at paragraph 7 of the  determination  proceeded  upon  the
      basis that the evidence of William Dube did not undermine the findings
      of Judge Frankish on the critical matter as to whether  the  appellant
      had been anything more than a general supporter of the  MDC  prior  to
      leaving Zimbabwe.  Judge  Frankish  had  found  that  the  appellant's
      evidence to the effect that he  had  an  important  role  within  that
      organisation was incredible.  It is true to say that  that  conclusion
      was arrived in the context that Judge Frankish  considered  it  wholly
      implausible that the appellant would have lost touch  with  his  uncle
      and thus the  uncle's  absence  at  the  hearing  indicated  that  the
      appellant's account was neither truthful  or  reliable.   However,  as
      Judge Hague pointed out, Judge Frankish's  assessment  proceeded  upon
      the basis that Judge Frankish  did  not  find  the  appellant  himself
      credible or reliable in those matters.  That  is  why  Judge  Frankish
      described William Dube as being nothing more than "a prop" to  bolster
      the appellant's claim of MDC activism.

11.   The question for us comes to be whether the evidence of William  Dube,
      as advanced before Judge Hague, was  such  that  his  approach  to  it
      amounts to a material error of law.  We therefore turn to consider the
      terms of William Dube's evidence.  We ask ourselves  whether  anything
      in it could to have led Judge Hague to  a  different  conclusion  than
      Judge Frankish on the appellant's claim  to  have  been  an  important
      figure in MDC was incredible, which was the critical  fact  in  issue.
      If there is, then Judge Hague could be properly said to have erred  in
      a material way.

12.   First it must be recognised that there are  significant  discrepancies
      between the account of the appellant and that of Mr  Dube  in  certain
      important matters.  First, the appellant claimed that he  worked  very
      closely with his uncle and had been so greatly influenced by him  that
      he largely followed in his footsteps (paragraph 13 of Judge Frankish's
      decision).  He had also  claimed  that  he  himself  had  assumed  his
      uncle's role (see paragraph 11).  He described William Dube as a  very
      high  person  to  (sic)  "the  MDC  in  Bulawayo".   His   uncle   had
      responsibility  for  membership  of  the  MDC,   publicity   and   the
      organisation of events.

13.   When one examines the statement of  William  Dube  it  is  immediately
      apparent that he does not confirm that he  and  the  appellant  worked
      closely together in MDC business.  As to Mr Dube's role within the MDC
      it is notable that he describes himself as being heavily  involved  in
      MDC campaigns in Felabusi.  As noted above, the appellant described Mr
      Dube as being a very high person to the MDC in Bulawayo.  Further, far
      from claiming, as the appellant did, that Mr Dube was heavily involved
      in  membership,  publicity,  distribution  of   literature   and   the
      organisation of events, all that Mr Dube says about his role was  that
      he was involved in  youth  campaigns  and  organising  rallies  in  an
      unspecified area.  Accordingly, the role ascribed to Mr  Dube  by  the
      appellant is not supported by Mr  Dube  himself  either  in  terms  of
      geographical location of any activities in which he was involved or in
      the nature of those activities.  Accordingly, the role he  claimed  to
      have assumed from his uncle and  which  brought  him  to  the  adverse
      attention of the authorities is not in any way supported by Mr  Dube's
      evidence.

14.   There are other discrepancies.  Whatever his role may  have  been,  Mr
      Dube does not confirm that the appellant worked closely with him while
      performing it.  Mr Dube says nothing about being assisted in  any  way
      by the appellant.  The appellant was criticised by Judge Frankish  for
      being unable to "provide a persuasive title for this important role on
      the part of his uncle", merely stating that his uncle's full title was
      "secretary".  By contrast, Mr Dube states at paragraph 2 "there was no
      specific title that was given to me".   Accordingly  there  is  direct
      conflict between the evidence of the appellant and his uncle on  that,
      albeit relatively  minor,  matter.   Mr  Dube  does  not  support  the
      appellant's contention that it was because of  the  close  association
      between him and the appellant that the appellant became  a  member  of
      MDC.

15.   Having regard to these discrepancies and  to  the  fact  that  in  the
      above respects the evidence  of  William  Dube  manifestly  failed  to
      support the contentions of the appellant as  to  the  reasons  why  he
      might be at  risk  on  return  due  to  his  political  activities  in
      Zimbabwe, we are quite unable to conclude that Judge Hague's  approach
      to the evidence of William Dube represents anything that approaches  a
      material error of law.  Judge Hague was entitled to come to  the  view
      that he did upon the credibility of  the  evidence  of  the  appellant
      himself and further to find that the evidence provided by William Dube
      did not provide any proper basis upon  which  the  findings  of  Judge
      Frankish should be revisited, far less disturbed.  For  these  reasons
      we reject the first ground of appeal.

16.   Mr Rehman also argued that Judge Hague had  materially  erred  in  his
      treatment of the evidence of a further witness, Mr Kevin Ngwenya,  who
      was a fellow member of  ZLU,  which  organisation  the  appellant  had
      joined after coming to the  United  Kingdom.   Judge  Hague  found  at
      paragraph 12 that  the  ZLU  was  a  sham  organisation  brought  into
      existence solely for the purpose of creating a false appearance of sur
      place political activity among failed asylum seekers in  the  UK.   On
      that basis he concluded that the empty nature of  ZLU  would  make  it
      insignificant to the authorities and of no  substantial  concern.   It
      was argued that Mr Ngwenya had been granted asylum by the  respondent.
      In the case worker's notes dealing with Mr Ngwenya's  application,  it
      was said that he would be  at  risk  at  the  airport  on  return  and
      identified by the CIO because of  his  sur  place  activities.   Judge
      Hague, it was said, erred in  failing  to  have  regard  to  the  case
      worker's findings and ought to have considered  whether  there  was  a
      valid reason to treat  the  appellant  differently  from  Mr  Ngwenya.
      Reference was made to AA (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ  1040.   In
      that case the Court of Appeal considered the relevance of  a  previous
      tribunal determination in respect of a third party which  was  founded
      on the  same  set  of  facts.   The  court  found  that  the  previous
      determination of the tribunal was not binding on the second judge  but
      formed a starting point and regard  ought  to  be  had  to  it  before
      factual conclusions are reached.  Mr Rehman argued that the activities
      in which Mr Ngwenya had involved himself were the same as those of the
      appellant  and  that  the  ZLU  had  not  been  regarded  as  a   sham
      organisation by the case worker who dealt with Mr Ngwenya's case.  The
      failure to give  due  consideration  to  the  case  worker's  findings
      constituted a material error of law.

17.   We are unable  to  agree  with  that  contention.   There  is  a  very
      important distinction to be made between the findings of a case worker
      on an application for asylum and the  findings  of  a  tribunal.   The
      Tribunal has the advantage of seeing and hearing witnesses who  appear
      before it and of receiving submissions from parties upon it.  In  this
      case, Judge Hague had the advantage not only of seeing the  statements
      advanced by the appellant and Mr Ngwenya but also heard evidence  from
      them (see paragraph 11).  In paragraph 11 Judge Hague points out  that
      Mr Ngwenya conceded that ZLU was not in contact with any organisations
      in Zimbabwe and that it was not teamed up with  any  organisations  in
      the United Kingdom.  He could not even say whether people in  Zimbabwe
      would  have  any  knowledge  of  it.   Judge  Hague  points  out   the
      contradictions between the evidence of Mr  Ngwenya  and  that  of  the
      appellant.  He found that it was apparent that no function or activity
      could be attributed to the ZLU.  For those reasons the judge was fully
      entitled to come to the view that ZLU was a sham organisation.  It was
      nothing to the point that a case worker may previously have come to  a
      different view on the basis of information of which  we  are,  in  any
      event, unaware.   We therefore reject this ground of appeal.

19.   Although the grounds of appeal also contained a further ground to  the
      effect that Judge Hague had  shown  bias  against  the  appellant,  Mr
      Rehman very properly did not seek to argue that particular ground.



Decision

20.   The appeal is refused.



                                                         The HON. LORD BURNS
                                                             29 January 2015
