


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04529/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 December 2015                     |              On 12 January 2016      |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     K K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is,  in  substance  and  in  procedural  history,  somewhat
    unusual.  The appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka.   He  has  visited
    India at various times and has a life-long visit visa  for  India.   He
    came to the United Kingdom in 2011 on  the  basis  of  entry  clearance
    granted as a student.  He undertook,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  his
    studies, but during the currency of his leave  as  a  student,  claimed
    asylum in the United Kingdom on the basis of  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in his country of nationality, Sri Lanka.   That claim  was
    made on 9 April 2014.  As we say, it was during  the  currency  of  his
    leave, and the Secretary of State has treated it as an application  for
    further leave on the basis of asylum.  The application was refused  and
    the Secretary of State decided to remove him under s 47  (as  amended),
    of the 2006 Act on a date which is not absolutely clear from the papers
    but was, at any event, in June 2014.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  on  asylum  grounds.
    The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Callow  in  January
    2015.  He determined as follows:  first, that the  appellant's  account
    of his experiences in Sri Lanka was credible; second, that on the basis
    of the facts he found, the appellant would be at risk of being  stopped
    and arrested on return to Sri Lanka and at risk of persecution;  third,
    that the appellant could be safely returned to India because he had the
    right to visit and live in India; fourth, that the  appellant's  appeal
    should therefore be dismissed on asylum grounds,  but  fifth,  that  it
    should be allowed on article 3 grounds on the basis of the  appellant's
    mental health.

 3. The last part of that decision has always been unexplained.  There  was
    a reference in the Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter  to  mental
    health grounds  but  they  were  not  advanced  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal
    against the allowing of the appeal on mental  health  grounds  and  for
    that reason the First-tier Tribunal referred the matter to Judge Callow
    who determined to issue a new decision.  That he did in July 2015.   In
    it, he purported to use the slip rule (r 42 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) to change his determination  allowing  the
    appeal to one dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

 4. Although it is clear that an issue could have been raised as to whether
    the slip rule permitted a judge to do that,  the  appellant  and  those
    representing him have been content to treat the second determination of
    the judge  as  the  effective  determination  of  the  appeal  to  him.
    Therefore the appeal stood as dismissed  on  all  grounds,  the  asylum
    ground raised by the appellant failing not because  the  appellant  had
    failed to show a well-founded fear of persecution  in  his  country  of
    nationality but because the judge considered  that  he  could  live  in
    another country.

 5. As all parties before us agree, that was an  inappropriate  process  of
    reasoning.  The Refugee Convention provides that a  claim  for  refugee
    status is to be determined according to the country of  nationality  of
    the person claiming  the  status.   The  only  country  of  nationality
    identified by the Secretary of State or  by  the  appellant  for  these
    purposes in this appeal is Sri Lanka.  The judge did not  look  in  any
    detail  into  questions  of  internal  relocation  or  sufficiency   of
    protection but the brief finding of which we have made mention makes it
    clear that the judge's finding of fact was that the appellant would  be
    at risk of persecution on arrival at Sri Lanka airport; and it  follows
    from that that issues of internal relocation do not arise, and  further
    that, because the risk was from the officials of the Sri  Lankan  state
    on his arrival in Sri Lanka, no issue as to sufficiency  of  protection
    arose.  It is therefore we think necessarily implicit in  the  Tribunal
    judge's finding of fact that he  was  finding  that  the  appellant  is
    indeed a refugee by reference to Sri Lanka, his only  asserted  country
    of nationality.

 6. It follows from that that the judge  erred  in  law  in  regarding  the
    appellant as not being a refugee; he is  a  refugee,  and  is  entitled
    whilst he is in the United Kingdom, to  the  benefits  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  That is not quite  sufficient  to  deal  with  the  matter
    because the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was against the Secretary
    of State's removal decision: and the ground of appeal had  to  be  that
    removal in accordance with  that  decision  would  breach  the  Refugee
    Convention.  The decision was to remove the appellant to Sri Lanka, not
    to India, nor to "India or Sri Lanka", but  to  Sri  Lanka.   In  those
    circumstances, it is, we have to say, rather  difficult  to  understand
    why the judge thought that India was in the equation at  all.   In  any
    event, bearing in mind his findings of fact and the clear terms of  the
    decision under appeal, it is apparent that  he  should  have  concluded
    that  removal  in  accordance  with  the  direction  would  breach  the
    appellant's rights under the Refugee Convention: it would be removal to
    the very place where  the  judge  had  concluded  he  was  at  risk  of
    persecution.

 7. There is, however, more to this  appeal  even  to  that.   As  we  have
    indicated in setting out the appellant's history, he is  a  person  who
    applied during the currency of existing leave for  further  leave;  the
    Secretary of State did not, as she sometimes does, curtail the existing
    leave on the basis that the application for  asylum  demonstrated  that
    the appellant no longer intended to apply with the terms of  his  leave
    as a student; instead she treated it throughout as an  application  for
    further leave.  Under those circumstances, as it appears to us, s 3C of
    the Immigration Act 1971 continued  the  appellant's  leave  until  the
    Secretary of State made her decision, thereafter during the  time  when
    he could have appealed as he did, and thereafter during the  time  when
    the appeal was pending as indeed it still is.

 8. The appellant is, therefore, even today, a person who has leave; he is,
    in the words of  article  32  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  a  refugee
    "lawfully in  the  territory  of"  the  United  Kingdom.   Under  those
    circumstances, the Secretary of State's power  to  expel  him  is  very
    limited.  Article 32 protects a refugee lawfully in the territory of  a
    State Party from expulsion, save on grounds  of  national  security  of
    public order.  Under those circumstances, it is  a  clear  to  us  that
    given the findings of fact by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  the
    procedural circumstances of the treatment of  the  application  by  the
    Secretary of State, that the applicant  is  a  person  who  has  to  be
    regarded as a refugee, and has to be regarded as a refugee lawfully  in
    the territory of the United Kingdom.  For those reasons  we  find  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in  his  assessment  of  the
    case, and we substitute a determination allowing the appellant's appeal
    on Refugee Convention grounds.

 9. We emphasise, however, two matters.  The first  is  this:  because  the
    appellant is a person with a status of a refugee, he is entitled to  be
    issued with documents recognising that status  on  the  basis  of  this
    determination, whatever the Secretary of  State  may  think  about  his
    entitlement.  The position is that while he is in  the  country  he  is
    entitled to the benefits of the Refugee Convention.

10. The second issue is this: in the course of our hearing Mr  Tarlow  drew
    attention  to  a  visa  in  the  appellant's  Sri  Lankan's   passport,
    describing the appellant as a "Citizen of India Overseas".   It may  be
    that the Secretary of State wishes to make further  investigation  into
    that, but, as we see it, it is not open to her to undermine the  effect
    of this decision by that investigation.  The effect of this decision is
    that the Secretary  of  State  is  required  to  issue  refugee  status
    documents to the appellant and on this basis the appeal is allowed.

                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 6 January 2016
