
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04295/2015
                                                               AA/04297/2015
                                                               AA/04296/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 4th January 2016                  |On 14th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            ZJ (first Appellant)
                            OS (second Appellant)
                            JS (third Appellant)
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Pipe of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Anthony  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 10th June 2015.

 2. The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  first  and  second
    Appellants are unmarried partners and are  the  parents  of  the  third
    Appellant who is their daughter who was born in April 2014.

 3. The asylum claim was made in May 2013, based upon the first Appellant's
    fear of her husband in Pakistan  who  had  ill-treated  her.   She  had
    converted from Christianity to Islam in order to marry him.

 4. The first Appellant fears persecution from her husband,  and  from  the
    general community in Pakistan because she has committed  adultery  with
    the second Appellant, and her child has been born outside marriage.

 5. The Respondent refused the asylum  application  by  letter  dated  23rd
    February 2015, and made decisions to remove  the  Appellants  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. The Appellants appealed, and their appeals were heard together  by  the
    FtT on 29th May 2015.  The FtT heard evidence from the first and second
    Appellants and found both Appellants to be unreliable  witnesses.   The
    FtT found their account to be a fabrication  and  that  the  Appellants
    would not be at risk if returned to Pakistan.

 7. The FtT considered an expert report prepared by Professor  Bluth  dated
    13th May 2015 but attached no weight to this report.  The FtT  did  not
    accept  Professor  Bluth's  conclusion  that  a  marriage   certificate
    produced by the first Appellant, proved that she had  been  married  as
    claimed.

 8. The FtT dismissed the appeals on all grounds.  The  Appellants  applied
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and I set out below  the
    grant of permission by Judge Reid which summarises the  grounds  relied
    upon by the Appellants;
         "2.  The grounds argue inter  alia:  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
             failing to properly consider the expert  report  by  Professor
             Bluth; the judge failed to make any findings in respect of the
             report save to reject assessment of  a  marriage  certificate;
             the judge's conclusion on delay was perverse; the judge had  a
             duty to assess both the oral  and  written  evidence  and  his
             rejection of elements of the evidence was perverse; the  judge
             failed to consider the significant obstacles to the Appellants
             integrating into  Pakistan  society;  the  judge  should  have
             proceeded to carry out a Razgar Article 8 assessment.
         3.   At [22] the judge questioned the reliability of  the  expert's
             assessment of the authenticity of  the  marriage  certificate.
             The expert set out his credentials at [2] of his report and at
             [5.1.5] he refers to the  marriage  certificate.   Whilst  not
             saying that he saw the original he does not say that  he  only
             saw a copy and the representatives  have  confirmed  that  the
             original was sent to him.  The expert at [2]  said  Ms  Mumtaz
             assisted with document verification, not that it  was  carried
             out by her.  It  is  arguable  that  there  was  a  degree  of
             speculation by the judge  in  his  assessment  of  the  expert
             report.  It is arguable that he speculated as to  the  details
             of the relationship discussed by the first Appellant  and  her
             family.  It is arguable that the judge failed to give  any  or
             proper weight to the fact that the first Appellant has  had  a
             child out of wedlock (the third Appellant), when assessing the
             risk on return.
         4.   The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."

 9. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Appellants' Submissions

10. In brief summary, Mr Pipe relied upon  the  grounds  contained  in  the
    application for permission to appeal.  He submitted  that  the  primary
    issue was the assessment by the FtT  of  the  expert  report  which  is
    contained at paragraphs 21-24 of the FtT decision.

11. Mr Pipe submitted the FtT had erred in paragraph 21 in stating that the
    expert had only assessed the contents of the marriage certificate,  and
    not assessed the marriage certificate as a whole.   The  FtT  had  also
    erred in speculating that the expert had not had sight of the  original
    document.

12. The FtT had erred in paragraph 22, concluding that  the  assessment  of
    the document had been  undertaken  by  Uzma  Mumtaz,  rather  than  the
    expert, and it was unclear what expertise Ms Mumtaz had in relation  to
    document authentication.

13. Mr Pipe submitted that the FtT had adopted an irrational assessment  of
    the expert report and had materially  erred  by  failing  to  give  any
    weight to the report.  The error in assessing the report  had  infected
    the assessment of credibility and risk.  The FtT  had  not  taken  into
    account that the first Appellant had clearly had a child  born  outside
    marriage, and therefore the claim to be at risk was  not  based  solely
    upon adultery, but also upon the fact that she had had a child  outside
    marriage.  Mr Pipe submitted that this should also have been considered
    in relation to paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  the  FtT  had  failed  to
    consider obstacles that the first Appellant would  face  by  reason  of
    having a child outside marriage, if she tried to integrate into society
    in Pakistan.  In addition it was submitted that there was no assessment
    of the best interests of the third Appellant who is a child.

14. Mr Pipe submitted that the decision of the FtT should be set aside, and
    the appeals remitted back to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

The Respondent's Submissions

15. Mr Harrison relied upon a response dated 16th July 2015 which had  been
    submitted by the  Respondent  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   This  response,  in  summary,
    submitted that the FtT  had  directed  itself  appropriately,  and  was
    entitled to find the Appellants' account to be a complete  fabrication,
    and that the first Appellant was an untruthful witness.   The  FtT  was
    therefore entitled to conclude that she had never been married and that
    she would be returning to Pakistan with her existing partner and child.



16. Mr Harrison  submitted  that  the  FtT  had  carefully  considered  the
    evidence, and made reasoned and valid comments upon the expert  report.
    Mr Harrison pointed out that the weight to be placed upon evidence  was
    a matter for the FtT.

17. Mr Harrison submitted that the grounds relied upon  by  the  Appellants
    amounted to a disagreement with the findings made by the FtT,  but  did
    not disclose a material error of law.

18. If, however, a material error of law was  found  as  contended  by  the
    Appellants, Mr Harrison accepted that there would need to be a  further
    hearing as credibility was central to the  appeals,  and  it  would  be
    appropriate to remit the appeals back to the FtT.

19. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. The FtT erred in considering the expert report.  In paragraph 21 of the
    decision the FtT has not explained the basis for  concluding  that  the
    expert assessed only the contents of the marriage  certificate,  rather
    than assessing the document as a whole.   In  paragraph  5.1.5  of  the
    expert report, the expert explains that the  marriage  certificate  had
    been compared to other documents from Pakistan known to be genuine, and
    concluded that the document is identical in every respect.

21. There is an element of speculation within paragraph  21  when  the  FtT
    states that it is unclear whether the expert had sight of the  original
    marriage certificate.  The FtT concludes that if the expert  had  sight
    of the original, then it would have expected some commentary on whether
    the quality  of  the  paper  or  document  was  consistent  with  other
    documents originating from the same city in Pakistan.  The  expert  did
    in fact state in paragraph 5.1.5, as noted above, that the document was
    "identical in every respect" with other documents  emanating  from  the
    same city in Pakistan.  While the expert does not specifically state in
    the report that he had the original document, he does not indicate that
    he had received only a photocopy.

22. In paragraph 22 the FtT states that it is unclear  whether  the  expert
    has any expertise in authenticating such documents as  his  credentials
    at paragraph 2 of the report do not make  reference  to  this.   It  is
    correct that there  is  no  specific  reference  to  authentication  of
    documents, but the expert does list his qualifications and  experience,
    which indicates that he does have expertise  as  a  country  expert  in
    Pakistan.   The  FtT  is  incorrect  to  state  in  paragraph  22  that
    assessment of documents in Urdu are undertaken by Uzma Mumtaz.  It  was
    confirmed in paragraph 2 of the  expert  report  that  Uzma  Mumtaz,  a
    native Urdu/Punjabi speaker and doctoral candidate at the University of
    Leeds, assisted with the assessment of documents in Urdu  and  Punjabi,
    but did not undertake the assessment herself.

23. At paragraph 47 the FtT  does  not  adequately  explain  why  Professor
    Bluth's conclusions on risk were rejected.  The FtT states that this is
    because his report  was  dependent  on  a  positive  finding  that  the
    Appellant was married in the first place, which the FtT rejects.   That
    however is not accurate, and the FtT neglected  to  consider  paragraph
    5.2.9 of the expert report which states;
         "Having a child out of wedlock is prima facie evidence of a serious
         criminal offence, unlawful sexual intercourse.  That is why  it  is
         very common in Pakistan for babies born out of wedlock to be simply
         abandoned."

    Therefore even if the FtT rejected the first Appellant's claim to  have
    been married before she  left  Pakistan,  there  should  have  been  an
    assessment of risk, on the basis that she is not married to her current
    partner, and they have a child born outside marriage.

24. The FtT erred by failing to consider the issue of the first and  second
    Appellant having a child outside marriage, when  considering  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  There is no reference in paragraph 57 in which the  FtT
    sets out findings of fact in relation  to  consideration  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the first  and  second  Appellants  having  a  child  born
    outside marriage.  This needed to be assessed when considering  whether
    there were significant obstacles to integration into Pakistan.

25. The FtT erred by not carrying out an adequate assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the third Appellant, as a child, which  should  have  been
    assessed as a primary consideration.  The only reference  to  the  best
    interests of the third Appellant is the last sentence of  paragraph  62
    in which it is recorded;
         "In addition, it would  be  in  her  best  interest  to  return  to
         Pakistan as she would be returning with her parents."

26.  The  errors  set  out  above  are  material  errors,  and  infect  the
    credibility findings made by the FtT.  Therefore the  decision  of  the
    FtT is  unsafe,  and  the  decision  is  set  aside  with  no  findings
    preserved.

27. I have taken into account submissions  made  by  both  representatives,
    that if a material error of law was found, it would be appropriate  for
    these appeals to be remitted  back  to  the  FtT.   I  have  considered
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice  Statements  dated  25th
    September 2012, and find that it is appropriate to  remit  the  appeals
    back to the FtT, because of the nature and  extent  of  judicial  fact-
    finding that will be necessary in  order  for  these  decisions  to  be
    remade.

28. The appeals will be heard by the FtT at the Sheldon  Court,  Birmingham
    Hearing Centre, and the parties will be advised of the time and date in
    due course.  The appeals are to be heard by an  FtT  Judge  other  than
    Judge Anthony.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeals are allowed to the  extent  that
they are remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings  of  fact
preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction and  I  continue  that  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.



Signed   Date 5th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed   Date 5th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
