
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04806/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 19 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     f m
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by Coram
                    Children's Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. His  date  of  birth  has
       been treated as 01 January 1995 and, for the purpose of  the  appeal,
       he accepts this as his age.  He appeals against the decision of Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Chana who, in  a  determination  dated  11
       December 2014, dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's decision
       of 24 June 2014 to remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
       following the Respondent's refusal to recognise him as a  refugee  or
       to grant him Humanitarian Protection.

    2. The Appellant  maintains  that  he  fears  serious  ill-treatment  if
       removed to Afghanistan as a result of  a  land  dispute  between  his
       family and his paternal uncle and cousins. The Appellant claims  that
       his father and brother were  killed  pursuant  to  the  land  dispute
       sometime in 2008 while he was attending his maternal uncle's  wedding
       in Pakistan. Arrangements were made for the Appellant to  flee  to  a
       safe country as he would be at risk on the basis  that  his  paternal
       uncle and cousins would believe he would seek revenge on them.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    3. At the  start  of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  an
       application was  made  to  adjourn  the  hearing  in  order  for  the
       Appellant  to  undergo  a  cognitive  assessment  following  concerns
       expressed  in  a  psychiatric  report  that  he  may   be   suffering
       neurological symptoms. The application was refused and the  Appellant
       was not tendered as the psychiatric report indicated he  may  be  re-
       traumatised by the experience.

    4. The First-tier Tribunal did not believe the Appellant was a  credible
       witness. The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave a number  of  reasons  in
       support of this  conclusion.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  attached  no
       weight to the psychiatric report as it was, in her view, based on  an
       acceptance of the Appellant's account, which  she  found  incredible.
       The First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied the Appellant would  be  at
       risk of suicide if removed and was satisfied the Appellant  would  be
       able to avail himself of the  internal  relocation  alternative.  The
       appeal was, accordingly, dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal

    5. The Grounds raise concerns with several  aspects  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal decision. It is alleged that the  Judge  acted  unfairly  by
       refusing the adjournment application. It was submitted that the Judge
       failed to  adequately  take  account  of  the  Appellant's  age  when
       assessing his credibility. It was argued that  the  Judge  materially
       erred in law  in  rejecting  the  psychiatric  evidence  and  in  her
       approach to the claimed suicide  risk.  It  was  submitted  that  the
       Judge's decision  was  vitiated  by  a  number  of  errors  of  fact.
       Permission to appeal was granted on all Grounds.

Discussion before the Upper Tribunal

    6. At the commencement of the 'error of law' hearing I was  informed  by
       Mr Wilding that the Respondent accepted that the First-tier  Tribunal
       made a number of  material  factual  errors  that  amounted,  in  the
       Respondent's view, to a material error of law.  Both  representatives
       agreed that the most appropriate course of action would  be  to  send
       the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

    7. Having carefully considered the First-tier Tribunal's decision, I  am
       satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did materially err in law  for
       the reasons agreed by the parties. These errors include  the  Judge's
       belief that the Appellant denied saying in his asylum interview  that
       he fled from Pakistan, and the Judge's assertion that  the  Appellant
       described his family as powerful (this was in fact a  description  of
       his paternal uncle and cousins).  The  Judge  additionally  erred  in
       holding that the Appellant said no warnings  were  given  before  his
       family were attacked, and there was no  engagement  with  the  report
       from Dr Giustozzi in respect of internal relocation.  In  relying  on
       these erroneous  factual  findings  I  am  satisfied  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge gave weight to irrelevant factors, or failed  to  take
       account of relevant considerations. I am satisfied that this error of
       law was material. It cannot be said that,  had  the  Judge  not  made
       these mistakes, her decision would have been the same.

    8. It has not been necessary  for  me  to  consider  whether  the  other
       Grounds of Appeal have been made out and I  did  not  hear  any  oral
       argument relating to the other Grounds. Given that the Judge's unsafe
       adverse credibility findings underpinned the remainder of  her  other
       findings and conclusions, it is appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
       returned to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision and Directions

The Judge made a material error of law in her determination.

The appeal will  be  sent  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
rehearing, all issues open. No findings are retained.

The fresh appeal hearing is to be heard by a  judge  other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chana.

The Appellant's representatives are to serve on the First-tier Tribunal  and
the Respondent, a fully paginated and  indexed  bundle  containing  all  the
documentation upon which he relies, to be served no later than 7 days  prior
to the next hearing.


[pic]    17 November 2015
Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
