
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04491/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2016                        |On 5 April 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                    [t c]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud, Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of Zimbabwe, appeals from the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge McDade sitting at Bennett House on 17
    November 2015) dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to remove her as a person subject to  administrative
    removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,  her
    asylum/human rights claim having been refused.  The First-tier Tribunal
    did not make an anonymity direction, and I do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant  requires  anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 7 January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "In an  otherwise  careful  and  certainly  succinct  decision  and
         reasons it is nonetheless arguable that the judge erred in  failing
         to consider the appellant's appeal in respect of E-LTRPT.2.3(b)  of
         the Immigration Rules as that was a matter raised by the  appellant
         and clearly set out in the skeleton argument.  It  is  additionally
         arguable that the judge erred in failing to appropriately  consider
         the appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.  The
         judge's finding that there is nothing exceptional and compelling in
         the appellant's case is arguably the wrong test to be applied."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, whose date of  birth  is  [  ]
    1966.  She has five children, four of whom are in the  United  Kingdom.
    Their father came to the  United  Kingdom  in  2005,  and  successfully
    claimed asylum.  Subsequently he sponsored  the  reunification  of  his
    family in the UK, consisting of his wife, the appellant, and their five
    children.  The entry clearance applications of three of  the  children,
    including the youngest child [J], were successful, and they arrived  in
    the United Kingdom to join their father in 2009.  The oldest child  was
    unsuccessful in his application, as he was over the  age  of  18.   The
    appellant's application was refused because the Entry Clearance Officer
    was not satisfied that her relationship to the sponsor was genuine  and
    subsisting.

 4. The appeals of the appellant and her daughter [TN]  came  before  Judge
    Osborne sitting at Bennett House on 11 May 2010.   The  judge  received
    oral evidence from the sponsor, who gave evidence that the relationship
    between him and  the  appellant  was  ongoing.   The  judge  found  his
    evidence credible, and he went on to allow the appellant's appeal  and,
    for different reasons, the appeal of [TN].

 5. Pursuant to Judge Osborne's  decision,  the  appellant  and  [TN]  were
    issued with family reunion visas  in  July  2010.   However  only  [TN]
    joined her father and her siblings in the United Kingdom in 2010.   The
    appellant did not arrive in the UK until 5 April  2013,  a  few  months
    before her three year family reunion visa was due to expire.

 6. On 27 February 2015  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing to recognise the appellant as a refugee, and for  refusing  an
    alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR.  She had been considered  under
    the parent route and Appendix FM.  From the information provided during
    her asylum interview, her children were cared for by her husband and he
    provided for them financially.  In  view  of  this  fact,  it  was  not
    accepted that she had sole responsibility for her children, and so  she
    failed to meet the requirements of  paragraph  E-ELTRPT.2.3(a)  of  the
    Rules.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Both parties were legally represented before Judge McDade.  Mr Ahmed of
    Counsel appeared on behalf of the  appellant,  and  agreed  with  Judge
    McDade that there was no substance to the asylum  claim.   However,  Mr
    Ahmed submitted that the appellant qualified for leave to remain on the
    basis of E-LTRPT.2.3(b) of Appendix FM.

 8. The judge received oral evidence from the appellant  and  some  of  her
    children.  In the light of this evidence, he accepted  that  after  the
    children left Zimbabwe and came here,  there  was  reasonably  frequent
    contact between them and the appellant by  means  of  phone  calls  and
    WhatsApp.  Since coming to the UK, the  appellant  had  taken  on  some
    responsibility for collecting one or two of the children at  particular
    times from school; and the appellant went with her children  to  church
    on Sundays.  There had  been  no  issues  raised  in  relation  to  any
    dependency between the appellant and her three children  who  were  now
    adults in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  younger  child  [J],  aged  11,
    certainly had a face-to-face relationship now that he did not have when
    his mother was back in Zimbabwe.  But it seemed to the judge  that  the
    relationship was nowhere near as significant to him as his relationship
    with his father with whom he had lived for the whole time he  had  been
    in the UK.  The judge continued:

         "He is not a qualifying child under  the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 because he is neither a British citizen nor has
         he been in the United Kingdom for the  requisite  period  of  seven
         years.  As such Section 117(B) of that  Act  does  not  assist  the
         appellant."

 9. There were no  exceptional  and  compelling  in  the  appellant's  case
    requiring him to look outside the Rules,  as  it  was  clear  that  the
    appellant had  little  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  any
    significance and family life only to a  limited  extent.   Family  life
    that did exist in the UK could be pursued back in Zimbabwe just  as  it
    was throughout the years that she has remained in  Zimbabwe  after  her
    children had left to the UK.  The judge continued:

         "In respect of E-LTRPT.2.3(b) the  appellant  has  never  made  any
         valid application for limited or indefinite leave to  remain  as  a
         parent,  having  chosen  instead  to  pursue   the   asylum   route
         aforementioned.  I  hold  that  the  appellant  can  therefore  not
         succeed under those provisions."

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

10. Although Tony Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a  Rule  24
    response opposing the appeal, Mr McVeety accepted at the outset of  the
    hearing before me that the judge had been wrong to direct himself  that
    a valid application under E-LTRPT.2.3(b) was a condition  precedent  of
    the Tribunal having jurisdiction to entertain an appeal  based  on  the
    proposition  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements   of   this
    provision.

11. As pleaded in ground 2, GEN.1.9 of Appendix FM states  at  subparagraph
    (a) that the requirement to make a valid  application  will  not  apply
    when the Article 8 claim is raised as part of an asylum  claim,  or  as
    part of a further submission after an asylum claim has been refused; or
    in an appeal (subject to the consent of the Secretary  of  State  where
    applicable).

12. Although the appellant had made a misconceived application for  asylum,
    the Secretary of State in the refusal letter had rightly  addressed  an
    alternative claim under Article 8, and had given specific consideration
    to whether the appellant could qualify for leave to  remain  under  the
    parent route in Appendix FM.  However, having made the  uncontroversial
    assessment that the appellant did not meet the eligibility  requirement
    of 2.3(a), the Secretary  of  State  had  not  considered  whether  the
    appellant met the alternative requirement contained in 2.3(b) that  the
    parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must  be  a  British
    citizen in the UK or settled in the UK.

13. It appears that by the date of decision, and certainly by the  date  of
    the hearing, the father was settled in the UK, having been granted ILR.
     So the judge should have gone on to consider whether the appellant met
    the requirements of E-LTRPT.2.4 on the basis that she had access rights
    to her 11 year old son  [J],  and  she  was  taking,  and  intended  to
    continue to take, an active role in [J]'s upbringing.

14. The appellant also needed to meet financial and language  requirements.
    It was only after the judge had  made  findings  on  all  the  relevant
    requirements which the appellant needed to satisfy in order to  qualify
    for leave to remain under the parent route of Appendix FM that (if  not
    all the requirements  were  met)  the  judge  could  make  an  informed
    assessment  of  whether  there  were   compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules which justified  the  appellant
    being granted Article 8 relief outside  the  Rules,  having  regard  to
    Section 117(B)(6) of the 2002 Act.

15. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    vitiated by a material error of law such that it must be set aside  and
    remade.  It was agreed  by  the  parties  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing  of  the
    Article 8 claim based on the appellant's contact with her 11  year  old
    child, who has indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
on protection grounds did not contain an error of law, and accordingly  that
decision stands.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's claim  on
human rights (Article 8) grounds contained an error of law, and  accordingly
the decision is set aside.

Directions

The appellant's human rights (Article 8 ECHR)  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier  Tribunal  at  Stoke  for  a  de  novo  hearing   (Judge   McDade
incompatible) with an agreed time estimate of two hours.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
