
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/04967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 26 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                              MR QUANG MINH VU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Price, Latta & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Farrelly dismissing this appeal on asylum and human
    rights grounds.

 2) The appellant was born on 20 October 1980 and is a national of Vietnam.
     He lived with his parents in Ho  Chi  Minh  City.   His  parents  were
    journalists.  On 8 February 1998 they were arrested  after  writing  an
    article of which the authorities disapproved.  The appellant's  parents
    were taken to a police station and then to a  detention  centre  called
    Kim Chi.  In May 1998 the appellant was in the  family  home  when  the
    police arrived to search it.  They were  accompanied  by  five  or  six
    other men, whom the appellant believed were gangsters working alongside
    the police.  The police told the appellant that they were  confiscating
    property from the house.  When the appellant argued he  was  assaulted.
    He tried to run away and in doing so pushed a door,  causing  a  police
    guard to fall.  He succeeded in escaping but learnt that the guard  was
    injured.  Colleagues of the injured guard engaged  gangsters  to  track
    down the appellant.  The appellant stayed with various friends and  was
    advised not to return home because his friends had seen  the  gangsters
    come to his home looking for him.

 3) The appellant learnt that his parents had been  taken  to  a  detention
    centre outside the city.  They had been tried at a closed hearing.  The
    appellant visited his parents on 20 September 1998, shortly before they
    were to be moved.  He later ascertained that they had been taken  to  a
    prison on the island of Con Dao.   The  appellant  left  the  area  and
    worked at various jobs, including as a porter in a  market  and  laying
    rainwater pipes.  In December 2007 he left Vietnam.  He arrived in  the
    UK illegally in July 2008.  He learnt from friends that  he  was  still
    wanted in Vietnam because of what had happened to the police officer.

 4) The appellant is in  a  relationship  with  another  Vietnamese  asylum
    seeker and they have a child together.  Her claim was refused  but  her
    appeal was heard by the First-Tier Tribunal a week before the appeal by
    this appellant.

 5) The principal issue before the First-Tier Tribunal was the  credibility
    of  the  appellant's  account.   The  evidence  before  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal showed that there was an island named Con Doa but this was now
    a protected marine nature reserve.  There had been several  prisons  on
    the island and it was used as a concentration camp during  the  Vietnam
    War.  The prisons were now used as museums or were in a state of decay.
     When this was put to the appellant in oral  evidence  at  the  hearing
    before the First-Tier Tribunal he said that he did not know  about  the
    place but had heard from a friend  that  his  parents  had  been  taken
    there.

 6) Other credibility issues  were  raised.   For  example,  the  appellant
    claimed that he was able to visit his parents  at  a  detention  centre
    called Kim Chi.  The respondent was unable to identify  a  centre  with
    this name in the country information.  According to the  appellant  the
    detention centre was around Hai Dong.   The  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal presumed that the appellant  would  have  had  to  go  through
    official channels to see his parents in September  1998.   It  did  not
    seem credible that he  would  risk  this  if  he  were  wanted  by  the
    authorities.  Furthermore, the fact he was able to  do  this  indicated
    that he was not being pursued.  The appellant claimed he  was  able  to
    visit his parents by accompanying family friends, whom he presumed  had
    paid a bribe.  He also claimed  that  the  prison  authorities  had  no
    jurisdiction outside the prison.  The  Judge  considered  that  if  the
    appellant's parents were  political  prisoners  the  state  would  have
    required the prison authorities to advise of any relevant occurrences.

 7) The Judge noted that it was also the appellant's  claim  that  he  left
    Vietnam in October 2007.  If this were true it meant that he  was  able
    to live in  Vietnam  for  almost  nine  years  without  coming  to  the
    attention  of  the  authorities.   The  Judge  had  regard  to  country
    information relating to local surveillance,  and  the  operation  of  a
    household  registration  scheme  and  other  systems  used  to  monitor
    individuals.

 8) The Judge referred to a delay by  the  appellant  in  claiming  asylum.
    According to the appellant he was trafficked into the UK in  July  2008
    and locked up when he was not working.  He managed  to  escape  in  May
    2010.  He was in London for two years but did  not  claim  asylum.   He
    said he did not know about the possibility of  claiming.   In  December
    2012 he and his partner moved to Glasgow.  At this  stage  his  partner
    was pregnant and she had to attend hospital in March 2013.  He  claimed
    asylum in March 2013 and his partner gave birth in May  of  that  year.
    This suggested to the Judge there was a connection between  the  asylum
    claim and his partner's pregnancy.

 9) The Judge did not accept the basis of the appellant's asylum  claim  as
    credible for the reasons summarised above.

10) The Judge then went on to consider the appeal  under  Article  8.   The
    Judge found  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Nevertheless the Judge accepted that the  appellant
    has family life in the UK with  his  partner  and  their  child.   She,
    however, was also from Vietnam and  had  no  right  to  be  here.   The
    country information indicated that their child  would  be  accepted  in
    Vietnam as a citizen.   Subject  to  the  outcome  of  the  appellant's
    partner's appeal, the intention of the respondent was that  they  would
    be returned to Vietnam together.  Consequently their family life  would
    be preserved.  On this basis the decision was proportionate.

11) Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that the Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal arguably erred in drawing  an
    adverse inference from the fact that Con Dao is no  longer  used  as  a
    prison without it being ascertained when it ceased to be a prison.   It
    appeared that the appellant's parents  had  been  detained  there  some
    years ago.  Permission  was  granted  on  other  grounds  also.   These
    included a reference to the appellant's partner  and  child  having  no
    right to be in the UK.  It was pointed out that  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal the partner and child had  their
    own pending asylum appeals and therefore they had permission to  be  in
    the UK while appealing.  It was then pointed  out  that  their  appeals
    were subsequently allowed.  The partner and child of the appellant  now
    have refugee status and leave to remain in the UK.

Submissions

12) Before me Mr Price relied on the grounds of the applications made  both
    to the Upper Tribunal and the First-Tier Tribunal.  He pointed out that
    according to the country information Con Dao was not a prison  in  2007
    but the appellant's evidence was that his parents were there  in  1998.
    Mr Price pointed out that the appellant's partner had been given asylum
    status in October 2014 and leave until October  2019.   The  Judge  had
    found in respect of the appellant that there was family life  with  the
    partner and child.

13) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien acknowledged that the Judge had  failed
    to address the lapse of time between the detention of  the  appellant's
    parents and the reference to Con Dao no longer being  a  prison.   With
    reference to the other grounds, Mrs O'Brien submitted that the Judge of
    the  First-Tier  Tribunal  had  not  required  corroboration   of   the
    appellant's evidence.  The Judge was entitled to take into account  the
    appellant's delay in leaving Vietnam.  The Judge was also  entitled  to
    have regard to the length of time the appellant had  spent  in  Vietnam
    following his parents' arrests and the tension  between  this  and  the
    evidence of a surveillance culture.  Given this surveillance culture it
    was difficult to understand  how  the  appellant  could  have  remained
    "under the radar" for so long.  The Judge was  also  entitled  to  take
    account of the delay  in  claiming  asylum  following  the  appellant's
    arrival in the UK.

14) In relation to Article 8, the appellant's  partner's  claim  was  still
    under consideration at the time of the hearing and the Judge could have
    gone no further.  This was at the time an unresolved issue and it would
    have been improper for the Judge to speculate on the outcome.

15) In response Mr Price said that if an error of law was  found  he  would
    have no further evidence to offer in respect of the asylum  claim.   He
    submitted that the appeal should be re-made under Article 8.  The Judge
    erred in law by  speculating  about  the  outcome  of  the  appellant's
    partner's asylum claim.  This speculation was  not  justified  and  the
    decision was unsound as a result.

Decision

16) The Judge's treatment of the appellant's evidence that his parents were
    detained at Con Dao does contain a flaw in the reasoning.  The evidence
    before the Judge indicated that Con Dao was no longer a prison  by  the
    date of the hearing but it does not follow from this that there was not
    a prison on the site in 1998.

17) This, however, is one of only a number of reasons given  by  the  Judge
    for not accepting as credible the evidence by the appellant in relation
    to his asylum claim.  Other cogent reasons were  given,  as  summarised
    above.

18) Some of these reasons were  also  challenged  in  the  grounds  of  the
    application.  For example, ground 3 refers to the Judge's finding  that
    the extent  of  surveillance  in  Vietnam  was  inconsistent  with  the
    appellant's claim that he  had  lived  there  for  nine  years  without
    detection following the arrest of his parents.   It  was  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant that this finding was contradictory.  If  there
    was such surveillance then the appellant would readily be traced by the
    authorities on return.

19) I do not think there is any substance in this point.  If the extent  of
    surveillance is such  that  the  authorities  could  readily  find  the
    appellant on his return to Vietnam, they ought to  have  been  able  to
    find him in the nine years that he lived there following the arrest  of
    his parents.  The Judge was entitled to find that the  length  of  time
    that  the  appellant  spent  in  Vietnam  without  detection   by   the
    authorities following his parents' arrests was  inconsistent  with  the
    claim that the authorities were still looking for him.

20) It was submitted, however, in both the application  to  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal and to the Upper Tribunal that the Judge was wrong  to  assume
    that the appellant's partner's appeal against  the  refusal  of  asylum
    would not succeed.  The Judge was wrong to say they had no right to  be
    in the UK as they were at the time pursing appeals against the  refusal
    of their asylum claims.  On the basis of the  assumption  made  by  the
    Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal, the  proportionality  assessment  was
    not properly carried out.

21) While I have some sympathy with the Judge, who attempted to assess  the
    Article 8 claim as at the date of the hearing before him, the Judge did
    make an error of law in this regard.  The Judge was wrong to  say  that
    the appellant's partner and child had no right to be in the  UK.   They
    had the right to stay in the UK while their asylum claims were pending.
     Furthermore, and more materially, the Judge assessed Article 8 on  the
    basis only that the appeal by the appellant's partner would  fail,  and
    not on the basis that it would succeed.  An even-handed approach  would
    have required both possible outcomes to  be  considered.   Furthermore,
    although this was not raised  in  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal and may not have been material, the Judge made no  reference  to
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended, which this was in force at the
    date of the hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal.

22) The Judge found that the appellant would not succeed in  his  claim  to
    private or family life under the Immigration Rules.   Although  one  of
    the grounds of the application suggests that the  Judge  was  wrong  to
    find that there were no significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  re-
    integration to Vietnam, I do not think that this is a significant issue
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.

23) More important is that the Judge found that the  appellant  has  family
    life with his partner and  child  in  the  UK.   According  to  Section
    117B(4) little weight should be given to a relationship formed  with  a
    qualifying partner that is established by a person at a time  when  the
    person is in the UK unlawfully.  The appellant met his partner  in  the
    UK and formed a relationship with her while he was here unlawfully.  It
    needs also to be taken into  account,  however,  that  the  appellant's
    partner has now been recognised as a refugee and therefore there is  no
    prospect of  the  couple  continuing  their  family  life  in  Vietnam.
    Furthermore, there is now a child of the relationship,  with  whom  the
    appellant has a genuine parental relationship, albeit that the child is
    not a "qualifying child" in terms of Section 117D.

24) I have approached the  issue  of  Article  8  in  accordance  with  the
    approach set out by the Inner House in Asif Ali Ashiq [2015] CSIH 31 at
    paragraphs 5 and 6.  The question of the application of the Immigration
    Rules to private and family life has already  been  considered  by  the
    Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal.  There is no intermediary test to  be
    applied before proceeding to consider the same facts in relation to the
    application of Article 8 outwith the Rules.  It is evident in this case
    that an Article 8 issue arises.  The appellant has now been in  the  UK
    for seven years.  He has a partner and  a  child  here,  with  whom  he
    enjoys family life.  His partner has been recognised as a  refugee,  as
    has his child.  There is no question  of  his  relationship  with  them
    being carried on in the country of origin, which is Vietnam.   Although
    in terms of Section  117B  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest, having regard  to  the  factors  in
    Section 117B(2) and (3), weight should also be given to the appellant's
    partner's refugee status and to the  best  interests  of  the  couple's
    child.  The child has been recognised  as  a  refugee  along  with  the
    mother.  It is therefore the case that the best interests of the  child
    are to remain in the UK.  It is also in the child's best  interests  to
    have both parents residing together with him in  the  UK.   When  these
    factors are taken into account the assessment of proportionality in the
    balancing exercise falls in favour of the appellant.   I  am  satisfied
    that it would be a disproportionate interference with  the  appellant's
    right to private or family life to require him to leave the UK,  having
    regard to the effect of this upon his partner and, in  particular,  his
    child, each of whom have been recognised as refugees.   On  this  basis
    the appeal will succeed under Article 8.

Conclusions

25) The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

26) I set aside the decision in respect of Article 8 only.

27) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it under Article 8.

Anonymity

28) The First-Tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  for  anonymity.   No
    application of such an order has been made before me and I do  not  see
    any reason of substance for making one.

Fee Award   This is not part of the determination

29) As no fee has been paid or is payable, no fee award is made.


Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
