
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04087/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2014 and 23 March 2015          |On 31 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    M B h
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chelvan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 10 March  1980.
    He appealed against the respondent's decision  dated  3  June  2014  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

 2. The appeal on asylum grounds was heard before Judge Afako who dismissed
    the asylum appeal and on human rights grounds in his decision  dated  3
    August 2014.  He did not find the appellant to  be  credible  regarding
    his conversion to the Shia faith or that he suffered persecution  as  a
    result.  As regards the claim that the appellant would be  at  risk  of
    honour killing for reasons not associated with  his  faith,  the  judge
    said he was unable to conclude  that  the  appellant  was  in  need  of
    international protection.  The grounds argued that the judge  erred  in
    two respects, his failure to make a finding on  whether  the  appellant
    was at risk of honour killing as a  result  of  his  marriage  and  the
    judge's findings on the appellant's risk from Sunni to Shia were flawed
    for the reasons set out at [12] - [27] of the grounds.

 3. Judge Foudy in  her  permission  to  appeal  dated  2  September  2014,
    rejected the claim that the judge had failed to properly  consider  the
    evidence of risk to the appellant as a Shia  convert.   She  found  the
    judge made well-reasoned findings on the evidence such that no error of
    law was disclosed with regard to  that  aspect  of  the  determination.
    Nevertheless, Judge Foudy found the judge erred in refusing to  make  a
    finding as to the risk faced by the appellant due to his  marriage  and
    the prospect of a possible honour killing particularly because  he  had
    made no findings in relation to the issue, even though it was a part of
    the appellant's asylum claim.

 4. When this matter first came before me at an error of law hearing on  22
    October 2014, Mr Bazini represented the appellant.   I  adjourned  that
    hearing to enable the parties to  file  and  serve  skeleton  arguments
    addressing Mr Bazini's claim that the judge's failure to make a finding
    as to the risk faced by the appellant  due  to  his  marriage  and  the
    prospect of a possible honour killing, infected the determination as  a
    whole such that the appeal should be heard de novo in  the  First-tier.
    On 5 February 2005, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  issued  the  following
    direction:

         "By 28 February 2015 the appellant is directed  to  file  with  the
         Tribunal and serve on the respondent a skeleton argument addressing
         the conceded error of law on the part of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge in failing to make a finding as to  the  risk  faced  by  the
         appellant due to his  marriage  and  the  prospect  of  a  possible
         'honour killing' and how this might have infected the determination
         as a whole, such that the appeal should be heard  de  novo  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal."

Submissions on Error of Law

 5. Mr Bramble conceded that the judge had  erred  in  failing  to  make  a
    finding as to the risk faced by the appellant due to his  marriage  and
    the prospect of an honour killing, which was a part of the  appellant's
    asylum claim.

 6. Mr Chelvan submitted that the material error with regard to the failure
    to make a finding as to the risk faced by  the  appellant  due  to  his
    marriage and the possible honour  killing  intrinsically  included  the
    corroborative evidence of  the  appellant's  wife  with  respect  to  a
    contemporaneous corroborative account of why  the  appellant  fled  his
    home area on account of his Shia faith and that his conversion  led  to
    the risk to him on return.  My attention was  drawn  to  [7.2]  of  the
    Tribunal Practice Statement in force from 13 November 2014:

         "7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion to proceed to re-
             make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal."

 7. Mr Chelvan submitted that the judge made a clear finding at  [39]  that
    there was no independent witness evidence corroborating the reasons why
    the appellant left Pakistan in 2003  but  that  was  in  error.   Those
    issues were raised in  the  appellant's  grounds  at  [24]  -  [27]  in
    particular that there was corroboration from the appellant's wife.  She
    said at [5] of her statement (see page 106 of the appellant's bundle):

         "I met MBH around the beginning of 2003 at his  cousin's  house  in
         Rawalpindi in Pakistan.  I was visiting one of my close friends, M,
         who is MBH's cousin's wife.  A lot of the problems that  MBH  faced
         in Pakistan occurred before we met, therefore I did not  personally
         witness these problems; I found  out  about  them  from  him.   MBH
         explained how he converted to Shia Islam and  the  consequences  of
         this conversion.  He also told me about the horrific way  in  which
         his friend, Z, was killed in August 2000; an incident where MBH was
         also brutally attacked and his shoulder was injured."

 8. At [12] of the appellant's wife's statement at page 109 of the  bundle,
    she said inter alia "...... My family told me that I had brought  shame
    and disgrace upon them by marrying a man that was not their choice, and
    to make matters worse, I had married 'a Shia infidel' ......".

 9. Mr Chelvan submitted that the honour killing claim included inter  alia
    the account of the appellant with regard to his religious conversion as
    his relocation to Rawalpindi, his wife's home area, was precipitated by
    him fleeing his  home  area  due  to  the  religious  conversion.   The
    reference to the conversion was reinforced as being linked to the  real
    risk of honour killing at [12] of the appellant's wife's  statement  at
    page 109 of the bundle, which I have referred to at [8] above.

10. What Mr Chelvan says is that JD (Congo) [2012] EWCA Civ 327;  [2012]  1
    WLR 3273 made clear that the Upper Tribunal would take  the  particular
    circumstances of the case into account  when  it  assessed  whether  to
    remit under [7.2] of the Practice Statement.  The evidence with respect
    to the marriage and  the  honour  killing  intrinsically  included  the
    corroborative evidence of the appellant's wife which was not considered
    with anxious scrutiny  such  that  the  appellant  was  denied  a  fair
    hearing.

11. Mr Bramble submitted that the re-hearing should  focus  solely  on  the
    issue of whether the appellant and his wife would be at risk  from  her
    family if returned to Pakistan.  Judge Foudy's decision of 9  September
    2014 followed the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005 (see [25]),  in  terms  of  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  an
    application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    appellant had been given permission to appeal on limited grounds,  that
    is, that the judge had erred in failing to make a  finding  as  to  the
    risk faced by the appellant due to his marriage and the prospect  of  a
    possible honour killing.  That was why the  respondent's  position  was
    that the judge's findings at [48] that he was not able  to  accept  the
    appellant's claim that he converted  to  the  Shia  faith  and  thereby
    suffered persecution, should stand.  There was no  further  application
    made by the appellant under the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 [21] to the Upper Tribunal on the ground that was previously
    refused.

12. The only issue conceded by the respondent was that the judge  had  made
    an error in failing at  [51]  to  make  any  findings  on  whether  the
    appellant and his wife would be at  risk  from  his  wife's  family  if
    returned to Pakistan on the basis that she had married a man  that  was
    not their choice. (See [12] of the appellant's wife's statement at page
    109 of the appellant's bundle).

13. There was no issue that the appellant  had  been  given  permission  to
    appeal only on limited grounds, that the judge had  failed  to  make  a
    finding with regard to the appellant's  marriage  and  possible  honour
    killing.  No further application was made to the  Upper  Tribunal  with
    regard to the ground that was  previously  refused.   What  Mr  Chelvan
    claimed is that the appellant's faith was bound up in the issue of risk
    on return from his wife's family and would therefore  need  to  be  re-
    argued.

Conclusion on Error of Law

14. I do accept that the judge erred at [37] when referring to the evidence
    of the appellant's wife.  He said "I note that in  her  evidence  about
    the appellant's Shia conversion she does not include any mention of the
    death of his friend".  That was in error as she reported Z's  death  as
    told to her at [5] of her statement at  page  106  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.

15. What Mr Chelvan claims is that  the  judge's  error  in  not  making  a
    finding with regard to risk to him because of the marriage and possible
    honour killing infected the whole decision such that in  terms  of  the
    Tribunal Practice Statement at [7.2], it should be heard de novo.

16. The judge made careful and comprehensive findings with  regard  to  the
    appellant's claim to have converted and  with  regard  to  the  claimed
    attack upon himself and Z. (See [19]  -  [39]  of  the  decision).  The
    appellant was not found to be credible.

17. The judge referred to issues  he  would  have  expected  to  have  been
    developed with regard to the alternative risk to the appellant at [49]-
    [51].  The judge considered at [51] that  given  he  had  rejected  the
    appellant's Shia conversion narrative, what was left of the  claim  was
    insufficient to find in his favour with regard to  his  mixed  marriage
    and the possible honour killing.

18. I find there is nothing to suggest the  appellant  had  anything  other
    than a fair hearing. I do not accept that the  conceded  error  of  law
    infected the whole decision and nor do I accept the  judge's  error  at
    [37] of his decision in  failing  to  mention  the  appellant's  wife's
    reference to Z's death was material.  That is because I find the  judge
    made well-reasoned findings at [19] - [39] of  his  decision  that  the
    appellant was not credible with regard to his conversion  to  the  Shia
    faith; the errors of law did not infect his  decision  in  that  regard
    which shall stand.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  I  preserve  the
    adverse findings of the judge made in relation to the risk arising from
    the appellant's claimed conversion to the Shia faith. Judge Afako  must
    now hear evidence and make a  decision  with  regard  to  risk  to  the
    appellant for reasons not associated  with  his  faith,  that  is,  his
    marriage and honour killing. Remit to Judge Afako, First-tier Tribunal,
    Taylor House.


Anonymity direction made.




Signed                              Date 31 March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart






