
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/04698/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 February 2016                       |  On 30 March 2016                |
|Prepared 15 February 2016                 |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     E N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Albania,  date  of  birth  9  March  1985,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 3 March 2015 to refuse
    leave to enter following the refusal of an asylum claim.

2.   An appeal against that decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    C M Phillips, the judge, who, on 8 October 2015, dismissed  the  appeal
    in respect of the asylum  claim,  human  rights  grounds,  particularly
    Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR, and "under the Immigration Rules".
3.   It is to be  noted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 25 November 2015 do not challenge the  judge's  decision
    [D] otherwise than in relation to the Refugee  Convention  claim.   The
    judge, as a fact, gave no reasoning for rejecting claims in relation to
    the Immigration Rules which were addressed by the Secretary of State in
    the undated Reasons for Refusal Letter.  In the circumstances,  in  the
    light of the arguments raised it did not seem to me that there were any
    grounds pursued challenging either the lack of analysis by the judge or
    the lack of reasoning both in respect of the judge's decision  said  to
    be reached under the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    Indirectly there was a claim to be at risk with reference to Article  3
    ECHR but that was addressed by the judge (D&R [91]) with  reference  to
    the Appellant's  mental  health  problems  not  reaching  the  required
    threshold to require protection and it was  not  argued  that  in  that
    respect the judge erred in law in the consideration of that issue.

4.   The judge also makes no reference to Article 3 issues  in  relation  to
    risk on return but it may be that was because  it  would  fail  if  the
    Refugee Convention claim failed.  If that was the reason it is not good
    enough but that again did not form the basis of a challenge although it
    might be said to be Robinson obvious.

5.   The centrepiece of the Appellant's claim, which,  it  seemed,  was  not
    substantively challenged as cited in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the reasons
    for refusal letter, was based on claimed ill-treatment of the Appellant
    by a man known as Mr L and two other men who had sexually  abused/raped
    and ill-treated her. It was said the Appellant's father had killed Mr L
    thereby giving rise to a blood feud, particularly against  her  father,
    but of which the Appellant believed she was also at risk.  The core  to
    deciding the claim was  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  had,  as  she
    claimed, been so ill-treated by Mr L and two others.  From a conclusion
    as to whether or not that had occurred, the existence of the blood feud
    or honour killing issue claimed to her needed to be considered.

6.   The judge heard the evidence and received  clear  information  which  I
    understand,  was not  substantively  challenged  by  cross-examination,
    that the Appellant was suffering from flashbacks,  the  consequence  of
    the sexual assault/multiple rape of her by Mr L and two others.  It did
    not seem it was said that the medical assessment  had  been  elaborated
    upon to the point which undermined the centrepiece of the claim.

7.   The judge particularly lit  upon  the  certain  discrepancies  said  to
    exist in the Appellant's account and from  those  concluded,  it  would
    seem, that the sexual assault did not occur  and  it  followed  nothing
    else was  reliable  in  the  account  relating  to  the  subjective  or
    objective fears on return.  At [D33] the judge recited something of the
    medical background.  The judge also took into account the evidence with
    a contradiction over the date of the sexual assault as  to  whether  it
    was 21 November 2012 or 21 December 2012. The judge took  into  account
    other issues but stated, in her findings on the  evidence  [D85],  that
    she had subjected the Appellant's evidence to the "utmost scrutiny" and
    stated:

         "...  I have considered her evidence as if she  were  a  vulnerable
         adult and considered and applied the benefit of the  doubt  in  her
         favour.  Despite having done so  I  find  there  are  a  number  of
         inconsistencies which individually and cumulatively  undermine  the
         Appellant's core claim, which simply does  not  have  the  ring  of
         truth."


8.   The judge also said [D 87]:-

         "I have taken full account of the medical evidence finding that the
         Appellant may well have suffered from some past trauma but this  is
         not the same as finding that she has suffered persecution and has a
         well-founded fear of persecution on return for a reason that  comes
         under  the  refugee  convention  or  gives  rise  to  a  claim  for
         international protection."


     Whilst the multiple  rape  was  unlikely  to  have  been  intended  to
    persecute or occur for a convention reason  it  was  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return that was the issue. It seemed to  me  that  if  the
    judge took into account, as she said she did, of  the  history  of  the
    Appellant's mental  health  and  the  medical  evidence  of  flashbacks
    relating to the rape/sexual assault, it is hard to see how, giving  the
    benefit of the doubt, she could have properly reached  that  conclusion
    without more  adequate  and  extensive  reasoning  that  the  Appellant
    '...may well have suffered from some past trauma...'.  It  is  true  to
    say that the judge's assessment of the Refugee Convention reason leaves
    something to be desired since  the  Appellant  was  not  claiming  past
    persecution but fear as part of her family(PSG) on return [D86,87].  It
    is clear that women who have been subject to ill-treatment and  do  not
    have the necessarily means of protection, by the state may form,  on  a
    Shah and Islam [1999] UKHL 20 basis, a particular social group.


9.   I do not have to resolve that for  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the evidence and consideration of the risk on return  was
    superficial and lacked adequate reasons as to why the evidence of  PTSD
    was dismissed in assessing the Appellant's credibility and claimed past
    ill-treatment and risk on return.  It may  be  there  is  substance  in
    other grounds for criticism of the Appellant.  It plainly needs  to  be
    looked at in the round with the entirety of the evidence.  It  did  not
    seem to me from a brief reading of the papers that it could not be said
    that there could not be a real  risk  of  an  honour  killing.  In  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that the fair and  proper  conclusion  was
    that the judge did not fairly address the evidence as a whole. The same
    applies to the evidence that internal relocation was not  a  reasonable
    option and to the sufficiency of protection by the state. The  findings
    of fact made by the judge should not stand because they are tainted  by
    the Judge's adverse assessment of some of the evidence. It is  possible
    that on remaking the decision the same outcome may arise.


NOTICE OF DECISION

In the circumstances I am satisfied  that  the  Original  Tribunal  decision
cannot stand and the issues of the Refugee Convention  and  Article  3  ECHR
only must be returned to the  First-tier  for  a  proper  consideration  and
reasons of the decision.


ANONYMITY

The judge made an  anonymity  direction  and  it  is  appropriate  for  that
anonymity direction to continue.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  Return to the First-tier. Do not list before F-t T JJ C M  Phillips  or
    PJG White

(2)  Time estimate two hours.

(3)  The Appellant to serve any further documents relied upon in support  of
    the claim  not  less  than  ten  working  days  before  the  matter  is
    reconsidered in the First-tier.

(4)  Albanian interpreter required.

(5)  If any witnesses are called that require an interpreter other  than  in
    Albanian then the Appellant's representatives must give notice  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal of the need for such interpreter(s) not less than 5
    working days before the re-hearing.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 23 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

