

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04474/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House        |                                                   |
|                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated                     |
|On 26th January 2016        |                                                 On|
|                            |3rd February 2016                                  |
|                            |                                                   |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     Z K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Appellant:     Mr Lemer, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State pursues this appeal against the decision of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal to allow an appeal against the refusal of asylum.

 2. I maintain the descriptions of the parties as they were in  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal, for ease of reference.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decision to refuse his asylum claim. His appeal  against  that  refusal
    was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ripley ("the FTTJ")  in
    a decision promulgated on 30 October 2015.

 4. I maintain the anonymity direction which was  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 20 November 2015 in the following terms:

         "It is submitted that the Home Office Presenting  Officer  who  had
         heard all the evidence was unable to attend the resumed hearing  to
         give submissions due to illness and another Home Office  Presenting
         Officer who attended to request an adjournment in the circumstances
         was refused [sic].  As a result  he  could  only  make  submissions
         based on the Reasons for Refusal Letter. There is no record of  the
         adjournment request in the Decision & Reasons and the  reasons  why
         the request was refused [sic]. It is an arguable error of law  that
         had the Home Office Presenting Officer been  able  to  attend,  the
         points raised in submissions may have made a material difference to
         the outcome or to the fairness of proceedings."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. In support of their position, the appellant and respondent produced the
    following:

      i) A typed minute dated 27 October 2015  and  said  to  be  signed  by
         Michael Sartorius, POU Feltham (albeit it is not actually signed).

     ii) Two witness statements by Victoria Idia-Aina, caseworker at Howe  &
         Co, Solicitors, who represent the appellant.

 8. The respondent's grounds of appeal are based on  Mr  Sartorius'  minute
    which states as follows:

         "The Presenting officer responsible for the conduct of this  appeal
         was ill on the day of the hearing.  A  request  was  made  for  the
         hearing to be adjourned to a time when the PO was  well  enough  to
         attend due to all evidence being  completed  and  only  submissions
         based on the evidence heard remained [sic] this was refused  but  I
         have no doubt if the illness had been  to  a  Representative  [sic]
         then the adjournment on the same basis would have been  granted.  I
         pointed out that I would be unable to assist the  Tribunal  further
         than relying on the RFRL as I was not privy to the  evidence  heard
         and no attempt was made by the Tribunal or the  Representatives  to
         inform me of the nature of the evidence  or  be  provided  with  an
         agreed record of proceeding  for  comment.  Should  the  appeal  be
         allowed then the decision should be challenged accordingly."

 9. The grounds of appeal to this Tribunal  state  that  Mr  Sartorius  had
    sought an adjournment and that this "was apparently refused and he  had
    to make submissions solely on the Reasons for Refusal  letter  in  this
    case:".  The grounds note that "the FTTJ nowhere records that  such  an
    adjournment  request  was  made  and  refused,  and  as  a  result  the
    determination is flawed for procedural irregularity".  It is  suggested
    that the respondent's representative had not been treated equitably and
    the "Judge's findings and reasons overall do not reflect  that  a  fair
    hearing took place".

10. In summary, the evidence of the appellant's caseworker is that no  such
    adjournment was requested, albeit the absence of the previous HOPO  was
    discussed by the FTTJ with Mr Sartorius at the resumed hearing.

11. Ms Brocklesby-Weller accepted that there were  differences  between  Mr
    Sartorius' version of events at the hearing and that of the appellant's
    representative. However, she submitted that Mr  Sartorius'  minute  was
    consistent with paragraph 16 of the FTTJ's decision which refers to his
    making submissions in reliance on the reasons for refusal  letter.  She
    submitted that the respondent had been prejudiced by the  inability  of
    the  second  HOPO  to  make  oral  submissions   on   the   appellant's
    credibility. She accepted that the first HOPO had  made  notes  of  the
    oral evidence but said these were not particularly legible and, in  any
    event, it was not clear why they had not  been  passed  to  the  second
    HOPO. She submitted  that  the  tribunal's  decision  might  have  been
    different if credibility points had been  raised  in  submissions.  She
    accepted that the FTTJ refers at paragraph 25 to  taking  into  account
    the cross-examination but suggested that the FTTJ  may  not  have  been
    alive to the issues at the forefront of the first HOPO's  mind  on  the
    issue of credibility.  She concluded by saying that the  case  had  not
    been put as the respondent wanted.

12. Mr Lemer, for the appellant, relied on the statement of Ms Idia-Aina to
    the effect that Mr Sartorius had made no application for an adjournment
    at the resumed hearing. There had been a "very brief discussion between
    the HOPO and the Immigration  Judge  about  the  change  of  Presenting
    Officer for the hearing on 30 October 2015, and the HOPO explained that
    his colleague was ill. However, at  no  point  did  the  HOPO  ask  the
    Immigration Judge to adjourn the case nor did he make  any  submissions
    for an adjournment...".  He submitter that, in any event, any error  of
    law was not material: there were three key aspects of  the  appellant's
    account and findings on these had been made by the FTTJ by reference to
    corroborative documentary evidence  rather  than  the  appellant'  oral
    evidence alone. Thus any oral submissions for  the  respondent  on  the
    appellant's credibility arising out of his oral evidence would have had
    no material impact on the outcome of the appeal.

Discussion and findings

13. The respondent's appeal to this tribunal is based solely on the  minute
    produced by Mr Sartorius. I  have  some  concerns  about  that  minute.
    First, it is not signed. Secondly, it is dated a week after the hearing
    attended by Mr Sartorius. Thirdly, it is  vague,  ambiguous  and  lacks
    detail. For example, whilst Mr Sartorius says "a request was  made  for
    the hearing to be adjourned to a time when the PO was  well  enough  to
    attend" he does not state who made the request, when it was made or  to
    whom or the reason an adjournment was requested.  Whilst  it  could  be
    inferred that it was made at the hearing to the FTTJ, it does  not  say
    this.  No explanation is given for his not having the  previous  HOPO's
    record of the oral evidence. He appears to blame  the  tribunal  and/or
    the appellant's representative for failing to provide him with it,  yet
    there is no evidence he had asked for this from either.

14. Mr Sartorius claims that he pointed out that  he  would  be  unable  to
    assist the Tribunal further than relying on the  RFRL  as  he  was  not
    privy to the evidence heard. This accords with the decision of the FTTJ
    who states at paragraph 16:

        "Mr Sartorius attended to make submissions for  the  respondent.  He
        relied on the reasons given in the RFRL and  the  issues  concerning
        credibility generally that had arisen in oral evidence".

15.  There  is  no  reference  in  the  FTTJ's   otherwise   detailed   and
    comprehensive decision and reasons to any request by Mr  Sartorius  for
    an adjournment.   Thus the  FTTJ's  decision  is  consistent  with  the
    evidence of Ms Idia-Aina, who represented the appellant at the hearing,
    that "At the submissions only hearing on 30 October 2015 the  HOPO  did
    not make any request for an adjournment."  Ms Idia-Aina's  recollection
    (which is supported by a statement of truth) is that "there was a  very
    brief discussion between the HOPO and the Immigration Judge  about  the
    change of Presenting Officer for the hearing..."  She states, with some
    certainty, that "at no point did the HOPO ask the Immigration Judge  to
    adjourn the case nor did he make any  submissions  for  an  adjournment
    under the [Procedure Rules]".

16. Given the appellant's caseworker's unequivocal statement, the depth and
    detail of the FTTJ's  decision  and  reasons  on  all  other  pertinent
    issues, the poor quality of Mr Sartorius' note  and  the  lack  of  any
    other supporting evidence (it was open to the respondent to ask  for  a
    copy of the FTTJ's record of proceedings, for example), I am unable  to
    find that Mr Sartorius asked the FTTJ to adjourn the hearing to  enable
    the previous HOPO to make oral submissions for the respondent on issues
    arising out of cross-examination. I find that this was an  issue  which
    was  discussed  between  Mr  Sartorius  and  the  FTTJ  but  that  that
    discussion did not amount to a request for an adjournment.   Nor  do  I
    find that the FTTJ  should  have  considered  whether  to  adjourn  the
    hearing of her own motion given the absence  of  the  first  HOPO.   Mr
    Sartorius had rightly drawn  her  attention  to  the  potential  issues
    arising from the absence of the  first  HOPO  and  relevant  issues  of
    procedural fairness; the FTTJ was in a  position  to  take  account  of
    those issues by reference to her record of the oral evidence.  She  was
    on notice of the fact that the first HOPO was  not  available  to  make
    such submissions and she would be able to take this into  account  when
    she made her decision, to ensure fairness to both parties.  Indeed,  in
    the event, this she did.  Thus I find that the failure of the  FTTJ  to
    adjourn the resumed hearing was not procedurally unfair.

17. Even if a request for an adjournment had been made and  refused,  I  am
    unable  to  find  that  that  refusal  was   procedurally   unfair.   I
    specifically invited Ms Brocklesby-Weller to make  submissions  on  the
    issue of materiality, there being no reference to this in  the  grounds
    of appeal.  With all due respect to her, she was unable to point to any
    potential materiality because she had only the barely legible notes  of
    the first HOPO and the typed note of Mr Sartorius to form the basis  of
    any such submissions.  She was unable  to  identify  any  issues  which
    arose in the oral evidence and to which reference might have been  made
    by the first HOPO had she made oral submissions.

18. I also bear in mind the following:

      i)  At  paragraph  25  the  FTTJ  refers  to  having  considered   the
         respondent's reasons for rejecting the appellant's credibility both
         in the RFRL and "in the issues that came up in cross  examination".



     ii) At paragraph 29, the FTTJ relies on  the  "abundance  of  character
         references and certificates" to find  that  the  appellant  "had  a
         significant profile and responsibility".

    iii) The FTTJ found, at  paragraph  31,  contrary  to  the  respondent's
         argument, that the  appellant  had  exhaustively  sought  to  avail
         himself of local protection.  She noted his detailed account of his
         requests  for  protection  and   the   "numerous   letters"   which
         corroborated his evidence.  She further states "these letters  also
         serve  to  evidence  the  threats   he   received".    She   refers
         specifically to other correspondence to which she gives  evidential
         weight. She identifies  the  content  of  these  letters  as  being
         "consistent with the appellant's account  and  they  refer  to  the
         appellant's  post  and   duties   for   which   I   have   separate
         corroboration. There is nothing in the format of the  letters  that
         suggests they are not reliable. That is the view of  Mr  Zadeh  who
         comments that they have the hallmarks of genuine Afghan documents".
         She found the documents were genuine.

     iv) As regards the reliability of the letters  from  the  Taliban,  the
         FTTJ accepted that these were brought to the UK by  the  friend  of
         the appellant's father. She  noted  that  the  respondent  disputed
         their veracity because they were  not  corroborated.  However,  the
         FTTJ noted the background "evidence" confirms that the  Taliban  do
         distribute 'night letters'. She also noted the comments of Mr Zadeh
         in this regard and concluded that "the appellant gave a  consistent
         account of these letters in interview and in  his  statement".  She
         did not refer to any oral evidence given by the appellant on  these
         matters  and  thus  any  oral  submissions  by  the  respondent  on
         credibility would not have been of relevance to her  findings  with
         regard to the Taliban's letters.

      v) The FTTJ concludes that the appellant is a credible witness who has
         given a detailed consistent account in his evidence, including  his
         interview and his appeal statement.

19. Thus it cannot be said that the FTTJ's decision  was  based  wholly  or
    even largely on  the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant.   The  FTTJ's
    decision demonstrates a level of scrutiny, analysis and thoroughness in
    the assessment of all the evidence by the FTTJ,  including  that  given
    orally.  The respondent does not suggest that the FTTJ's record of  the
    appellant's oral evidence (paragraphs 8-14) is incorrect  in  any  way.
    The decision refers specifically to the FTTJ having taken into  account
    those issues of relevance arising in cross-examination.  It  is  clear,
    taking the decision and reasons as a whole, that  the  FTTJ  considered
    all the evidence and background material carefully  and  took  it  into
    account in her decision-making at every stage. I find  it  particularly
    telling that the respondent has been unable to draw my attention to any
    aspects of the cross-examination which have not been considered by  the
    FTTJ in her decision. This suggests that the  decision  has  been  made
    with the relevant issues, evidence and background material in mind.

20. For these reasons,  even  if  the  HOPO  made  an  application  for  an
    adjournment and it was refused and/or the FTTJ should  have  considered
    adjourning of her own motion and had decided against it, the failure to
    adjourn would not have amounted to an error of law capable of affecting
    the outcome of the appeal. Even if the first HOPO, who  was  unable  to
    attend the resumed hearing,  had  made  oral  submissions,  the  FTTJ's
    decision would have been the same.

Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

22. I do not set aside the decision.

Signed           A M Black                   Date        1 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction  Regarding  Anonymity  -  Rule  14,  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed           A M Black                   Date        1 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

