
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04237/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Sent           |
|On 7 August 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BOWEN



                                   Between

                                  Mr M S N

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Fountain of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant claimed asylum on 30 May 2012  and  his  application  was
    refused on 19 April 2013.  Thereafter he sought to appeal against  that
    decision, which appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas  on
    4 June 2013.

2.   The judge found the appellant's claim to  be  without  credibility  and
    dismissed the appeal in all respects.

3.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that decision.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted on 9 July 2013.  Thus the matter comes before us for
    a determination as to the relevant issue.

4.   The appellant lived in Iran with his parents and younger  brother.  His
    family was affluent and owned  a  number  of  properties.   His  father
    worked for the government as an interpreter in the navy and  co-founded
    a private school.

5.   Subsequently his father was placed under house arrest  and  the  school
    closed because of suspected  anti-government  activities.   The  school
    then reopened and his father left the navy.  In  2000  the  authorities
    closed down the school and in 2007  his father set up a  new  business.
    The appellant came to the United Kingdom to study.  In  June  2009  his
    father ran a campaign  for  the  anti-government  Green  Party  in  the
    presidential elections. The appellant's  father,  brother  and  cousins
    were arrested and the family  home raided.

6.   In October 2011 the appellant returned to  Iran  for  one  month.   His
    application for a  further  student  visa  had  been  refused  and  his
    maintenance funds were insufficient.  Having arrived  in  Iran  he  was
    notified that he should for his own  safety  leave,  which  he  did  in
    November 2011.

7.   Thereafter  in  December  2011  there  was  a  letter  from  the  court
    requesting the appellant to attend. I n April 2012 officials raided his
    family home taking many of his possessions including his  laptop  which
    he had left with his mother to use. There were  photographs  stored  on
    the laptop showing him attending a demonstration in Victoria Square  in
    London in June 2009.

8.   The Judge, for the reasons set out in  the  decision,  did  not  accept
    that the appellant's father was arrested or had been  involved  in  the
    activities as claimed.  The Judge did  not find it  credible  that  the
    authorities either raided the family home or wanted the appellant.

9.   At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas there  had  been
    a request to show two short videos.  There had been no request for  the
    use of video equipment prior to the  hearing and indeed there had  been
    a CMR hearing on 21 May 2013.  A record of that hearing is in the  file
    and indeed there was a copy of the directions in that  Case  Management
    Review handed to each party.  There is  a  specific  passage  in  those
    directions dealing with video evidence and no indication is given  that
    that was raised at all at that hearing.

10.  Nevertheless the Judge sought to accommodate the parties and  equipment
    was obtained but unfortunately it was not equipment that could show the
    particular videos in question.

11.  The first ground of appeal is that the  Judge  failed  to  adjourn  the
    matter in order that the evidence should be obtained.  For our part  we
    see no merit whatever in that suggestion.   It  is  unfortunate  indeed
    that the correct equipment was not available but that of course is  the
    whole purpose of having earlier directions so that those matters can be
    dealt with.  We detect no impropriety on  the  part  of  the  Judge  in
    insisting that matters go ahead.

12.  We requested of Mr Howard  what  the  particular  videos  purported  to
    show.  He said that they were very short, about two minutes each.   One
    video showed the appellant's father teaching and  the  other  showed  a
    demonstration.  The common ground, as indeed the Judge had noted in the
    determination, is that the video of the demonstration did not show  the
    appellant.

13.  Mr Howard submitted  that  it  was  material  to  the  claim  that  the
    appellant's father was  shown to be a teacher. From our reading of  the
    findings of the Judge, however, it was not the father's occupation as a
    teacher that was in question but rather his political involvement.  The
    judge considered indeed that if the appellant's father had been   under
    such suspicion he would not have been reemployed or  reinstated  as  an
    interpreter in the navy as claimed.

14.  We find nothing to  criticise  the  Judge  in  relation  to  the  video
    evidence.

15.  Mr Howard relying on grounds 2 and 3 submits that there was  inadequate
    reasoning in respect of the Judge's credibility findings.

16.  Our attention was drawn in particular to paragraphs 22, 25  and  29  of
    the determination.  The Judge comments that if the  appellant's  father
    had been placed under house  arrest  in  1992  on  suspicion  of  anti-
    government activities it  was  not  credible  that  he  would  then  be
    permitted back into the navy to carry on  his  work  until  1996.   The
    Judge went on to find that,  given  the  appellant's  father's  claimed
    difficulties with the authorities, it was not credible  that  he  would
    openly expose himself and his family in the involvement with the  Green
    Party campaign.  Furthermore that following the  defeat  of  the  Green
    Party it was not  credible  that  the  appellant's  father  would  have
    remained in his home for more than a month. The Judge did not  find  it
    credible that the appellant  would  have  left  his  laptop  containing
    potentially  damaging  information  at  his  mother's  home  given  the
    problems that his family  already faced with the authorities.

17.  It is contended that there is a marked lack  of  reasoning  as  to  why
    those matters should be regarded in the way in which the Judge seeks to
    place them.  Mr Smart on behalf of the respondent invited our attention
    to a decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad (Sufficiency of  reasons:
    set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC).

18.  We were invited to note the head  note  of  that  case  that,  although
    there is a legal duty  to  give  a  brief  explanation  supporting  the
    conclusions on the central issues on which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

19.  It seems to us that it is proper to put those matters within the  wider
    context of the findings made in connection with the case as a whole.

20.  The  Judge  did  not  consider  that  if  the  appellant's  father  was
    permitted back into the navy and continuing to run a school  and  later
    set up business, that such was consistent with his claim to be  someone
    who was regarded as an anti-government individual who had  been  placed
    on lengthy house arrests in the past.  It seems to us that  that  is  a
    reasonable approach to take to such matters.

21.  More particularly the Judge  noted  that  the  appellant's  father  and
    brother and cousins had been arrested prior to 2011 thereby,  if  true,
    establishing a very strong  profile  for  the  family  as  being  anti-
    government. Notwithstanding that matter the appellant  makes  no  claim
    for asylum but rather returns to Iran. The  Judge  finds  that  that  a
    return is undermining of the credibility of the profile the  family  as
    presented.  We would agree. The judge notes in paragraph 30 that if the
    authorities had a genuine adverse interest in the appellant they  would
    have known of his presence in Iran and  his arrival  in  October  2011.
    The Judge notes that the authorities, if they really had an interest in
    the appellant, could simply have arrested him at his home. No reason is
    given why the appellant should have left his laptop  with   his  mother
    particularly if such contained incriminating photographs.

22.  Given the entire context of the claim we do not find that that  finding
    is Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse in all the circumstances.

23.  The third ground of appeal relates to the failure of the judge to  make
    proper findings in the light of BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk  on
    return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) or  to  have  applied  it  to  the
    circumstances of this case.

24.  Mr Smart submits that it was unnecessary for  the   judge  to  consider
    the case of BA given the findings that were made in paragraph 33 of the
    determination, namely that the appellant had not  proved  that  he  was
    present or actively involved in the demonstration in 2009.   The  Judge
    goes on to say "I do not find that the authorities  in  Iran  have  any
    such belief of reason to believe that he has been politically  involved
    in the United Kingdom."

25.  The evidence emanated from the  appellant  himself  that  he  had  been
    involved in that demonstration.  The  YouTube  extract  that  had  been
    sought to be produced at  the  hearing  was  to  show  that  particular
    demonstration. It did not however show the appellant to be at it. There
    was a lack of information about the demonstration in Birmingham  on  21
    June 2009.

26.  It is perhaps of significance to note that the  hearing took  place  on
    4 June 2013, some four years from that demonstration. No  evidence  was
    given by the appellant that  he  has  attended  other  or  more  recent
    demonstrations.

27.  The return of the appellant is regarded as having significance  by  the
    judge both as to the genuine nature of his fear of the authorities  and
    of the fact that the appellant entered the country  in  2011  seemingly
    with no difficulty with nobody seeking to arrest him at that stage.  It
    is clear from the decision in BA that there is a very  significant  and
    sophisticated monitoring apparatus recording those who have taken  part
    in demonstrations. The appellant came upon a student visa and  with  an
    Iranian passport.  No doubt therefore the authorities have all relevant
    records as to his facial characteristics  and,  if  they  had  been  so
    interested, no doubt could  have picked him out from the demonstrators.
     The fact that the appellant was allowed to both enter and  leave  Iran
    was, to the Judge, a factor illustrating that the authorities were  not
    looking for him nor had they an interest in  him.   Indeed  it  is  the
    appellant's own account that it was the  images  on  his  laptop  which
    encouraged the authorities in their pursue of him as well as his family
    connections.

28.  Given the findings of the judge that the appellant was not involved  in
    the demonstration it does not seem to us to be an error of law  on  the
    part of the  judge not to engage with BA.  In any event  the  appellant
    decided to return to Iran  which he did in 2011  without  incident.  It
    was only after he returned to the United Kingdom that  he  claims  that
    the difficulties which he has spoken about arose.

29.  The devil often lies in the detail. The question must arise why  it  is
    that the appellant at his hearing sought to rely upon a YouTube picture
    of the demonstration which did not show him whereas on his laptop  that
    he had prior to Iran in November 2011 he claims  to  have  had  footage
    showing himself.  Accepting of course that the claim for asylum was not
    made for two years or more after  that  demonstration,  it  is  perhaps
    surprising that the appellant chooses to produce  something  that  does
    not show him at the demonstration, when according to him he did have in
    the past some evidence showing his presence.

30.  Overall the  Judge's  findings  are  properly  open  to  be  made.  The
    appellant gave evidence before the Judge and no doubt the Judge was  in
    the best position to assess that evidence.

31.  We detect no material error of law in  the  proceedings.  The  case  is
    very fact specific and the task of the judge as we so find was properly
    discharged  in  the  approach  taken  to  the  case  as  shown  in  the
    determination.

32.  In those circumstances the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    shall be upheld.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  is
    dismissed.  The  asylum  appeal  is  dismissed.  That  in  relation  to
    humanitarian protection is dismissed. The appeal in relation to Article
    8 and human rights is also dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 30th August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
