

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04645/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham     |Determination Sent       |
|On 11th June 2013                      |On 17th June 2013        |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

                                   Between

                                     CLW

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Pipe instructed by TRP solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. As it is common ground and agreed between the parties that this appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal is one that falls to be allowed, it is necessary
      for us only briefly to explain why  we  agree  that  the  parties  are
      correct to agree on that disposal.


   2. The appellant, who is a citizen of Jamaica, was born  on  9th  January
      1977. She arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  16th  July  2001.  Her
      immigration history and the history of proceedings  that  followed  is
      well known to the parties and there is no need for us to  set  it  out
      here. It is sufficient for present purposes to  record  that  a  fresh
      asylum claim was accepted in 2009 and in March 2010 she  and  her  son
      were  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  although  she  was  not
      recognised as a refugee. She appealed,  as  she  was  entitled  to  by
      virtue of section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002.

   3. That appeal was dismissed  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      following a hearing on 7th June 2011. He accepted that  the  appellant
      had a well founded fear of persecution in her home area of Jamaica but
      dismissed her appeal on the  basis  that  she  could  safely  relocate
      elsewhere  in  Jamaica  and  so  was  not  entitled  to  asylum.   The
      appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  dismissed  by  a  Deputy
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal on the basis  that  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal judge disclosed no error of law.

   4. That, however, is a view that has not been  shared  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal and the determination of the Upper Tribunal has been set  aside
      by an order of the Court of  Appeal  made  with  the  consent  of  the
      parties on 16th January 2013. The parties agreed that  the  judge  had
      erred in his approach to internal relocation by the  appellant  within
      Jamaica.

   5.  In  short,  the  judge  erred  in  leaving  out  of  account  certain
      considerations that would relate to the  appellant  whether  she  were
      living in her home area or in an area of relocation.

   6. Given the need for a holistic approach to this assessment and  to  all
      the characteristics of this appellant, not least the fact that she has
      been living in the United Kingdom for nearly 12 years; that she is  at
      risk from criminal gangsters in Jamaica but does not have  the  shield
      of the witness protection programme; that  members  of  her  immediate
      family have been killed already and,  because  of  her  mental  health
      difficulties, lack of employment experience and illiteracy  she  would
      be at very real risk of experiencing destitution, it is  not  hard  at
      all to see why, properly and realistically, Mr Singh concedes that  it
      would be unduly  harsh  to  expect  this  appellant  now  to  relocate
      anywhere within her country of nationality.

   7. We agree and find that to be  the  only  rational  conclusion  on  the
      particular facts of this appeal.

   8. For those reasons it is plain that the appellant has established  that
      she has a well founded fear of persecution such as to require  her  to
      be recognised as a refugee.

   9. Thus, the appeal is to be granted refugee status.

  10. We record  also  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  order  for
      anonymity and that shall be continued.




   Summary of decision:

  11.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  an  error  of  law  and   his
      determination, promulgated following the hearing  on  7th  June  2011,
      shall be set aside.


  12. We substitute a fresh decision to allow the appeal.








                               Signed






                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                                    11th June 2013
