
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04050/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Harmondsworth                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 20 May 2015                              |On : 26 May 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    M A I
                            (anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jagpal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Bangladesh  born  on  28  December  1990.  He
entered the United Kingdom in February 2010 with leave to enter as a Tier  4
student and then overstayed after his subsequent application  for  leave  to
remain as a student was refused. He was issued with a notice of  removal  as
an overstayer on 14 May 2014  and  then  made  an  Article  8  human  rights
application on 9 June 2014, which  was  refused  and  certified  as  clearly
unfounded on 19 January 2015. He was detained  when  reporting  and  removal
directions were set on 30 January 2015 for his removal to Bangladesh  on  10
February 2015. The removal directions were cancelled when he  made  a  claim
for asylum on 4 February 2015. On 13 February 2015 he  was  accepted  on  to
the fast track process and was interviewed about his claim on 4 March  2015.
His claim was refused on 5 March 2015 and a removal decision  was  made  the
same day.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard
before the First-tier Tribunal and dismissed in a determination  promulgated
on 27 April 2015. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on
7 May 2015.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant's claim, in summary, is that  he  is  at  risk  on  return  to
Bangladesh as a result of his previous political activities  for  the  youth
faction of the Bangladesh National Party,  the  Bangladesh  National  League
Jubo League, and due to being homosexual. He claimed to have  been  involved
in politics since October 2007 and to have experienced problems as a  result
from 1 June 2009 when he was part of a group of BNP  members  that  attacked
an Awami League meeting resulting in an Awami League member being shot  dead
by a BNP member. He claimed that he played no  part  in  the  attack  but  a
warrant for his arrest was issued  on  2  June  2009  and  the  police  came
looking for him, whilst he was in hiding,  so  he  fled  the  country  after
being issued with a student visa. He claimed also to have realised  that  he
was gay when he was aged 16 years although  no  one  found  out  about  that
whilst  he  was  in  Bangladesh.  He  had  had  five  or  six   casual   gay
relationships in the United Kingdom and had a  longer  relationship  with  a
male from April 2012.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was politically  involved  as  claimed  and  did  not  accept  that  he  was
homosexual. It was considered that  his  removal  to  Bangladesh  would  not
breach his human rights.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was initially heard before  the
First-tier Tribunal on 17  March  2015  and  was  dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 19 March 2015. However, following the grant of permission  to
appeal, an Upper Tribunal Judge set aside the decision for error of law  and
remitted the case to the First-tier Tribunal where the appeal was  heard  de
novo by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana on 23 April 2015.

Judge  Chana  heard  from  the  appellant  and  three  of  his  friends  and
considered the documentary evidence before  her,  which  included  a  charge
sheet, an FIR, an arrest warrant and a letter purporting to  come  from  the
President of the BNP Shriatpur District Committee. She  found  none  of  the
evidence to be reliable and concluded that the appellant had fabricated  his
claim relating to involvement with the BNP. She also rejected his  claim  to
be homosexual  and  found  that  he  would  be  at  no  risk  on  return  to
Bangladesh. She accordingly dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought on behalf  of  the  appellant  on  two  main
grounds: firstly that the judge  had  made  inconsistent  and  contradictory
findings on the appellant's claim as regards his  political  activities  and
had failed to determine the reliability of  the  documentary  evidence;  and
secondly that her approach to the question of the appellant's sexuality  was
flawed and that her rejection of the witness' evidence lacked reasoning.

Permission was initially refused, but  was  subsequently  granted  by  Upper
Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 7  May  2015,  with  specific  reference  to  the
second ground, on the basis that  the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  the
witness' evidence in relation to the  appellant's  sexuality  were  arguably
flawed.

Appeal hearing

At the hearing  Mr  Palmer  produced  correspondence  from  the  appellant's
former solicitors to the respondent advising them that he was  also  relying
upon his sexuality as part of his claim, but found it  hard  to  talk  about
such personal issues with strangers and had therefore not  mentioned  it  at
his screening interview. He requested that  the  documents  be  admitted  as
relevant to Judge Chana's findings at paragraph 72  of  her  decision  where
she placed weight upon the appellant's delay in  raising  his  sexuality  as
part of his claim.

The parties then made submissions on the error of law.

Mr Palmer expanded upon the grounds of appeal,  submitting  that  the  judge
had made  inconsistent  findings  about  the  appellant's  attendance  at  a
meeting on 1 June 2009 and had wrongly rejected the  legal  documents  which
were, contrary to her conclusion, consistent with the  appellant's  account.
He submitted further that the judge, in making adverse  findings  about  the
appellant's claim as to his sexuality  due  to  his  delay  in  raising  the
matter, had failed to have regard to the  respondent's  guidance  on  sexual
orientation issues in asylum claims, and had made adverse  findings  against
the witnesses for  reasons  which  were  unlawful.  He  requested  that  the
decision be set aside and re-made afresh.

Mr Jagpal submitted that the  judge  had  made  no  errors  of  law  in  her
decision and that the grounds amounted to little more  than  a  disagreement
with her findings.

Consideration and findings.

In my view the judge's decision does not contain any material errors of  law
such that it has to be set aside.  My  reasons  for  so  concluding  are  as
follows.

In granting permission on all grounds, Upper Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor  said
that he found little merit in the grounds relating to the  judge's  findings
on the appellant's political involvement. I agree. The  judge  gave  lengthy
and detailed reasons for concluding that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
political involvement and the risk he allegedly  faced  on  that  basis  was
lacking in credibility. Contrary  to  the  assertion  in  the  grounds,  her
findings were not inconsistent or contradictory but simply pointed  out  the
various inconsistencies in the evidence. At no point  did  she  accept  that
the incident on 1 June 2009  had  genuinely  taken  place,  but  she  merely
pointed out  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  unaware  of  the
intention  of  his  colleagues  to  attack  the  Awami  League  members  was
inconsistent with the account given in the  FIR  that  his  colleagues  were
armed with deadly weapons and with his own evidence  that  they  were  armed
with guns and bombs. Her findings,  at  paragraph  62,  that  the  appellant
feared prosecution not persecution was no more than a comment on  his  claim
in the alternative, but  it  is  plain  that  that  did  not  amount  to  an
acceptance that the events actually took place.

As regards the assertion in the grounds that the judge made no  findings  on
the weight to be attached to the  documentary  evidence,  that  is  patently
wrong. She considered the documentary evidence in detail, in  particular  at
paragraphs 53 to 57 of her decision, and  noted  several  discrepancies  and
inconsistencies between the contents of the documents  and  the  appellant's
own evidence, concluding that the evidence was not reliable.  There  can  be
no doubt, from her findings  in  those  paragraphs  and  her  reference,  at
paragraph  57,  to  the  reported  prevalence  of  fraudulent  documents  in
Bangladesh, that she did not attach weight  to  any  of  the  documents  and
found that they formed part of a fabricated claim.

Whilst Mr Palmer accepted that the judge's findings on the letter  from  the
president of the BNP were open to her for the reasons  given,  he  submitted
that her findings on the legal documents were unsustainable. He focussed  in
particular upon her reliance,  at  paragraph  53,  on  the  FIR  failing  to
explicitly state that  the  Awami  League  victim  had  died  and  upon  her
reliance, at paragraph 54, upon the title of the charge sheet  referring  to
the Explosive Substance Act rather than a charge  of  murder.   However  the
judge was entitled to give weight to such concerns,  particularly  in  light
of the more weighty concerns, expressed at  paragraphs  51  and  52  of  her
decision, that the appellant had previously expressly stated that no  arrest
warrants had ever been issued against him and that he  had  previously  made
no mention at all of the incident described in the  documents.  In  view  of
such significant inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, the judge  was
perfectly entitled to place the weight that she did upon the  documents  and
the evidence as a whole.

Having found, for reasons properly given,  that  the  appellant's  claim  as
regards his political involvement was a complete fabrication, the judge  was
entitled to approach  his  claim  in  regard  to  his  sexuality  with  some
circumspection. In any event it is plain that she  gave  full  and  detailed
consideration to that  claim  and  to  the  supporting  evidence.  She  took
account of the appellant's explanation for having introduced the claim  only
at a later stage and, in rejecting that explanation, gave clear  and  cogent
reasons for so doing. There was nothing inconsistent with  the  respondent's
policy guidance  in  her  approach.  Mr  Palmer  relied  upon  new  evidence
indicating that the appellant had raised the matter of  his  sexuality  with
his solicitor at the time of his screening interview and that his  solicitor
had communicated the additional  strand  to  his  claim  to  the  respondent
subsequent to the interview. However that does  not  undermine  the  judge's
findings at paragraph 72, where she properly found that  the  appellant  had
failed to mention his sexuality on various previous occasions  when  he  had
had the opportunity to do so and that his explanation for  not  having  done
so was not a credible one. She was entitled to rely upon that  as  a  matter
undermining the credibility of the appellant's claim.

In any event that was not the sole reason given by the judge  for  rejecting
the appellant's claim as to  his  sexuality.  She  noted  that,  aside  from
making no mention of being gay, he had in fact previously claimed to  be  in
a relationship with a woman, Ms Maharjan. Further, his evidence  as  to  his
homosexual relationships in the United Kingdom was inconsistent. Aside  from
the claimed casual relationships he had had with men  whose  full  names  he
did not know, he claimed to  have  had  one  relationship  which  was  still
ongoing, yet the evidence given by himself and his  claimed  partner  as  to
the nature of their relationship and in particular whether or not  they  had
cohabited, was  completely  contradictory  and  his  partner  had  not  even
attended the hearing.

As regards the witnesses appearing at the hearing, the  judge  was  entitled
to attach the weight that she  did  to  their  evidence.  In  rejecting  the
evidence of Ms Maharjan the judge noted the inconsistent evidence  given  by
the appellant about the nature of his relationship with her  at  a  previous
interview  and  considered,  but  rejected,   his   explanation   for   that
inconsistent evidence. The fact that the  evidence  given  by  both  at  the
hearing was consistent was not in itself a reason  to  accept  the  accounts
given, when there had been previous inconsistent  evidence  and  when  there
otherwise  existed  considerable  concerns  about  the  reliability  of  the
appellant's account of his sexuality.

Likewise, in view of such concerns as to the evidence as a whole, the  judge
was entitled to place the weight that  she  did  upon  the  evidence  of  Mr
Mojumdar (referred to in her decision as Mr Kader) and Mr  Ahmed.  She  gave
reasons for  finding  their  evidence  to  be  lacking  in  credibility:  in
relation to Mr Mojumdar, at paragraph 75 and in  relation  to  Mr  Ahmed  at
paragraphs 78 and 79. The grounds of appeal only challenge her  findings  in
relation to Mr Mojumdar, although Mr Palmer challenged her findings on  both
witnesses, and assert that the reasons she gave for rejecting  the  evidence
were irrational. However I am in agreement with Mr Jagpal's submission  that
such an assertion is no more than a disagreement with the  judge's  findings
and that she was entitled to place  the  weight  that  she  did  upon  their
evidence for the reasons given, and in the light of the lack of  credibility
of the evidence as a whole.

Taken as a whole, the judge's  decision  contains  a  careful  and  detailed
assessment of all the  evidence  before  her  and  clear  findings  of  fact
supported by cogent reasoning. The grounds amount  to  little  more  than  a
disagreement with those  findings.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
adverse credibility findings that  she  did  in  rejecting  the  appellant's
claim as to his political activities  and  his  sexuality  and  the  grounds
disclose no material errors of law in her decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.






                               Signed   Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
