
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: AA/04498/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |      Decision & Reasons          |
|                                   |Promulgated                       |
|On 17 October 2016                 |      On 19 October 2016          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED AMIN SOLTANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms N Patel for Lei Dat Baig
For the Respondent:     Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is a resumed hearing of an appeal where I found errors of law  after
   a hearing on 14 March 2016 in respect of the  Judges  assessment  of  the
   Appellants risk on return being the subject of a court  summons  and  her
   assessment  of  the  genuineness  of  the   Appellant's   conversion   to
   Christianity.

The Law

Asylum

4. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that the Applicant will  be
   granted asylum if the provisions of that paragraph apply. The  burden  of
   proof rests on an Appellant to satisfy me that he or she falls within the
   definition of refugee in Regulation 2 of the Refugee or person in need of
   International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (which I  shall
   refer to as the Qualification Regulations) as read with Article 1 (A)  of
   the refugee Convention. In essence, an Appellant will have to  show  that
   there are substantial grounds for believing that the Appellant is outside
   his or her country of nationality or, if applicable, his or  her  country
   of habitual residence, by reason of a well founded  fear  of  persecution
   for Refugee Convention reason and is unable or unwilling, owing  to  such
   fear, to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country.


Humanitarian Protection

5. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules states  that  an  applicant,  who
   does not qualify as a refugee, will be granted humanitarian protection if
   the provisions of that paragraph apply. The burden of proof rests  on  an
   Appellant to satisfy me that  he  or  she  is  entitled  to  humanitarian
   protection under paragraph 339 of the Immigration Rules. In  essence,  an
   Appellant will have to  show  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
   believing that, if returned, the Appellant would  face  a  real  risk  of
   suffering serious harm and that he or she is unable  or,  owing  to  such
   risk, unwilling to avail himself or herself  of  the  protection  of  the
   country of return. Serious harm in this context is defined as  the  death
   penalty or execution, unlawful killing, torture or inhuman  or  degrading
   treatment or punishment or a serious and individual threat to a civilians
   life by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of  international
   or internal armed conflict




The ECHR

6. The burden of proof rests of an Appellant to satisfy me  that  there  are
   substantial grounds for believing that, as a result of  the  Respondent's
   decision, he or she will be exposed to a real risk of torture, or inhuman
   or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  contrary  to  Article  3.  Where
   applicable, it is for the Appellant to satisfy me that he or she  has  an
   Article 8 private and/or family  life  in  this  country  which  will  be
   interfered with by the decision under  appeal.  If  that  is  shown,  the
   Respondent must establish that  the  decision  is  legitimate,  taken  in
   pursuit of  a  legitimate  aim  and  necessary  and  proportionate  in  a
   democratic society.

Sur Place


7. The Immigration Rules and case law assists  the  court  when  considering
   the position facing a person who claims to have engaged in activities  in
   the United Kingdom which  would  bring  them  to  the  attention  of  the
   authorities in their country of return. Paragraph 339P of HC 395 states:


   "A person may have a well-founded fear of being persecuted or a real risk
   of suffering serious harm based on events which have  taken  place  since
   the person left the  country  of  origin  or  country  of  return  and/or
   activates which have been engaged in  by  a  person  since  he  left  the
   country of origin or  country  of  return,  in  particular  where  it  is
   established that the activities relied upon constitute the expression and
   continuation of convictions or orientations held in the country of origin
   or country of return."


8. I must also consider Paragraph 339J(iv) which states that  the  Secretary
   of State must take into account, inter alia,


    "whether the person's activities since leaving  the  country  of  return
   were engaged in for the sole or main purpose of  creating  the  necessary
   conditions for making an asylum claim or establishing that he is a person
   eligible for humanitarian protection or a human rights claim,  so  as  to
   assess whether these activities will expose the person to persecution  or
   serious harm if he returned to that country"

Evidence

9.  The Appellant had provided a number of witness statements which were  in
   the bundles dated 28 May 2013,18 August  2014,  and  24  June  2016.  The
   Appellant gave oral evidence in English and there is a full note  of  his
   evidence in the record of proceedings.


10. Reverend David Lathom also gave evidence adopting the  contents  of  his
   witness statement of 11 January 2015, the letter at page 3 of the  bundle
   and the supplementary statement at pages 2-3 dated 22 June 2016. There is
   a full note of his evidence in the record of proceedings.


Submissions


11. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates made the following submissions:


   a) He relied on the reason for refusal letter and the preserved  findings
      of Judge Malik.


   b) In respect of the court summons which Judge Malik accepted was genuine
      it was clear that the Appellant was oblivious as to  why  the  summons
      had been issued in 2005 and he had never sked his family, with whom he
      maintained contact, to find out why the summons was issued.


   c) If the summons was issued for a serious  reason,  then  the  Appellant
      would have been pursued in the 11 years that followed the issue of the
      summons.


   d) Therefore whatever reason the summons had been issued it  was  not  so
      serious that the Appellant would be drawn  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities.


   e) In relation to the Appellants claim to have converted to  Christianity
      he argued that the Appellant's account of why he fled  from  Iran  had
      not been believed.


   f) He suggested that the  Appellants  involvement  with  the  Church  was
      largely social.


   g) He suggested that it was not credible that Reverend Lathom  would  not
      remember being told that the Appellants brothers  had  both  converted
      although claiming they were close friends. He suggested  that  he  may
      have recalled such a conversation about a sister but this was  clearly
      wrong.


   h) The suggestion that his brothers had converted  was  an  embellishment
      bya person willing to embellish to achieve his goal.


   i) The Appellant did not have a letter or evidence from those he  claimed
      to have spoken to about his Christian faith outside the Church.


12. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Patel made the following submissions:


   a) In relation to the court summons Judge Malik had accepted that it  was
      genuine although she did not accept that the reason he  gave  for  his
      flight from Iran was genuine.


   b) The expert report of Mr Rashti confirmed that it was not unusual for a
      summons to not specify why the person summonsed was required to attend
      court.


   c) The summons was to the Revolutionary Court, a criminal court, and  the
      three reasons for such a summons would put the Appellant  at  risk  on
      return. There was no evidence that the summons had an expiration date.


   d) She  accepted  that  the  assessment  of  the  genuine  nature  of  an
      Appellants conversion was not easy. She argued that there were visible
      signs that are pointers and guides to the nature of their faith.


   e)  The  Appellant  had  given  a  detailed  written   account   of   the
      circumstances of his conversion in his earliest statement on 18 August
      2014.


   f) The Appellant was honest in relation to his motive for  attending  the
      Church, that it was to attend the English Language course and  through
      this attendance he became more interested in the Christian  faith.  It
      was not a case of him immediately attempting to convert:  he  attended
      the language school and after a year his thoughts crystallized in  May
      2013 and he considered himself to be a Christian.


   g) In reality converted before the receipt of the  refusal  letter  which
      was dated 8 June 2014 although he was not baptised until July 2014.


   h) Reverend Lathom  had  attended  each  hearing  of  the  case  and  was
      satisfied that the Appellant was a genuine convert. He was aware  that
      there were duplicitous  people  but  took  precautions  and  steps  to
      distinguish those who were genuine and those who were not.


   i) The Reverend conformed that the Appellant was  a  committed  Christian
      attending regularly at a number of different events  that  showed  his
      interest was not just social.


   j)  The  fact  that  the  Reverend  could  not  specifically  recall  the
      Appellant referring to the fact that his brother had converted was not
      surprising given that the Appellants case was that this  had  happened
      some three years ago.

Findings

13. Having I am required to look at all the evidence  in  the  round  before
   reaching any findings.  I have done so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I
   have compartmentalised  my  findings  in  some  respects  below,  I  must
   emphasise the findings have only been made having taken  account  of  the
   evidence as a whole.

14. The central issue in this case is whether the  Appellant  has  converted
   to Christianity as I am satisfied that as  a  Muslim  convert  who  makes
   clear he would wish to practise his religion openly he would be  at  risk
   on return.


15. I acknowledge that I have preserved those findings made by  Judge  Malik
   in which she did not accept that the reasons the Appellant had given  for
   leaving Iran were credible. I am satisfied that the lack  of  credibility
   of one part of his case is not determinative of the  credibility  of  his
   claim to have converted to Christianity and I must look at all matters in
   the round, which I have done.


16. I heard evidence from both the Appellant and Reverend David Lathom.


17. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 11  March  2012.  I  found  that  the
   Appellant gave a credible account of why and how he became a Christian. I
   found  that  he  gave  a  credible  account  of  what  attracted  him  to
   Christianity.


18. I found that it was, if anything, a more believable account that he  had
   started to attend the City Church in late 2012 not because he  was  drawn
   to Christianity but because he simply wanted to learn  English.  I  would
   have found it difficult to accept that at a time when he could not  speak
   English he was drawn to Christian beliefs. Rather it appears that as  his
   English improved and he was  drawn  into  the  various'  life  enhancing'
   activities both social and religious that  the  Reverend  Lathom  accepts
   they invite those who attend the language school to  join  the  Appellant
   became increasingly drawn  to  the  Christian  faith  which  he  asserted
   offered him something that he did not find in Islam, the religion of  his
   birth.


19. I accept the Appellants evidence that he  felt  that  he  had  become  a
   Christian by mid-2013. The Appellant was baptised as a  Christian  on  13
   July 2014 and Reverent Lathom confirmed that  baptism  only  takes  place
   after a period of about a year of a discipleship course and a process  of
   'screening' which the Reverend conducted  to  satisfy  himself  that  the
   Appellant was genuine. I am therefore satisfied that while  baptism  took
   place after the refusal letter that the Appellant was  actively  pursuing
   the process of becoming a Christian before the refusal letter was issued.


20. I found the Reverend Lathom was a  credible  witness.  He  is  a  mature
   experienced  minister  who  acknowledged  the  possibility   of   someone
   pretending an interest in Christianity in order to pursue an asylum claim
   and it was clear he had had experience of this. However, he remarked that
   those whose interest was not genuine in his experience tended to  show  a
   more 'sudden' interest in Christianity and then be less committed as time
   went on. He noted that the Appellants interest had arisen  gradually  out
   of his attendance at the language  school  and  his  attendance  at  both
   Sunday services, house groups and assisting with other Church events  had
   been consistent sine he found his faith. He  stated  that  the  Appellant
   spoke very good English, which I can confirm, and was able to  articulate
   his Christian beliefs and answer questions about Christian values and the
   message which persuaded the Reverend that his beliefs are genuine.


21. I accept that  the  Reverend  was  a  little  vague  about  whether  the
   Appellant had told him, as he told me, that his brothers  had  converted.
   He did not explicitly reject the suggestion he had been told  about  this
   rather saying that 'something about that  came  up':  I  accept  that  he
   simply couldn't remember.


22. I also accept that his bothers have had no problems in Iran as a  result
   of their changed religious views but I am satisfied on the basis  of  the
   Appellants evidence that this is because they have not  been  open  about
   their conversion  and  have  not  attempted  to  attend  Church:  as  the
   Appellant described it they had accepted Christianity in their hearts but
   done nothing overt about it. I accept the  Appellants  evidence  that  he
   would want to practise his faith openly and this would put him at risk on
   return to Iran.


23. While I am satisfied that the Appellants conversion without  more  would
   put him at risk I am also satisfied that the Appellant would also be more
   likely to be questioned on return because he was the subject of  a  court
   summons from the Revolutionary Court. SB (risk  on  return-illegal  exit)
   Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 is still good law in so far as it states  that
   being a person who has left Iran when  facing  court  proceedings  (other
   than ordinary civil proceedings) is a risk  factor,  although  much  will
   depend on the particular facts relating to  the  nature  of  the  offence
   involved and other circumstances. The  more  the  offences  for  which  a
   person faces trial are likely to be viewed as political, the greater  the
   level of risk likely  to  arise  as  a  result:  it  is  properly  to  be
   considered as a risk factor to be taken into account along  with  others.
   There is nothing to suggest that the summons has a 'time limit' on it. It
   is a summons to  the  Revolutionary  Court  which  the  expert  Mr  Rasht
   confirms is a criminal court. The expert also confirms that the fact that
   the summons does not  state  why  the  Appellant  was  summonsed  is  not
   unusual. I am therefore satisfied that taken together with  the  fact  of
   his conversion the Appellant would be at risk on return.


 Conclusions on Asylum


24. I find that the Appellant has therefore discharged the burden  of  proof
   on him to show that he has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
   reason recognised by the Geneva Convention. Accordingly, the  Appellant's
   removal would cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations  under  the
   Geneva Convention.


Conclusions on ECHR


25. On the facts as  established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
   grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.


Decision


26. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


27. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


28. No anonymity direction is made

Signed                                                              Date
18.10.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
