
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04979/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd February 2016                      |On 9th March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                     S A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms T Jaber, Counsel instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willock-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan whose claim  that  it  would
    breach his rights under the Refugee and Human Rights Conventions if  he
    was removed from this country  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Archer in a decision promulgated on 24th August 2015.  Grounds of
    application for leave to appeal were lodged.  They can be summarised as
    follows.

 2. In Ground 1 it was  said  the  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  or  give
    adequate or any reasons for refusing  the  Appellant's  entitlement  to
    humanitarian  protection  given  the  current  level  of  violence   in
    Afghanistan.  The Tribunal did not  consider  whether  the  Appellant's
    particular profile put him in an enhanced risk category  and  erred  in
    finding that he would not be at risk as he was no longer a child.   The
    Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons  as  to  the  effect  of  the
    failure of the Secretary of State to undertake  a  duty  to  trace  his
    family particularly since it was accepted  that  he  would  be  without
    family support.  The Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons as to the
    effect  on  the  delay  in  dealing  with  the  Appellant's  claim  for
    protection.  The Tribunal had erred in whether he would be returning to
    Afghanistan as a vulnerable young adult and the  Tribunal  should  have
    considered whether his profile would make him vulnerable in Afghanistan
    for numerous reasons set out (a) to (m) inclusive.

 3. Ground 2 is that the Tribunal erred in concluding  that  the  Appellant
    could not succeed under the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He fell within paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  those  Rules  in  that
    there were "very significant obstacles" to  his  integration  into  the
    country.  In relation to Article 8 the Tribunal erred in that it failed
    to consider in a holistic manner all relevant factors as set out in the
    grounds at (a) to (q).  Furthermore the Tribunal erred in its weight it
    gave to the consideration of 117B of the 2002 Act as set out at (a)  to
    (e).  There was also the question as to the application  or  weight  of
    paragraph 117B to be given to those  Appellants  who  arrived  here  as
    unaccompanied asylum seeking children.

 4. Ground 3 is that the Tribunal failed to consider paragraph 353B of  the
    Rules.  The factors  set  out  to  Article  8  were  also  relevant  to
    consideration of paragraph 353B though the two are not synonymous.

 5. Permission was refused by First-tier Judge J M Holmes.  He  noted  that
    the Appellant sought in his appeal  to  reargue  the  same  account  of
    events in Afghanistan that had previously been rejected as  untrue  and
    the grounds make no complaint about the judge's decision to  reject  it
    as untrue once again.   In  terms  of  the  first  ground,  namely  the
    decision  to  dismiss  it  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds,   the
    Appellant had not told the truth about his circumstances and he was  by
    the date of hearing an adult male of 20  in  good  health,  capable  of
    returning to  Kabul  and  living  there  in  safety  with  the  support
    available to those returning voluntarily.  Judge Holmes said there  was
    no material arguable error of law in that decision.  The  first  ground
    was in reality no more than an attempt to reargue this Ground of Appeal
    and it was unfortunate or unhelpful for the grounds to seek to  present
    the  Appellant  as  a  truthful  witness  about  his  circumstances  in
    Afghanistan when he was not.

 6. Judge Holmes also held that the second Ground of  Appeal  was  no  more
    than a disagreement with the judge's finding on that issue.  He did not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE and did not engage  with  the
    provisions of Section 117B.

 7. Grounds of application were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  It was said
    that refusal of permission to appeal by Judge Holmes failed  to  answer
    the Appellant's central concern that the Tribunal did not consider  the
    current country conditions in Afghanistan at all.  It was not  asserted
    that the Appellant had been a truthful witness  and  Judge  Archer  had
    found that the Appellant would  be  returned  to  Afghanistan  with  no
    family  support.   Given  the  increasing   levels   of   violence   in
    Afghanistan, it  was  said  that  Judge  Holmes  had  given  manifestly
    inadequate reasons as to his conclusion on proportionality.

 8. Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  allowed  permission  to  appeal  in  the
    following terms:-

         "It is  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make
         adequate findings relevant to 276ADE and Article 8 of the  ECHR  on
         the Appellant's likely plight upon return to Afghanistan  in  light
         of the matters that have been  accepted  and  the  current  country
         conditions for those without any family members to return  to  (see
         in particular the submissions in the Grounds of Appeal to the First-
         tier Tribunal at paragraphs 2 and 4).

         The grounds do not challenge the asylum findings and permission  is
         granted in relation to 276ADE and Article 8 only".

 9. A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the Secretary of State  submitting  that
    the judge made clear findings on the  private  life  of  the  Appellant
    having accepted  that  the  circumstances  would  be  harsher  for  the
    Appellant in Afghanistan but  finding  that  he  had  the  personality,
    capacity and intelligence to manage  independently  there.   There  was
    nothing irrational about this finding.  Although this  finding  related
    to Article 3 it was clear that the implication was that  it  also  fell
    under the Article 8 banner and it dealt with the proportionality  issue
    considering relevant case law and legislation.

10. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

The Hearing

11. Ms Jaber, Counsel for the Appellant, was good enough to present me with
    a fresh bundle of case law jurisprudence for which I am grateful.   She
    moved to amend her Grounds of Appeal to include the proposition that it
    would be a breach of  Article  15(c)  humanitarian  protection  if  the
    Appellant was removed to Afghanistan.  I noted that this had  not  been
    included in the first grounds of application considered by Judge Holmes
    and nor in the second application considered by Judge Plimmer.   I  was
    given no explanation as to why it was proposed  to  try  to  amend  the
    grounds at the last moment or what had prompted a  change  of  view  on
    those acting for the Appellant.  In all the circumstances I refused  to
    allow the grounds to be amended.

12. Ms Jaber elaborated on the Appellant's  grounds  of  application.   The
    findings of the judge  were  generally  inadequate  and  in  particular
    having regard to paragraph 38 where he made a very slender reference to
    paragraph 276ADE.  He had not mentioned that paragraph  276(vi)  had  a
    test of very significant obstacles.  There  had  been  no  analysis  of
    that. The findings were generally plainly inadequate.   The  judge  had
    found that he would be  returned  as  a  young  adult  with  no  family
    support.   Furthermore  the  judge  had  not  carried  out   a   proper
    proportionality analysis under Article 8 ECHR.   Nowhere  did  he  take
    account of the indiscriminate violence that took place  in  Afghanistan
    and the pressures on him as a young adult.  The standard of  Article  8
    was lower and different to that of Article 3 ECHR.  There was also  the
    impact of delay upon the Appellant.  The  decision  should  be  quashed
    with further evidence being given and with the case  remaining  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

13. For the Home Office it was said that the judge had made clear  findings
    in his decision.  He had considered the Appellant's age and health  and
    the fact that he  lived  independently.   He  was  not  a  child  or  a
    vulnerable individual (paragraph 36).  The judge had accepted  that  he
    would face harsher conditions in Afghanistan (paragraph  37).   He  had
    followed the country guidance case.  He  had  considered  all  relevant
    factors.   He  had  considered  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act   and
    acknowledged that the Appellant had  developed  good  English  language
    skills.   However  all  other  relevant  factors  counted  against  him
    (paragraph 42).  He had  considered  the  delay  in  dealing  with  the
    Appellant's claim but noted, correctly, that this was not determinative
    of the Appellant's claim.

14. It was submitted that there was no error in law and that  the  decision
    should remain.

15. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

16. Permission to appeal was granted in relation to 276ADE  and  Article  8
    only.  Plainly there is an interlink between the two  grounds  with  Ms
    Jaber relying on the "very serious obstacles" in respect  of  paragraph
    276ADE which obstacles are also a part of  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    case,  namely  that  it  would  not  be  proportionate   in   all   the
    circumstances for him to be returned to Afghanistan.

17. A key finding by Judge Archer was that  the  Appellant  was  a  "wholly
    unreliable witness because of his continued reliance  on  a  fabricated
    account" (paragraph 30) and his findings that the Appellant was not  at
    risk from the Afghanistan government or the family of the dead  burglar
    (paragraph 32).  There was no challenge to these findings.  Accordingly
    the core of the Appellant's case falls away at the first hurdle.  Given
    my refusal to extend the Grounds of Appeal, the grounds are confined to
    what is set out above.

18. The judge made important findings in paragraph 36.  The judge said that
    the Appellant appeared to be a  physically  robust  and  healthy  adult
    male.  He lived a largely independent  life  in  a  shared  house  with
    occasional regular contact with his social worker and key workers.   He
    was well on the road to full independence.   He  was  a  confident  and
    personable adult with good social skills.   He  was  not  a  vulnerable
    individual.  At paragraph 37 the  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    lacks support in Afghanistan and would face harsher conditions in  that
    country.  However he had the personality, capacity and intelligence  to
    manage independently in Afghanistan.  The judge noted  that  there  was
    nothing in AK (Article  15(c)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  to
    suggest that a young adult could qualify for  humanitarian  protection.
    He rejected the submission that accelerating  violence  in  Afghanistan
    and the  Appellant's  particular  circumstances  meant  that  he  could
    qualify.  He was from Kabul province and could  live  independently  in
    Kabul.  He went on to consider Article 8 with reference  to  well-known
    case law.  He considered Section 117B of the 2002 Act, noting that most
    relevant factors counted against him.  He  considered  the  significant
    delay in dealing with the Appellant's current application and found the
    delay did not amount to such conspicuous unfairness as to constitute an
    abuse of power.  He noted correctly, that the delay was not  in  itself
    determinative of the Appellant's claim.  In fairness to Ms  Jaber,  she
    did not point to delay as being a material factor  in  the  Appellant's
    case.  The judge finally noted that the Appellant was capable of living
    independently within his own culture and society.

19. From this it can be seen that  the  judge  considered  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in considerable detail.  He recognised that  there  might
    be accelerating violence in Afghanistan (paragraph  37).   He  accepted
    the Appellant would face  harsher  conditions  in  that  country  (also
    paragraph 37).  The final complaint made by Ms Jaber is that the  judge
    could - and should - have said much more about the future that  awaited
    the Appellant if he was returned to Afghanistan.

20. No doubt, as if often the case, the judge could have said more than  he
    did say - as set out in the grounds - but that does not  mean  that  he
    did not give proper consideration to the Appellant's claim under 276ADE
    and Article 8 ECHR.  Of particular importance is that  he  referred  to
    the country guidance case of AK which makes it clear in its  head  note
    (B)(ii) that the level of indiscriminate violence in that country taken
    as a whole is not at such a high level as  to  mean  that,  within  the
    meaning of Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive,  a  civilian,
    solely by being present  in  the  country,  faces  a  real  risk  which
    threatens his life or person.  Under (iii) it is said that nor  is  the
    level of indiscriminate violence, even in the provinces worst  affected
    by the violence (which may now be taken to include Ghazni  but  not  to
    include Kabul) at such a level.  The judge had made clear and  succinct
    findings about the Appellant's personality and ability to cope in Kabul
    which in my view crosses over into how his  findings  under  Article  8
    should be read.  Referring to  AK  the  judge  was  indicating  he  was
    clearly aware of what  conditions  in  Kabul  would  be  like  for  the
    Appellant and he noted that he was from Kabul province and  could  live
    independently there.

21. In terms the judge was saying  that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration  into  the  country  of  which  he  was  a
    national.  He recognised that Article 8 was a qualified  right  and  he
    noted that there was no great depth or breadth to the Appellant's  life
    here (paragraph 39).

22. In my view there is nothing  perverse  or  irrational  in  the  judge's
    findings. He considered the totality of the  evidence  before  him  and
    dealt with all the salient points of  the  Appellant's  case.   He  was
    entitled to conclude as he did and for the reasons he gave.   There  is
    no error of law.  Neither party addressed me on  whether  an  anonymity
    order was necessary but I shall continue it.





Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

