

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04423/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 27 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                          MOLOUD TAVAKOLI MOGHADDAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Nr T. D. H. Hodson of Elder Rahimi solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Figiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Iran born on 7 March 1952,  arrived
      in the United Kingdom in December 2012 and was admitted as a  visitor.
      She had travelled from Iran with her husband. They  had  both  secured
      entry clearance before departure and  had  travelled  upon  their  own
      valid Iranian passports.  The  purpose  of  applying  for  that  entry
      clearance was to visit their relatives in the United Kingdom.


   2. The appellant overstayed her leave and, in March 2013, claimed asylum.
      She has now been granted permission to appeal against the decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy who, by a determination  promulgated
      on 22 September 2014, dismissed her  appeal  against  the  immigration
      decision that accompanied refusal  of  her  asylum  and  human  rights
      claim.

   3. For present purposes the following summary of  the  appellant's  claim
      will suffice.

   4. The appellant is a retired schoolteacher who lived  with  her  husband
      their home in Rasd in Iran. Neither she nor her husband  have  engaged
      in any political activities in Iran or anywhere else.  Several  months
      before travelling to the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor  she  received
      telephone calls from the Iranian authorities on three consecutive days
      asking about whether  she  had  been  "in  touch  with  the  Voice  of
      America". She was then called about a satellite dish installed at  her
      home and was asked to attend  their  offices.  When  she  attended  as
      instructed she was questioned for  about  three  hours  and  when  she
      refused to sign a  statement  confirming  that  she  would  not  again
      contact the Voice of America she was hit on the back of her head.  She
      was released after having agreed to surrender her satellite  equipment
      but she installed another set about a month later.

   5. The appellant experienced no further difficulties after  that.  Having
      secured entry clearance, she and her husband travelled to  the  United
      Kingdom in December 2012. On 19 February 2013 she received a telephone
      call from her sister in Iran informing her that her  nephew,  who  was
      politically active in Iran,  had  been  arrested  together  with  some
      friends and the  authorities  had  removed  some  equipment  from  the
      appellant's house. Her house was sealed up by the authorities and,  as
      a result, the appellant says  that  her  life  is  at  risk  from  the
      authorities should she return to Iran.

   6. The respondent rejected that claim  on  the  basis  that  it  was  not
      accepted that the appellant  had  given  a  truthful  account  of  her
      experiences in Iran. The respondent said that even if it were accepted
      that the appellant's house in Iran had  been  raided  and  her  nephew
      arrested, this did not give rise to any risk for the appellant or  her
      husband as they have no political  profile  and  so  would  be  of  no
      adverse interest to the authorities.

   7. The judge, having heard oral evidence from the appellant and from  her
      husband did not accept that the appellant had a well founded risk from
      the authorities. Although the judge concluded that:

           "... I have not found the Appellant's claim to be credible...",


      she did not reject the appellant's account in its entirety. The  judge
      accepted that the appellant had been questioned  about  her  satellite
      system and about some telephone calls to an American TV channel and to
      a friend in America, so that anyone checking her calls would see  that
      calls had been made to America. But the judge did not accept that  the
      appellant had been ill-treated when she attended  the  offices  to  be
      questioned about her satellite system because the evidence provided by
      her  and  her  husband  about  her  injuries  was   inconsistent   and
      contradictory. Further, if the appellant had been subjected to violent
      ill-treatment on account of her use of this equipment  the  judge  did
      not accept it  to  be  credible  that  she  would  have  replaced  the
      surrendered equipment  as  quickly  as  she  did.  The  appellant  had
      produced some medical evidence from Iran about treatment received  for
      a detached retina but this did not support the claim that this  injury
      had been sustained in the manner claimed. The judge was reinforced  in
      her conclusion that the applicant was of no adverse  interest  to  the
      authorities because she and  her  husband  were  able  to  leave  Iran
      through normal emigration channels using their own passports.

   8.  The judge did not find credible either the appellant's claim that she
      is of adverse interest to the authorities because her nephew  and  his
      friends had been arrested at her home because this was speculation  on
      the appellant's behalf, the letters she produced from relatives  being
      "self-serving" and lacking in detail. The judge found it notable that,
      despite the  resources  available  to  the  appellant,  there  was  no
      evidence that family members in Iran had enquired  as  to  whether  an
      arrest warrant had been issued.


   9. Drawing these findings together, the judge concluded that  the  family
      history of migration was relevant:

           "I am struck by the Appellant's family history and circumstances
           and note that all of her three children are no longer living  in
           Iran and left Iran many years ago. Two of them are  now  British
           citizens, her eldest son having  come  to  the  UK  and  claimed
           asylum and eventually having been granted  indefinite  leave  to
           remain and another son has been a student and working in Germany
           for the last  8  years.  The  appellant  and  her  husband  have
           frequently travelled to and from the UK and have  never  in  the
           past experienced any problems with the authorities and I find it
           likely that the appellant has been motivated to make  the  claim
           for asylum as she and her husband are now separated  from  their
           children and wished to remain here  in  order  to  be  close  to
           them."

      And the judge added:

           "Even if it was accepted that the  Appellant's  house  had  been
           raided and the Appellant's  nephew  arrested,  which  I  do  not
           accept, I  concur  with  the  respondent  in  finding  that  the
           authorities would have no  interest  in  the  appellant  or  her
           husband bearing in mind  that  they  do  not  have  a  political
           profile  at  all  nor  have  they  demonstrated  any   political
           involvement whilst living in Iran."

  10. For these reasons, the judge dismissed the appeal.


  11. In granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal
      Judge Chalkley said, the emphasis being his own:


           "I am persuaded that it is properly arguable that  some  of  the
           reasons for some of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy's findings
           may not be entirely adequate."

  12. In fact, the  grounds  raise  seven  different  complaints  about  the
      findings of the judge. In his submissions on behalf of  the  appellant
      Mr Hodson adopted those grounds and sought to expand upon them.


  13. First, at paragraph 40 of the determination the  judge  accepted  that
      the appellant had been questioned by the authorities but at  paragraph
      41  did  not  accept  that  she  replaced  the  confiscated  satellite
      equipment a month later. This was said to be a finding not  reasonably
      open to the  judge  as  the  country  evidence  showed  that  although
      illegal, about 60% of households in Tehran have  a  satellite  system.
      That challenge is misconceived. The point being  made  by  the  judge,
      which was plainly open  to  her,  was  not  that  it  was  lacking  in
      credibility that the appellant would have a satellite system,  as  did
      60% of households, but that it was lacking  in  credibility  that  she
      would replace a confiscated system so soon after  having  been  called
      into the offices of the security services, questioned about her use of
      such equipment and beaten about the head  with  such  violence  as  to
      cause a detached retina. The fact that she did so  led  the  judge  to
      find her account of the ill-treatment to be lacking in credibility.

  14. The second complaint is that the judge fell into legal error in basing
      her adverse credibility findings upon the absence of medical  evidence
      to confirm that the injury suffered by the appellant was caused in the
      manner claimed. Mr Hodson submitted that the judge was wrong to demand
      this, as the evidence was  offered  simply  to  demonstrate  that  the
      appellant was treated at about the time she  says  she  sustained  the
      injury. The grounds assert that it is entirely unsurprising  that  the
      medical evidence from Iran that was  submitted  did  not  confirm  the
      cause of the injury because:

           "The JFtT ought to be aware that doctors in Iran  are  extremely
           reluctant  [to]  provide   evidence   suggestive   of   official
           involvement in the mistreatment of  detainees.  Iranian  doctors
           who do provide such evidence are  putting  their  own  lives  at
           risk."

      But it is not apparent that any evidential basis for that  was  before
      the judge or, indeed, that such a submission was advanced at all.


  15. In any event, this is to misrepresent what the judge  has  said  about
      this. She wrote at paragraph 42 of the determination:


           "The Appellant submitted some medical notes she brought with her
           from Iran to show she  had  treatment  for  a  detached  retina.
           However only  parts  of  the  notes  have  been  translated  and
           although they refer to  Barrier  Laser  treatment  there  is  no
           evidence that this was undertaken because of a detached  retina;
           the notes refer to a reduction in right eye sight. There was  no
           medical  report  to  support  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
           detached retina which she claims she suffered was caused in  the
           manner which she claims."

      It cannot be said that the judge  based  adverse  credibility  finding
      upon the absence of relevant medical  evidence.  Here,  the  judge  is
      doing no more than to look carefully at the medical evidence to see if
      anything could be drawn from it to support  the  appellant's  account.
      She was plainly entitled to conclude that it did not.


  16. The third challenge to be drawn from the grounds is that the judge was
      wrong to reject the letters provided by  the  appellant's  sisters  in
      Iran on the basis that  they  were  "self  serving"  and  "contain  no
      context in which the contents can be assessed and  provide  almost  no
      details" because those letters in  fact  contained  a  great  deal  of
      detail relating directly to the appellant's claim. The  letters  spoke
      about the appellant's home being raided, her  nephew  being  arrested,
      items being seized from her home by the  authorities,  her  neighbours
      being questioned and her  home  being  under  surveillance.  A  second
      letter provided further detail about the fate of the  arrested  nephew
      and said that another nephew who attempted to  visit  the  appellant's
      home was told by the porter that the appellant was considered to be an
      "anti-regime activist". The grounds characterise those two letters  as
      "compelling corroborative evidence of  the  core  of  the  Appellant's
      claim" and assert that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  provide  any
      sustainable reasons for finding that no  weight  could  be  placed  on
      them.


  17. It is fair to say that  the  judge  dealt  with  this  aspect  of  the
      evidence briefly. At paragraph 44 of the determination she said:

           "In support of her claim the Appellant has produced two  letters
           from her sisters, Iran and Touran. However,  I  have  not  found
           these letters to assist the appellant in establishing her  claim
           and find they are self-serving. The letters contain  no  context
           in which the contents can be  assessed  and  provide  almost  no
           details."


      and at paragraph 46:


           "I find that the claims made in the letters are unsupported  and
           are self-serving. If the Appellant's nephew had been politically
           active as claimed, I do not find it credible that this would not
           have been known to the appellant or her sister, his mother."

  18. The difficulty with that challenge is that  the  letters  were  simply
      that. They were pieces of evidence about which the judge had  to  make
      of what she could. The weight to be attached to them was a matter  for
      the judge. This was not evidence presented in the form  of  a  witness
      statement, which would mean that the maker of the statement  would  be
      aware that the information imparted was to  be  used  in  proceedings.
      There was, obviously, no opportunity for that evidence to be tested in
      cross examination. It cannot sensibly be suggested that  the  fact  of
      someone not before the court having written about events in  a  letter
      meant that the judge was obliged to accept  that  what  was  said  was
      true. It is not  apparent  upon  what  basis  these  two  letters  can
      justifiably be regarded  as  "compelling  corrobative  evidence".  The
      parties cannot expect more of the judge than that  she  assesses  that
      evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole, which is precisely
      what she has done. Mr Hodson realistically accepted that the judge was
      not bound to accept what was said  in  those  letters.  He  submitted,
      though, that the judge did have to recognise that  this  was  evidence
      supportive of the appellant's claim and to give some weight to it.  In
      my judgement that is precisely what she did, and she was  entitled  to
      conclude that very little weight could be given to this evidence


  19. The fourth issue  raised  in  the  grounds  concerns  the  appellant's
      evidence that a warrant for her arrest had been issued  in  Iran.  The
      grounds  complain  that  in  basing  an  adverse  credibility  finding
      concerning that upon the appellant's failure to provide evidence  that
      a warrant had been issued, the  judge  erred  in  law  in  placing  an
      unreasonable evidential burden upon the appellant because the  country
      evidence indicates that arrest warrants are often not issued  so  that
      it would be impossible for the appellant to provide evidence  that  it
      had been. But, again, that is to  misrepresent  what  the  judge  said
      about that. At paragraph 46 of the determination  the  judge  observed
      that:

           "... the appellant and her  husband  have  many  family  members
           living in Rashd who could have made enquiries as to  whether  an
           arrest warrant had been issued..."

      from which it is clear that the judge was not here  demanding  that  a
      copy of the  warrant  itself  must  be  provided  if  the  appellant's
      evidence that her arrest had been authorised was to  be  accepted  but
      that, if true, it was reasonable to expect that some enquiry could and
      would have been made by relatives about this. Although the  appellant,
      in evidence felt unable to say whether or  not  there  was  an  arrest
      warrant at her house, it was the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant's
      husband that he was sure that arrest warrants had been issued  against
      them. It was open to the judge to find the uncertainty as  to  whether
      or not warrants had been issued to be lacking in credibility.

  20. Next, it is asserted that the judge erred in saying that the appellant
      had provided no explanation for  being  of  interest  to  the  Iranian
      authorities, given that she was in the United Kingdom and  so  not  in
      Iran at the  time  of  her  nephew's  address.  That  is  because  the
      appellant in fact had given three reasons: The  activities  attracting
      interest in her nephew took place at  her  home;  that  she  had  been
      questioned about her satellite system and about having made  telephone
      calls to America  meant  that  she  did  have  a  "profile"  with  the
      authorities and  she  had  breached  her  undertaking  concerning  the
      satellite system by replacing the one that was confiscated.


  21. Again, it is important to identify what the judge actually said.  This
      challenge  appears  to  be  focussed  upon   paragraph   46   of   the
      determination and the observation made by the judge:

           "The  Appellant  has  offered  no  explanation  as  to  why  the
           authorities would consider that she [was] in any way  implicated
           in her nephew's activities, given that the  claimed  arrest  too
           place when she and her husband had been absent from  their  home
           for many months."

      Thus, again, the grounds do not accurately represent  what  the  judge
      has said. This was not a finding that the appellant had  not  come  to
      the attention of the authorities at all. The judge accepted that there
      was no reason to doubt her account of being questioned about  her  use
      of the satellite system. Here the point the judge was making, and  was
      entitled to make, was that it was claimed that  the  interest  of  the
      authorities had been  generated  not  by  those  matters  but  by  the
      activities of the appellant's nephew which the appellant  clearly  had
      nothing to do with as she had been out of the country for many months.
      It was open to the judge to  place  weight  upon  the  fact  that  the
      appellant had offered nothing to suggest that she might reasonably  be
      associated with the activities of her nephew.


  22. The sixth complaint raised by the grounds is that the finding made  by
      the judge that if the appellant's nephew had  in  fact  been  involved
      with anti regime activities, it was  not  credible  that  neither  the
      appellant nor her sister was aware of that was a perverse one. That is
      because the grounds assert that  it  is  "highly  unlikely"  that  the
      nephew would have informed his mother or the appellant  of  his  anti-
      regime activities. The judge, though, did not  say  that  it  was  not
      credible that the nephew would not have told the appellant or his  own
      mother about his activities but that it was  not  credible  that  this
      would not have been  known  to  his  mother.  There  is  an  important
      difference between those two  articulations  of  this  issue  and  the
      judge, having heard oral evidence from the appellant and her  husband,
      was best placed to make  such  an  assessment  and  no  perversity  is
      disclosed by the way in which she has expressed her view about this.


  23. Finally, the grounds criticise the finding in paragraph 47 that if the
      appellant's nephew had been arrested during a raid  on  her  home  the
      appellant could defend herself against any accusation  of  involvement
      with his activities because she was at the time in the United  Kingdom
      and because she had no profile with the authorities.  To  some  extent
      this ground overlaps the complaints discussed above  when  considering
      the fifth issue raised by the grounds. The grounds do  not  accurately
      reflect the approach of the judge. She did not proceed  on  the  basis
      that the appellant was a person with no profile at  all,  because  she
      accepted that she had been questioned in the  past.  The  point  being
      made is that she had no political profile, a qualifying  term  omitted
      from the grounds. That, taken together from her lengthy  absence  from
      Iran, was sufficient to support the finding of the judge that, even if
      the nephew had been arrested, that did not  mean  that  the  appellant
      faced a real risk of being  implicated  in  his  activities.  But,  of
      course, that as a finding in the alternative. The primary  finding  of
      the judge is that the account of the nephew's arrest was untrue.


  24. For all  of  these  reasons,  although  Mr  Hodson  has  advanced  and
      developed the grounds in the  most  attractive  way  possible,   I  am
      satisfied that the grounds fail to identify any error of  law  in  the
      determination. The judge has weighed together all of the evidence  the
      parties chose to put before  her  and  has  given  clear  and  legally
      sufficient reasons for reaching conclusions that were open to  her  on
      the evidence.


Summary of decision:

  25. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made no  error  of  law  and  the
      determination shall stand.


  26. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                               Signed






                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 21 April 2015

