
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04207/2014
                                                               AA/04210/2014
                                                               AA/04211/2014
                                                               AA/04213/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                         F T A K S (first appellant)
                           R T (second appellant)
                          T A k S (third appellant)
                           A T (fourth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  appellants  are  a  Pakistani  family,  a  couple  and  their  two
    children, who applied for asylum on the grounds of their Ahmadi  faith.
    Their applications were refused, and their appeals  were  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Stott, following a hearing in  Birmingham  on
    17 September 2014.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen  on  5
    February 2014.  Permission had initially  been  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Simpson, on 15 October  2014.   In  granting  permission
    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen gave the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in not addressing the evidence
         of  the  second  appellant  in  concluding  as  he  did  about  the
         credibility of the claims.  This has potential implications for the
         other two grounds although by  themselves  they  are  significantly
         weaker.  However for the above reasons I do not rule them out."

3.   There had in fact been four grounds on  which  permission  was  sought.
    The first concerned  the  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children; the second  the  point  about  the  failure  to  address  the
    evidence of the second appellant  (the  first  appellant's  wife);  the
    third the treatment of a letter from the Ahmadiyye  Muslim  Association
    (AMA) in the UK; and the fourth concerned  the  treatment  of  a  First
    Information Report (FIR) and a document verification report (DVR)  that
    had indicated that this was not genuine.

Submissions

4.   In her submissions  Ms  Iqbal,  for  the  appellants,  concentrated  on
    ground 3 (the  AMA  letter),  and  ground  2  (the  second  appellant's
    evidence).  She did not pursue ground 1, but she did  make  submissions
    in relation to ground 4 (the FIR and DVR point).  Her  main  points  in
    relation to the AMA letter were that the judge had misapplied the  test
    in the relevant country guidance case  of  MN  and  others  (Ahmadis  -
    country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT  00389  (IAC).   The
    judge, in applying little weight to the AMA letter, had made no mention
    of the positive view taken of the quality of AMA  evidence  in  the  MN
    case.  The judge had also misapplied the test in MN, at headnotes 5 and
    6, with reference to 2(i).

5.   In relation  to  the  second  ground  the  second  appellant's  witness
    statement  was  specific  about   the   first   appellant's   preaching
    activities, amongst other things,  and  it  had  the  ability  to  lend
    support to his account.

6.   Ms Everett's submissions can be summarised as follows.  In relation  to
    the AMA letter this had been properly considered by the judge, who  had
    found that it had not shown headnote 2(i) behaviour.  There  was  force
    to the finding  that  the  letter  was  vague.   The  point  about  the
    misapplication of the country guidance  case  had  not  been  made  out
    because he was taking the letter at face value.  His  critique  was  of
    the lack of detail in the letter.  His finding on the  AMA  letter  was
    one that was open to him, and was not perverse.  In relation to  ground
    2 the lack of discrete findings about the second  appellant's  evidence
    could not have made a difference to the outcome,  because  of  the  AMA
    letter findings, and the FIR/DVR point.  In relation to ground 4 it had
    been open to the judge to reach the finding that he did on that aspect.

7.   In response to Ms Iqbal referred to evidence that had been  before  the
    judge, in the country guidance case, about police inaction in  relation
    to Ahmadi complaints; about unfair treatment of Ahmadis by  the  police
    and the courts; about an attitude within the Pakistan government  of  a
    refusal to confront or interfere with KN and  other  extremist  groups;
    and the fact that harassment by KN had been  seen  to  lead  to  police
    action  against  Ahmadis,  rather  than  police  action  combating  the
    harassment.

Error of Law

8.   As I indicated at the hearing I have decided that there  was  an  error
    of law in the judge's decision.  The second ground appears to me to  be
    made out.

9.   The Rule 24  response  attempted  to  refer  to  a  number  of  passing
    references to the second appellant in  the  judge's  decision,  but  in
    reality it appears to me that there is no escape  from  the  conclusion
    that the second appellant, who produced a  detailed  witness  statement
    and also gave oral  evidence,  is  entirely  absent  from  the  judge's
    decision.  There is no mention of her evidence  at  any  point.   As  a
    result there is no assessment as to whether she was or was not credible
    in her evidence, and there is no consideration of whether her evidence,
    which was clearly relevant to a number of the contested  issues,  could
    support the evidence of the first appellant.  In short, the  judge  has
    concentrated exclusively on the  first  appellant's  evidence  and  has
    omitted to give any consideration to that of the second appellant,  who
    was directly involved in the matters  that  formed  the  basis  of  the
    asylum applications.  I understand the point made by Ms Everett that  a
    consideration of this evidence might have made no difference,  in  view
    of the position that the judge took in relation to the  other  matters.
    I have decided, however, that the omission is not one that can properly
    be said to be of immaterial.  The second appellant's evidence  required
    consideration.   It  is  possible  that  proper  consideration  of  her
    evidence could have made a difference to the outcome.

10.  The other grounds, by contrast, did not appear to me to  be  made  out.
    The judge's approach to the AMA letter does appear  to  be  surprising.
    As an organisation the AMA was assessed in the MN country guidance case
    in such a way that most judges would  give  such  letters  considerable
    weight.  It appears surprising that the judge would have  regarded  the
    point about the absence of further details as to the  location  of  the
    first appellant's proselytising activities as being significant  enough
    to reduce that weight.  Having said both of those things, however, this
    does appear to me to  fall  within  the  factual  realm.   The  judge's
    approach to the letter may be surprising, but I accept  the  submission
    made that his finding on the letter was one that was open to  him,  and
    was not perverse.

11.  I did have some concerns about the approach to the FIR  and  DVR.   The
    difficulty here was that the information from the police,  that  formed
    the basis of the DVR, was information from a body  that  are  known  to
    pursue prosecutions against Ahmadis.  The overall picture that  emerges
    from the background evidence summarised in the country guidance case of
    MN is that the police in Pakistan are very far from  neutral  in  their
    dealings with Ahmadis, and with  those  extremist  groups  that  target
    them.  On the contrary, the police are actors of persecution, not  only
    in their enforcement of anti-Ahmadi laws, but also  in  their  dealings
    with situations in which Ahmadis are facing harassment  or  persecution
    from non-state actors.  Having said all of that, however, this  appears
    to me to be a challenge where the outcome is somewhat similar  to  that
    in relation to the AMA letter.  The first appellant suggested that  the
    police were only denying the existence of the FIR because they were  in
    league with the KN group, but the judge was  entitled  to  reject  that
    argument, and to point out that it  was  not  supported  by  background
    evidence.  Even if the boldness of the judge's statement to this effect
    may raise some concern  about  whether  he  had  in  mind  the  general
    background evidence referred to above, nevertheless it again appears to
    me that this was a matter that fell within the factual arena,  and  the
    judge's finding was one that was open to him on the evidence.

12.  There was some discussion at the hearing  of  the  consequences  of  my
    error of law decision.  After  some  discussion  it  became  an  agreed
    position between the parties that the appeal should be remitted  for  a
    fresh hearing at the First-tier, with no findings preserved.

13.  In some ways the point at issue is relatively  narrow,  because  it  is
    accepted that the appellants are Ahmadis.   It  also  appears  unlikely
    that it would not be accepted that the first appellant  was  active  in
    the Ahmadi communities both in Pakistan and in the UK.  The only points
    at issue will be whether the appellants have established, as reasonably
    likely to be true, the specific account that they  have  given  of  the
    persecution  that  they  faced  in  Pakistan;  and  whether  it  is  of
    particular importance to these appellants, in terms of their  religious
    identity as Ahmadis, to engage in behaviour mentioned in the first part
    of paragraph 2 of the headnote in MN.  These matters include  preaching
    and other forms of proselytising; holding open discourse about religion
    with non-Ahmadis; openly referring to  one's  place  of  worship  as  a
    mosque and to one's religious leader as  an  imam;  calling  themselves
    Muslims or referring to their faith as Islam; or referring to the  call
    to prayer as azan.

14.  What will be required, on a rehearing at the  First-tier,  will  be  an
    overall assessment of the evidence of both appellants, in  the  context
    of the background evidence, along with an assessment of the AMA letter,
    the other documentary evidence, and the FIR and DVR.  It will  also  be
    necessary, if the FIR is found not to be genuine, to assess whether the
    appellants are genuine claimants who have submitted a  false  document,
    or whether the falsity of the document has wider implications  for  the
    overall credibility of the accounts given.

15.  Neither side made any reference to anonymity, but I have  decided  that
    an anonymity direction is justified  in  view  of  the  nature  of  the
    claims.  There was no mention of fee awards.

Notice of Decision

The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are allowed.

A material error of law having been established,  the  decisions  dismissing
the appeals are set aside.

As agreed the appeals are remitted to the  First-tier  for  fresh  hearings,
with no findings preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or  any  member  of  the  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb




