
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04995/2015



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 August 2016                  |On 07 February 2017                |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                    MTMN

                         (AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Saini instructed Jein Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.   Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances including that such a direction was made previously, I am
    satisfied that it is appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andonian promulgated on  13th  July  2015,  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse him refugee  status,  humanitarian  protection  or
    relief on the grounds of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 3. By a decision taken on 8th August 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-
    Hutchinson granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Thus
    the matter appeared before  me  to  determine  in  the  first  instance
    whether or not there was an error in law in the original determination.



 4. The Grounds of Appeal assert:

      a) That the judge has in assessing the credibility of the  appellant's
         account failed to take  account  of  the  medical  evidence  as  an
         integral part thereof. As  the  medical  evidence  was  capable  of
         constituting supporting evidence it should have been considered  as
         an integral part of the credibility assessment.

      b) That the judge has speculated in considering the facts and evidence
         and founded findings of fact on such speculation.

      c) That the judge during the course of  the  hearing  appeared  to  be
         unwell and appeared to fall asleep.

 5. In Mazrae 20004 EWCA Civ 1235 the Court of  Appeal  set  out  that  the
    judge's approach to the assessment of credibility  was  flawed  as  the
    judge had reached  adverse  credibility  findings  assessing  only  the
    appellant's account and  had  thereafter  gone  on  to  find  that  the
    credibility findings made had not been  undermined  by  the  background
    material or the experts report, in effect considering such  separately.
    The court indicated that the proper approach was to  consider  all  the
    evidence together and make findings of  fact  based  upon  all  of  the
    evidence.

 6. The point is also made in the case of Mibanga v SSHD 2005 EWCA Civ 367,
    although in that case it  has  to  be  noted  that  the  injuries  were
    particularly significant.

 7. However in S v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ 1153, the court indicated that  there
    would only be an error of law however  where  there  was  a  structural
    failing within the decision.

 8. It is settled law that  where  an  expert  or  medical  evidence  is  a
    relevant factor relating to credibility the judge should deal with such
    evidence as integral part of the findings on credibility rather than as
    an add-on, which does not undermine the  conclusions  of  fact  already
    made.

 9. As pointed out within the grounds within paragraph 13 of  the  decision
    the judge has reached a conclusion that the appellant's  account  is  a
    total fabrication of events. It is thereafter that the judge begins  to
    deal with the medical evidence in paragraphs 14 of the decision. It can
    be seen from paragraph 12 of the decision,  where  the  judge  examines
    parts of the appellant's account in which the injuries  were  material,
    that the medical report and whether there was any evidence  to  support
    the appellant's claims would have been relevant to assessing whether or
    not parts of the account were credible.

10. It  is  clear  that  the  judge  has  made  findings  of  fact  without
    considering the evidence as a whole including the medical evidence.

11. In the present  case  the  medical  evidence  was  highly  material  in
    assessing whether or not the appellant's account was  credible  as  the
    medical evidence gave some support to the claim  of  injuries  and  how
    they were caused. In  the  circumstances  the  failure  to  assess  the
    medical evidence as an integral part of the credibility was an error of
    law.

12.  With regard to the allegation that the judge had fallen asleep, it may
    have had more substance if it could be shown that the judge had  failed
    to record the evidence correctly or had clearly  missed  parts  of  the
    evidence that were material  to  the  outcome  of  the  hearing.  There
    appears to be nothing in the evidence that is indicated as  lacking  in
    the judgement made. There is no  suggestion  that  the  judge  has  not
    properly summarised the evidence and has not  dealt  with  the  various
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant and the respondent.

13. Whilst it may have been that the judge was listening carefully  to  the
    evidence and submissions made. He made have been seeking to concentrate
    upon the technicalities that were being advanced before him  free  from
    distractions within the court room. If that had been the only ground of
    appeal, it would have assisted if  some  substance  was  given  to  the
    allegation that the judge was asleep and had missed material  parts  of
    the hearing.

14. However given that for the reasons set out above there is an  error  of
    law, I need not say anything further with regard to this ground as  the
    matter is to be reheard in any event.  Similarly  with  regard  to  the
    second ground of appeal.

15. For the reasons set out there is an error of law and  the  decision  of
    the judge is set aside. This matter is to be heard afresh in the First-
    tier Tribunal with none of the findings of fact preserved.

Notice of Decision


16. I allow the appeal by the Appellant and direct that the matter be heard
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



