
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04323/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |         Decision & Reasons      |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 27 January 2016                        |          On 12 February 2016    |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Meredith, Counsel, instructed by ATLEU
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raynor (the judge), promulgated on 20 October  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  international  protection
    issues, but allowed it to the  limited  extent  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not otherwise in accordance with the law.

 2. In addition, the Respondent has appealed against the  judge's  decision
    to allow the appeal on that limited basis.

 3. The appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 27 February 2015, refusing to vary the Appellant's leave to
    remain and to remove him from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The Appellant's claim had a number of legal strands, but in essence was
    based upon his account of being trafficked from Pakistan to the  United
    Kingdom  and  the  consequences  thereof.  The  Appellant's  case   was
    initially processed through the National Referral Mechanism  and  as  a
    result of a Conclusive Grounds decision in 2012 he was granted a year's
    Discretionary Leave. A further protection claim was made in  2013.  The
    Respondent accepted most of the account. However, it was said that  the
    Appellant had not been threatened by the 'host' family (the Q  family),
    that no Convention reason  was  engaged,  and  that  protection  and/or
    internal relocation were available. Article 8 was said  not  to  assist
    the Appellant.

 5. On appeal the Appellant relied on the Refugee Convention,  Humanitarian
    Protection, Articles 3, 4 and 8 ECHR, and the provisions of  the  Anti-
    Trafficking Convention.



The hearing before the judge

 6. In a  largely  well-structured  decision,  the  judge  deals  with  the
    relevant issues in turn. At paragraph 49 he restates  the  Respondent's
    generally favourable view of the Appellant's  credibility  and  accepts
    the account as to life in Pakistan, the manner in which he came to  the
    United Kingdom, his treatment by the Q family, and  his  life  in  this
    country.

 7. At paragraphs 59-66 the judge sets out why he does not accept that  the
    Appellant was a member of a particular social group, with reference  to
    AM and BM (Trafficked Women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT  80  (IAC)  and  SB
    (PSG - Protection Regulations - Reg 6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 00002.

 8. Paragraphs 67-68 reject the Appellant's claim to have  been  threatened
    by the Q family after he escaped from them.

 9. The judge then finds that there was no risk of the Appellant being  re-
    trafficked by the Q family or anyone else  (paragraphs  69-72).  It  is
    said that because of his fairly poor state of health, no one would seek
    to exploit the Appellant in the future.

10. Paragraphs 73-81 deal with the issues of state protection and  internal
    relocation on the basis that there was a risk to the Appellant  in  his
    home  area.  The  judge  concludes  that  both  are  available  to  the
    Appellant.

11. At paragraphs 83-89 the judge considers Articles 3 and 8. He finds that
    Article 3 would not be breached by removal. In respect of Article 8  it
    is said that although life would  be  difficult  on  return,  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Rules was not satisfied and  the  claim  also  failed
    outside of the Rules.

12. The remaining section of the judge's decision addresses Article  4  and
    the Anti-Trafficking Convention. The decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
    EK (Article 4 ECHR: Anti-Trafficking Convention) Tanzania  [2013]  UKUT
    00310 (IAC) is cited. In light of the Presenting  Officer's  concession
    that the Appellant entered the United Kingdom  lawfully  and  therefore
    did obtain a visa, the judge found that the Respondent  had  failed  to
    comply with obligations/duties as regards ensuring that  the  Appellant
    had the opportunity of avoiding being trafficked to this country. These
    failures contributed to the Appellant's circumstances  thereafter.  The
    judge accepted (at least implicitly) that the Respondent's conduct once
    the Appellant was here had a  bearing  on  his  ability  to  return  to
    Pakistan with dignity.  There  was  a  link  between  the  Respondent's
    omissions and the Appellant having suffered in terms of  accommodation,
    health and employment. There had been no consideration of  whether  the
    Appellant should be compensated for the  breaches  of  obligations.  On
    this basis, the appeal was allowed to a limited extent.



The grounds of appeal from both parties and the grant of permission

13. The Appellant's grounds of appeal take issue with all elements  of  the
    judge's decision as they relate to the protection and Article 8 claims.



14. The Respondent's grounds assert that the judge misdirected  himself  as
    to EK and failed to make adequate findings and/or give adequate reasons
    on to the Appellant's case.

15. Permission to appeal was granted to both parties by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Andrew on 27 November 2015.



The error of law hearing before me

The Appellant's challenge

16. Given the nature of this  appeal  the  hearing  before  me  was  fairly
    lengthy. This is no criticism of the representatives. Towards  the  end
    of Ms Meredith's submissions  in  support  of  her  grounds,  Mr  Kotas
    accepted that there were material errors of law in the judge's decision
    and he acknowledged that the case should therefore be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In light of this stance (which  I  might  say  was
    both fair and realistic), I will set out fairly  briefly  the  material
    errors that I have found to exist.

17. First, on the issue of the Convention reason  I  find  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to approach the "distinct identity" issue on a correct
    footing. I agree with Ms Meredith's skeleton  (page  9)  and  her  oral
    submissions that in effect the judge erroneously compared the  position
    of women in Albania and Moldova with that of the Appellant (a male from
    Pakistan), and concluded (at least partly on this basis)  that  because
    factors that could not possibly apply the Appellant were  absent  (i.e.
    gender and country-specific social codes), the "distinct identity" limb
    was not made out. In addition, I find that the judge, whilst  referring
    to unspecified "objective evidence", failed to address it in sufficient
    detail and/or give adequate reasons for rejecting its relevance to  the
    Appellant's case.

18. Second,  there  has  been  procedural  unfairness  in  respect  of  the
    credibility point taken against the Appellant on threats made by the  Q
    family. A material consideration  in  the  judge's  rejection  of  this
    aspect of the claim was that there was an inconsistency in the evidence
    (see paragraph 67(iv)). This inconsistency was a  point  taken  by  the
    Respondent in the reasons for refusal  letter  (see  end  of  page  5).
    However, I note from paragraph 28 that the  Presenting  Officer  stated
    that she was not relying on the inconsistency mentioned in the  reasons
    for refusal letter. I accept Ms Meredith's word  that  the  credibility
    issue was not raised independently by the  judge  at  the  hearing.  In
    turn, I find that the Appellant was not given  a  fair  opportunity  to
    address a point that had in effect been conceded by the  Respondent  at
    the hearing.

19. Third, the judge erred in his consideration of the risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked. He failed to have any regard to paragraph 339K of the Rules
    and Article 4(4) of the  Qualification  Directive.  This  was  relevant
    because the Appellant had been persecuted and/or the victim of  serious
    harm in the past. There is  also  what  appears  on  the  face  of  the
    decision to be a contradiction between the finding in paragraph 71 that
    the Appellant was of little use to any potential re-trafficker, and the
    finding in paragraph 87 that he could undertake menial work  (the  very
    sort of work that a trafficker  might  subject  an  individual  to).  I
    conclude that relevant findings have not been  taken  into  account  at
    these two different sections of the decision.

20. Fourth, in assessing the  state  protection  issue,  the  judge  relies
    heavily on the decision in  AW  (Sufficiency  of  protection)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC). It is clear to me though that in paragraph 76 the
    judge has failed to explain what the relevant  characteristics  of  the
    Appellant were as regards the actual  availability  of  protection,  or
    else has failed to provide adequate reasons as  to  why  they  made  no
    difference to this case.

21.  Fifth,  in  respect  of  internal  relocation  there  is  no  adequate
    consideration of the Appellant's own particular circumstances (relating
    to health, past  experiences,  familial  support  and  the  like)  when
    assessing the reasonableness of  moving  elsewhere.  In  addition,  the
    focus of the judge's reasoning is on the Q family without any regard to
    the issue of re-trafficking by others throughout Pakistan.

22. Sixth, the consideration of Article 8 within and without the  Rules  is
    flawed in part because of the contradiction I  have  already  mentioned
    concerning  paragraphs  87  and  71.  Further,  there   is   inadequate
    consideration of the medical evidence (particularly as  it  relates  to
    the Appellant's mental health) and his status as  a  former  victim  of
    trafficking.

The Respondent's challenge

23. Neither party was prepared to concede the correctness or  otherwise  of
    the  judge's  consideration  of  Article  4  and  the  Anti-Trafficking
    Convention.

24. Having considered the submissions of the representatives  with  care  I
    find that there are material errors of law in respect of this issue.

25. First, it is clear  to  me  that  the  judge  placed  weight  upon  the
    submission that the Appellant's return to Pakistan with dignity was (at
    least) jeopardised by the Respondent's failures (see paragraphs 96  and
    98). However, as Ms Meredith acknowledged, there is a 'tension' between
    this position and that taken in respect of the  Article  8  claim  (see
    paragraph 87). As discussed previously, in my view the  tension  is  in
    fact a genuine and material contradiction within the decision  (and  to
    this extent I  also  agree  with  paragraphs  21,  23  and  27  of  the
    Respondent's grounds). Part of the problem here is the  judge  did  not
    deal with the medical evidence in as much detail as he otherwise  might
    have. This is a point relied on  by  Ms  Meredith  in  respect  of  her
    challenges to the decision. With respect, it seems to me as though  she
    cannot have it both ways, as it were. The  findings  of  the  judge  in
    respect of Article 4 and the Anti-Trafficking Convention are materially
    undermined.

26. Second, it is not apparent to me on the face of the decision  that  the
    judge has found, or at least given reasons for finding, a causal  nexus
    to exist between the Respondent's breaches  and  the  Appellant's  ill-
    health. Having looked at the medical evidence myself, it is not obvious
    that such a link was necessarily present (although it might have been).
    The existence of causation is relevant to the application of EK and the
    lack of clarity in the judge's decision is material.

27. I conclude that the two errors identified above cannot be separated out
    from the judge's reasoning as whole such that his overall  decision  on
    this issue remains sustainable.



Disposal

28. Having regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Practice  Statement  and  the
    circumstances of this case, the appeal must be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Neither representative suggested otherwise.

29. This is a relatively complex case, and with that in mind I  am  issuing
    detailed directions (see below). In relation to factual matters,  I  am
    specifically preserving the positive credibility findings at  paragraph
    49 of the judge's decision and the acceptance that the  Appellant  came
    to the United Kingdom in 2000 through lawful channels.

Anonymity

30. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                                       Date:  9 February 2016


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








