
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/04329/2014
                                                               aa/04327/2014
                                                               aa/04331/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 16th January 2015                          |On 1st June 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 (1)  mr nz
                                 (2)  mrs rb
                                 (3)  mrs ab
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Saifolahi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O R Williams,  promulgated  on  14th  August  2014,  following  a
    hearing at Stoke-on-Trent on 12th August 2014.  In  the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the appeals of  the  Appellants,  who  subsequently
    applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are all citizens of Pakistan, whose dates of  birth  are
    20th May 1966, 4th February 1990, and 1st January  1946,  respectively.
    They appealed against the decision of the Respondent that they were not
    refugees under the Refugee Convention, that they were not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C, that their removal  would
    not unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that Mr NZ has a wife, a daughter,  and  three
    sons all of whom reside in Pakistan along with his father, brother, and
    sister-in-law, and niece.  He does not know their current  whereabouts.
    They have moved their address.  The second Appellant is Mr NZ's sister,
    and Mrs AB is the Appellant, Mr NZ's mother.  Mr NZ was employed  as  a
    messenger for the Allied Bank in Pakistan, starting his  employment  in
    1995.  On 15th February 2010, he was at home when five men  knocked  on
    the door, did not identify the Appellant by name, but the Appellant was
    asked to inform them of the date the bank was to deliver cash.  The men
    covered their faces, carried weapons, and stated that  they  were  from
    the Pakistan Taliban.  He was  warned  of  severe  consequences  if  he
    informed the police.  On 26th February 2010, the Appellant  received  a
    phone call from five men asking the Appellant  for  his  decision.   He
    hung up.  There was a knock  on  the  door  five  minutes  later.   The
    Appellant refused to go outside.  He did not report the matter  to  the
    police because he was afraid.  Eventually the Appellant filed  a  First
    Information Report (FIR) with the police.  There were a number of court
    hearings, which followed the arrest of four men who had been identified
    and charged, but they were released by the  Sessions  Court.   Violence
    was exacted against the family.  Mr NZ's nephew was murdered.

 4. The judge accepted the evidence of Mr NZ that he "was a  messenger  for
    Allied Bank and would have been regarded as a  person  who  would  have
    knowledge of the movements of  monies  by  criminals"  (paragraph  29).
    However, the judge did  not  accept  that  they  were  members  of  the
    Taliban.  The judge held that this aspect  of  the  evidence  had  been
    embellished (see paragraph 35).

 5. Subject to the above findings, the judge went on to hold that "there is
    in place a criminal justice system in Pakistan...".  This made  attacks
    by the persecutors punishable by sentences that were commensurate  with
    the gravity of the crimes.  The judge held "there must be a  reasonable
    willingness by the law enforcement agencies, that  is  the  police  'to
    detect prosecute and punish offenders'" (paragraph  50).   Second,  the
    judge held that the fact that there is  in  place  a  criminal  justice
    system in Pakistan, "is amply  demonstrated  by  the  system  of  First
    Information  Reports  which  led  to  the  four  criminals  arrest  and
    incarceration" (paragraph 51).  Third, the judge held that "there is no
    evidence that there is a systemic failure to take action against  these
    four/five criminals, because, as a matter of common sense, four of them
    spent a year in custody with no  bribery  being  necessary"  (paragraph
    53).  Finally, the judge went on to consider internal  relocation,  and
    had regard to the established authorities  (see  paragraph  56)  before
    concluding that the Appellants could return to a  place  of  safety  in
    Pakistan.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellants were victims of a targeted campaign by criminals,  but  that
    these criminals had no Taliban involvement, and in so doing, the  judge
    had erred in law by reaching irrational conclusions of  fact.   Second,
    that in relation to sufficiency of protection, the judge did  not  have
    sufficient regard to the guidance in  AW  (Sufficiency  of  protection)
    Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31, which was before the judge.

 7. On 17th September 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered  to  the  effect
    that the judge gave careful consideration to the Appellant's claim  and
    concluded with good reasoning that the Appellants were the  subject  of
    attentions of a criminal gang and not the Taliban.  Moreover, the judge
    considered whether there was sufficiency of protection  and  gave  good
    reasons for concluding that there was.  The judge properly concluded at
    paragraph 57 that there was no bar to  the  Appellant's  relocation  in
    Pakistan.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 16th January 2015, Ms Saifolahi,  appearing
    as Counsel on behalf of the Appellants, wisely submitted before me that
    she would not elaborate upon the Grounds of Appeal, which were set  out
    extensively before the Tribunal, but chose to summarise  those  grounds
    as follows.  First, the basis on which the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    concluded that the criminal gang were not members of  the  Taliban  was
    flawed.  Second, that this would effectively  have  impacted  upon  the
    remaining issues of sufficiency of  state  protection,  risk,  and  the
    availability of IFA.  Third, and in any event, even  if  these  matters
    were not accepted, the judge's assessment of  state  protection  within
    Pakistan  did  not  take  account   of   the   Appellant's   particular
    circumstances, where those people  who  had  been  apprehended  as  the
    persecutors of the Appellants, were then subsequently released.

 9. For his part, Mr Wilding made the following  submissions.   First,  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that, whereas he would accept  that  the
    people who were harassing the Appellants were a criminal gang from  the
    local area, they were not the Taliban, and this had been fabricated  to
    strengthen the Appellant's case.  Second, but in any event, even if the
    judge was wrong about all these matters, he referred to the  applicable
    authorities in relation to IFA, and concluded that internal  relocation
    was  available  to  the  Appellants.   Third,  the  grounds  state  (at
    paragraph 2(ii) that the fact that the FIR does not mention the Taliban
    does not mean that the Taliban were not  the  Appellant's  persecutors.
    However, this does not follow at all.  The relevant  question  is  what
    findings were open to the judge to make.  The judge made  the  findings
    on the basis of the evidence.  It is not clear why  the  FIR  does  not
    specifically state that they were indeed the  Taliban,  if  they  were.
    The findings, accordingly, were open to the judge, because there was no
    misunderstanding of the  evidence,  and  no  misinterpretation  of  it.
    Similarly, paragraph 2(iii) states that the Tribunal wrongly  concluded
    that as a matter of "common sense" the Taliban would not be living in a
    local  village,  informing  the  populous  of  their  affiliation,  and
    becoming known to the police, and that they would not be targeting  low
    level messengers of banks.  However, it was for the judge to come to  a
    conclusion one way or the other on the evidence.   The  judge  did  so.
    The judge was  not  in  error.   Finally,  as  far  as  sufficiency  of
    protection was concerned, the  judge  was  correct  in  concluding  (at
    paragraphs 50 to 53) that there was a proper criminal  justice  system,
    that was being applied in Pakistan, and the Appellants could turn to it
    for protection.

10. In reply, Ms Saifolahi  submitted  that  the  reason  why  the  judge's
    findings in relation to  the  persecutors  being  not  members  of  the
    Taliban, was flawed, was that the evidence was not considered, and  was
    actually misinterpreted, in relation to this question,  by  the  judge.
    On sufficiency of protection, the judge made the finding, which did not
    take into account the country guidance case of AW.  A specific limit in
    the case was overlooked.  The  death  of  the  family  members  of  the
    Appellants was a material factor.  The availability of  FIA  would  not
    compensate for the risk attending upon the Appellants.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

12. First, there is a question  as  to  whether  the  judge  was  right  in
    concluding that the criminal gang were not members of the Taliban.  The
    judge concluded that this was an attempt to "beef up" the  argument  in
    relation to asylum (see paragraph 35).  However, the  judge  gave  very
    extensive reasoning for this conclusion, setting it  out  carefully  in
    individual paragraphs,  with  ample  recitation  of  the  evidence  and
    objective materials (see paragraphs 36 to 41).  The judge was  entitled
    to come to this conclusion.  This was a conclusion open to  the  judge.
    There is absolutely no error of law here at all.

13. Second, and in any event, the judge concluded that there was a criminal
    justice system in Pakistan in line with established standards that  are
    internationally recognised, and  this  is  amply  demonstrated  by  the
    system of First Information Reports (see paragraphs 50 to 51).  Indeed,
    the judge had evidence before him that there was no "systemic  failure"
    because four of the criminals had been apprehended (see  paragraphs  52
    to 53).

14. Third, the judge had proper  regard  to  internal  relocation  under  a
    separate heading in the determination (see paragraphs 55 to 57),  where
    regard was had  to  the  established  authorities  on  the  meaning  of
    internal relocation.  It was unnecessary for the judge to do this given
    that he had already concluded that there was  an  established  criminal
    justice system in place, which had no systemic failures, but  the  fact
    that this was done, only strengthens the probity of the  determination.



15. Finally, proper consideration  was  given  to  all  the  other  issues,
    including Article 8 of the ECHR  (see  paragraphs  50  to  62  to  63).
    Accordingly, notwithstanding Ms Saifolahi's elegant  and  comprehensive
    submissions before me, there is no error of law in this determination.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    29th May 2015

