

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04542/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 March 2015                               |On 11 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                            duniya isse mohamoud
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountains Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 9 January 2015 I found that the determination of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge P J Holmes that was promulgated on 6 October  2014  contained  an
    error on a point of law in relation to the grounds of  appeal  relating
    to asylum and that it had to be set  aside  for  that  decision  to  be
    remade.  At the hearing both representatives confirmed they had  copies
    of my earlier decision.

 2. For the sake of clarity, I mention that Judge Holmes allowed the appeal
    on humanitarian protection grounds and that decision  is  unchallenged.
    However, before the SSHD can make  a  grant  of  leave,  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant is a refugee or a person  otherwise  in  need  of
    international protection has to  be  resolved.   To  that  extent,  the
    outcome of the appeal will result in the appellant being granted  leave
    of some kind.

 3. As indicated in my earlier decision, the only  issue  arising  in  this
    appeal is whether the appellant has a well founded fear of  persecution
    in Somalia because she would return as a lone woman.  As  I  indicated,
    the other grounds of  appeal  fall  away  because  they  were  resolved
    satisfactorily by Judge Holmes.  In this context,  the  appellant  gave
    further evidence at the hearing and both Mr Mills and  Mr  Howard  made
    submissions.  There is no need to rehearse the evidence or  submissions
    as their content will be apparent from what I say below.

 4. I begin my reasons by setting out the findings  made  by  Judge  Holmes
    that in effect led to this appeal.  These are contained in paragraph 33
    of his determination.

        33.  I consider that I ought to follow the guidance  given  by  the
        Tribunal in AMM.  The fact that the appellant has not been believed
        in her claim to be from a  minority  clan  does  not  lead  to  the
        conclusion that upon return to  Mogadishu  she  would  be  able  to
        secure for herself the protection from  harm  which  (according  to
        AMM) are available only to a limited  class  who  have  appropriate
        connections.  She might  or  might  not  be  able  to  re-establish
        contact  with  her  husband,  but  his  current  circumstances  are
        unknown.   The  respondent's  suggestion  that  she  could   obtain
        protection from her clan (whichever it might genuinely be) is  mere
        speculation.  The appellant would be, upon the  evidence  available
        to me, a lone woman returnee without any  connections  to  powerful
        actors or any claim to middle class or professional status.

 5. Mr Mills sought to limit the impact of these findings  to  the  country
    situation described by the Upper Tribunal in AMM and others  (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00445
    (IAC).  He submitted that in light of MOJ & Ors (Return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) the situation was no longer the same
    and therefore all the findings have to be revisited because, of course,
    when remaking the decision the situation at the  date  of  the  resumed
    hearing becomes the relevant date.

 6. Mr Mills suggested that as Judge Holmes had found the appellant was not
    a member of a minority clan, she must be a member of  a  majority  clan
    and therefore would have the assistance needed to live in Mogadishu  or
    elsewhere in Somalia even as a lone  woman.   He  reminded  me  of  the
    findings in MOJ that the clan structure had changed  in  Mogadishu  and
    the booming  economy  there  meant  that  most  returnees  could  avoid
    destitution.

 7. I mention at this juncture two concessions made by  Mr  Mills.   First,
    lone women continued to form a particular social group  in  Somali  and
    the issue for me to decide is whether being a member of  such  a  group
    would cause the appellant to have a well-founded fear  of  persecution.
    The second is that it was accepted that the appellant could not  obtain
    support from her husband.  Mr Mills did not challenge  the  appellant's
    oral evidence that she had separated from her husband sometime  between
    2005 and 2007, when she found out he had taken a  new  wife  in  Kenya,
    where he was living at that time and that  he  and  his  new  wife  had
    children.

 8. I reject Mr Mills's arguments in their entirety, primarily  because  of
    the strength of the submissions made by Mr Howard.  Mr Howard  reminded
    me of the key points decided by MOJ regarding the need to assess all of
    an appellant's circumstances  to  see  whether  a  person  without  any
    relatives in Mogadishu could re-establish herself on return.  Mr Howard
    argued, in essence, that there were good reasons for finding  that  the
    appellant would not be able to access the economic  opportunities  that
    exist in Mogadishu because of the following factors

     a. The appellant  has  been  absent  from  Mogadishu  since  at  least
        February 2002, when she entered the UK.  When she arrived in the UK
        she was 18  years  old.   These  facts  are  established  from  her
        immigration history which is not  disputed.   The  length  of  time
        since the appellant left Somalia is sufficient reason  to  conclude
        that she would not be able to secure financial  support  on  return
        from those who helped her fund her journey to the UK.

     b. The appellant has no family  or  clan  associations  in  Mogadishu.
        This is a finding made by Judge Holmes and is not challenged.

     c. The appellant has no access to financial resources.  She has  never
        worked in the UK and is unlikely to find  employment  in  Mogadishu
        because she has no skills that would enable her to benefit from the
        economic boom.  She is currently studying for a health  and  social
        care  qualification  which  she  hopes  will  enable  her  to  find
        employment in the UK but she does not have that  qualification  yet
        and there is no evidence that such employment would be available in
        Mogadishu.

     d. The appellant has relied on the  good  will  of  friends  whom  she
        refers to as her brother and sister.  They have limited income  and
        have in effect only  provided  accommodation.   The  appellant  has
        relied on various benefits whilst in the  UK  to  meet  her  living
        costs.  These facts are established by the  findings  Judge  Holmes
        made elsewhere in his determination.

     e.  It  follows  that  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  rely  on
        remittances from these friends.  She has no connections  to  anyone
        else who might be expected to send her money.

 9. In making his arguments, Mr Howard referred me to paragraphs 344 to 352
    of MOJ and highlighted in particular the evidence that was  before  the
    Upper Tribunal from Dr Mullen.  At paragraph  353  the  Upper  Tribunal
    recorded that returnees were likely  to  have  advantages  over  Somali
    citizens because of being better educated and being  regarded  as  more
    resourceful.  Neither  factor  applies  to  the  appellant,  given  her
    history before and since arriving in the UK.

10. In addition, Mr Howard reminded me of  the  guidance  provided  by  the
    Tribunal in NM & Ors (Lone women -  Ashraf)  Somalia  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
    00076.  Despite its age, it  was  upheld  in  both  AMM  and  MOJ.   At
    paragraph 99 of NM the Tribunal had identified that the age of a  woman
    could be a relevant factor when assessing risk on return.  Although the
    appellant is 31, she has been dependent on friends  since  arriving  in
    the UK and has never lived alone.  Having to live alone would  put  her
    at risk on return.  At paragraph 119 the Tribunal found that lone women
    were in general likely to face greater risks on return than men but  on
    its own such  discrimination  would  not  amount  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution.

11. Mr Howard took me  to  the  UK  Home  Office  Country  Information  and
    Guidance - Somalia: Women fearing gender-based harm/violence  (February
    2015).  It confirms the risks to women  in  Somalia  and  the  lack  of
    effective protection.  At section  1.2.8  the  guidance  confirms  that
    being a woman  is  not  enough  of  itself  to  establish  a  need  for
    international  protection  but  points  out  that   a   woman   without
    family/friend/clan connections or who is without resources is likely to
    be at risk of sexual and gender based violence on  return.   At  1.2.17
    the guidance indicates that for single women internal  relocation  will
    not be available in the absence of meaningful  support  networks  or  a
    real prospect of securing access to a livelihood.

12. Mr Howard relied on the factors discussed above to show that there were
    other factors at play and that when taken with the appellant's  gender,
    she had established she had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on
    return.

13. I agree entirely  with  Mr  Howard's  submissions.   He  has  correctly
    identified facts which are either established by the preserved findings
    of  Judge  Holmes  or  which  are  otherwise  undisputed.   The   facts
    establish, bearing in mind that it is the lower standard of proof  that
    applies, that the appellant would  return  as  a  lone  woman  with  no
    family/friend/clan  connections  and  who  would  have  no  access   to
    resources or have  any  meaningful  support  networks  or  a  realistic
    prospect of securing access to a livelihood.   The  Home  Office's  own
    very recent guidance confirms a person with this matrix of facts has  a
    well-founded fear of persecution.

14. For these reasons, I find that the appellant is a  refugee  and  remake
    Judge Holmes's decision accordingly. I add  that  because  I  find  the
    appellant to be a refugee, she cannot be a person otherwise in need  of
    international protection and therefore I must also remake that part  of
    his decision.  But this is merely for clarity as the two  statuses  are
    mutually exclusive.

15. Finally, I address the issue of anonymity.  The First-tier Tribunal did
    not make a direction for anonymity and I find no reason to make one  in
    the Upper Tribunal, bearing in mind there has no application for one to
    be made.

Decision

The determination of First-tier Tribunal P J Holmes contains an error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.  I remake the  decision  and  find  that  the
appellant is a refugee.







                               Signed   Date 11 March 2015


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
