
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/04282/2015
                                                               Aa/04288/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2016                 |On 24th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  (1) M S H
                                  (2) B S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Q Ahmed (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are husband and wife and both are citizens of  Pakistan.
    The first Appellant, the husband, was born on 1st February  1982.   The
    second Appellant, his wife,  was  born  on  4th  November  1984.   They
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State dated 18th February 2015  which  rejected
    their asylum claims and they alleged that the decision was in breach of
    the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention  and  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The Appellants' appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parks  on
    8th April 2016.

 3. The claim put forward is that the first Appellant and his  father  were
    members of MQM Haqiqi (MQM-H).  In February 2015 a group  forced  their
    way into the family home.  They abducted the first Appellant's  father.
    The father held a senior position within the party.  He was involved in
    recruitment and in administration.  The first  Appellant  alleged  that
    his mother was not allowed to submit an FIR and following a threatening
    phone call decided not to.  After  his  father  had  fled  to  Malaysia
    between 2004 and  2009  the  Appellant  had  taken  over  his  father's
    position.  He feared the intelligence agencies and his  brother-in-law,
    a member of MQM-Altaf (MQM-A), a rival faction (see paragraph 10 of the
    determination).

 4. At paragraph 30 of the determination, Judge Parkes stated as follows:

         "Even if the second Appellant's brother-in-law is involved  in  the
         MQM-A the evidence that the parties reach an inference is such that
         there is nowhere safe in Pakistan is not supported by the evidence.
          Pakistan is a large country with several large cities where  there
         is no evidence of MQM Party influence or activity.  I find that  if
         the Appellants were to  return  to  Pakistan  they  could  relocate
         within the country using their qualifications  and  skills  to  re-
         establish themselves".

    Indeed, the judge held that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the  second
    Appellant's brother-in-law was involved with MQM-A or that he  had  the
    capacity to take action against her or the first Appellant in Pakistan.
     He held that, "there is no supporting evidence for her claim about her
    sister's death and in the absence of any evidence I do not accept  that
    she died as claimed or that her brother-in-law was involved" (paragraph
    29).

 5. The Grounds of Appeal state that  the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    overall credibility may have been influenced by  the  judge  mistakenly
    taking the position that  the  Appellant's  student  visa  had  expired
    before he claimed asylum.  It was also said that the  judge  failed  to
    take into account  the  Appellant's  explanation  for  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence to show his involvement in the MQM Party.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  27th
    June 2016.

 7. A Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent Secretary of State  on
    19th July 2016.

 8. At the hearing before me on 4th November 2016, Mr Ahmed,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that there had been five grounds  of
    application and each of them had been allowed for consideration in this
    Tribunal.

 9. First, he stated  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant came as a student to the UK "and after expiry of his  student
    visa in October 2013 he claimed asylum in February 2014" (paragraph 9).
     This is because the Appellant's student visa expired on 23rd  February
    2014, but the Appellant had already on  11th  February  2014  made  his
    application for asylum, so that the judge was wrong  to  conclude  that
    this was an application made after expiry of leave to remain.

10. Second, the first Appellant  had  indeed  planned  to  return  back  to
    Pakistan on 20th February 2014 and had purchased an airline ticket  but
    on 9th February 2014, he found that his father had  been  kidnapped  in
    Pakistan and all the indications were that it would be unsafe  for  him
    to return so that he had to cancel the return back to Pakistan  and  to
    make an application for asylum.

11. Third, a proper assessment of credibility  had  been  impaired  by  the
    judge being distracted by matters that were not relevant or germane  to
    the issues at hand or simply misconstrued  so  that  I  should  make  a
    finding of an error of law and remit the matter back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be reheard again.  Indeed, there  had  not  been  a  proper
    assessment of the risk on return because it had not been  accepted  why
    an FIR had not been lodged and the judge was mistaken  about  how  FIRs
    are issued in Pakistan.  He had wrongly concluded that the mother would
    not have been denied an FIR in the  circumstances  described.   He  had
    also wrongly concluded that the FIR would be refused simply because the
    perpetrators were unknown (see paragraph 20).

12. For his part, Mr Mills relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He  made  the
    following submissions.  He stated that even if the  judge  had  wrongly
    stated of the first Appellant that, "he came to the UK as a student and
    after expiry of his student visa in October 2013 he claimed  asylum  in
    February 2014" (paragraph 9), this was not a material error because the
    judge nowhere in the determination ascribed any lack of credibility  to
    the Appellant on account of his having made an application,  which  the
    judge wrongly described, as  having  been  made  after  expiry  of  the
    Appellant's student visa.  It was simply a mis-statement of  the  fact.
    It did not go to the assessment of the credibility in any way.  Had the
    judge said that, because the Appellant had made  an  application  after
    expiry of the visa, for that reason alone his  application  was  to  be
    treated with suspicion,  that  would  have  been  a  different  matter.
    Whatever the judge said did not impact  upon  the  judge's  credibility
    assessment of the Appellant's claim.

13. Second, for the judge to require corroboration of the Appellant's claim
    was not an unlawful exercise of his  discretionary  authority  because,
    although corroboration was not  a  requirement  in  asylum  claims,  in
    appropriate cases the judge would be entitled to  see  the  absence  of
    corroboration, in relation to a claim that is made, as being  damaging.
    For example, here the judge was entirely correct to say that, "there is
    no  supporting  evidence  for  her  claim  about  her  sister's  death"
    (paragraph 29), when the  judge  referred  to  the  second  Appellant's
    brother-in-law being involved in MQM-A.  Furthermore,  given  that  the
    Appellant's claim was that, "he took  over  from  his  father  for  the
    period that his father was in voluntary exile" (paragraph 18),  it  was
    entirely reasonable for the judge to conclude that, "the absence of any
    supporting evidence for his involvement in the  party  is  surprising",
    such that, "it remains the case that there is  no  supporting  evidence
    for his having held any role in the MQM-H faction or even that he was a
    member of the party itself" (paragraph 19).

14. Finally, cases involving alleged threats from the MQM, a  Karachi-based
    party in the south of Pakistan, invariably fails quite  simply  because
    this is a regional party which has no reach outside its main provincial
    area, such that  internal  relocation  is  always  an  option  that  is
    available to people who are in a position to avail  themselves  of  it.
    The judge concluded that this was the case here as well (see  paragraph
    30).

15. In reply, Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge had  indeed  drawn  adverse
    inferences from the  Appellant's  lack  of  supporting  or  documentary
    evidence which were unwarranted because he had stated at the outset (at
    paragraph 5) that, "the provisions of  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004  also  bear  upon
    consideration of an Appellant's credibility".  I pointed it out  to  Mr
    Ahmed that this was simply a statement of the law that would apply in a
    given case  where  an  asylum  claim  was  made.   The  judge  was  not
    suggesting at all that Section 8 fell to be applied in this case.

16. Second, Mr Ahmed submitted that the judge had criticised the  Appellant
    on the basis that there was a gap of five months between the  rejection
    of the  asylum  claim  and  the  hearing  itself,  thereby  giving  the
    Appellant ample time to produce  supporting  evidence  in  relation  to
    matters before the Tribunal, which he  had  failed  to  do.   Mr  Ahmed
    submitted that this was unfair  criticism  because  the  Appellant  had
    planned to go back, and had only decided not to  when  his  father  was
    kidnapped, and his wife also had  an  extra  year  to  remain  in  this
    country.

17. However, this does not mean, as I observed,  that  the  judge  was  not
    entitled to conclude that, "he has known that  this  was  a  source  of
    concern in the refusal letter and I am entitled to have regard  to  the
    evidence that may be expected to be available", and this is  not  least
    because the judge went on to also state that, "it would  be  reasonable
    to expect that someone who held a high rank within  a  political  party
    would be able to provide some evidence in support of  their  membership
    and activities and the complete absence of any such evidence undermines
    the first Appellant's case" (see paragraph 19).

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section  12.1  of
    TCA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are as
    follows.  First, the  mis-statement  that  the  Appellant  applied  for
    asylum after the expiry of his student visa goes to nothing as this mis-
    statement is not used in any way to assess the Appellant's  credibility
    in the asylum claim (see paragraph 9).  Second, the judge's recital  of
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act (at paragraph 5) is simply that  and  is  not
    used by him in any way  whatsoever  to  suggest  that  the  Appellant's
    credibility fails because of Section 8 of that law.  Third,  the  judge
    was perfectly entitled, when faced with the Appellant's claim  that  he
    was "someone who held a  high  rank  within  a  political  party"  (see
    paragraph 19) to expect  some  evidence  of  this,  notwithstanding  Mr
    Ahmed's submission before me that the Appellants had intended to return
    back to Pakistan.  Fourth, the judge also correctly observed  that  the
    first Appellant  did  not  appear  to  have  undertaken  any  political
    activities in the UK and does not appear to have  made  any  effort  to
    locate other MQM-H supporters or former  members  (see  paragraph  23).
    Fifth, the judge correctly rejected any suggestion that there would  be
    risk on account of the first and second Appellant  having  undergone  a
    "love marriage" and gave proper reasons for  this.   Finally,  internal
    relocation was a clear possibility available to the  first  and  second
    Appellant and the judge was right to  have  concluded  that  the  claim
    would fail in any event for this reason when observing  that,  "I  find
    that if the Appellants were to return to Pakistan they  could  relocate
    within the  country  using  their  qualifications  and  skills  to  re-
    establish themselves" (paragraph 30).  This appeal  is  devoid  of  all
    merit and I reject  it  and  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.



Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd November 2016

