
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04521/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 July 2017                          |On 1 August 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     WA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Williams
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, WA, is a citizen of Libya.  She had appealed against the
    decision of the respondent dated 3 May 2015  to  refuse  to  grant  her
    protection.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge M  Davies)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 November 2016, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman, in a decision  dated  24  February
    2017, had  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  a  limited  basis.   In
    particular, relying on FA (Libya: Article 15(c)) CG [2016]  UKUT  00413
    (IAC), she had excluded a ground  of  appeal  which  concerned  Article
    15(c).  In doing so, she observed that "risk should be determined on  a
    case-by-case basis and there does not appear to have been any  evidence
    before the judge to substantiate an Article 15(c) claim on the facts of
    this case".

 3. Case law guidance was indeed as summarised by Judge  Chapman  when  she
    ranted permission.  However,  new  country  guidance  is  available  in
    respect of Libya in the form of ZMM (Article  15(c))  Libya  CG  [2017]
    UKUT 263 (IAC)   The headnote reads:

         The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level   that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person.

 4. At the initial hearing at Manchester on 14 July 2017,  the  appellant's
    representative sought permission to amend  the  grounds  of  appeal  to
    include a claim in respect  of  Article  15(c)  in  the  light  of  the
    decision of ZMM.  Mr McVeety, for the respondent,  did  not  object  to
    that application.  I gave permission for the grounds of  appeal  to  be
    amended.

 5. In the light of the  unequivocal  decision  as  regards  indiscriminate
    violence in ZMM, it must follow that  this  appellant,  notwithstanding
    the weaknesses in her  case  identified  by  Judge  Davies,  should  be
    entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.  I find that the  judge
    has erred in law in his treatment of Article 15(c) and I set aside  the
    decision accordingly.  I remake the decision.  I allow  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  In doing so, I stress that  I  intend
    no criticism whatever of Judge M Davies;  his  decision  has  become  a
    victim of rapidly changing country conditions in Libya  which  are  now
    reflected in the country guidance available from the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 10 November 2016
    is set aside.  I have remade  the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 3 May 2015 is  allowed  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 31 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 31 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

