
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers AA/04651/2014
     AA/04945/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 28 July 2015                          |          On 19 August 2015       |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE KNOWLES
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                     K G
                                     V G
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal with the permission of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Simpson in respect of the decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Nightingale promulgated on 9 February 2015.  There  are
      two appellants, both are citizens of Albania.  They are brothers,  one
      was born on 20 July 1987 and the other  on  12  January  1998.    Five
      grounds of appeal are in the result advanced by Ms Radford.


   2. The first ground is that the judge expressed herself to be doubtful in
      relation to the occurrence of an attack  on  the  first  appellant  in
      December 2007 and yet did not carry through the  consequence  of  that
      finding of doubt in applying what has been  described  as  the  "lower
      standard".

   3. The reference in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that  is  the
      focus of this point is paragraph 57.  The important aspect is  however
      to note that the reference appears within an overall passage that goes
      on to examine the situation on the footing that there was an attack in
      December 2007, hence the phrasing "Even if the  first  appellant  were
      attacked in December 2007, which I find to be doubtful, ...".

   4. The second ground advanced on the appeal concerns the  same  paragraph
      of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. After the phrasing that  I
      have just quoted, the First-tier Tribunal went on "... then I can find
      no evidence which indicates that this was in pursuance  of  an  active
      blood feud against his family rather than a random encounter with  two
      brothers who feel resentment towards the first appellant's family  for
      the death of their father."

   5. In essence Ms Radford says that these are one and the same thing.   On
      the one hand an active blood feud; on the other hand an  encounter  by
      those who feel resentment towards a family for the death of a  father.
      This is an area in  which  the  terminology  used  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge can be  debated  and  it  has  been  very  attractively
      debated, if I may say so, by Ms Radford.  But the real emphasis on the
      part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that is  apparent  from  reading
      the decision as a whole is on  the  word  "active"  and  also  on  the
      description "active blood feud" as a description of a state of affairs
      of the quality, degree and characteristics  summarised  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in  EH  and  quoted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
      paragraph 53 of her reasons.

   6. We do not accept the submission  that  the  passage  at  paragraph  57
      involves a misunderstanding of what a blood feud is on the part of the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge.  We think that she was doing  her  best  to
      distinguish on the one hand an active blood feud  of  the  sort  under
      consideration in EH and on the other hand the situation where there is
      resentment by one family for a death, which resentment opens  up  when
      there is an encounter, but without the situation having the depth  and
      endurance (and other aspects) so to attract the phrase "blood feud".

   7. However Ms Radford seeks to add to this second ground and indeed build
      a third ground in the same area by referring to two pieces of material
      before the First-tier Tribunal. The first  is  the  statement  of  the
      first appellant, made on 1 August 2014, in which, referencing the 2007
      attack, the first appellant indicates that the  attackers  shouted  in
      the hearing of two other people that the first appellant's father  had
      killed their father "and they were just seeking blood".

   8. The second piece  of  material  to  which  we  were  referred  is  the
      interview of  the  first  appellant  where  question  38  attracted  a
      narrative answer, describing the attack in 2007. Here the  account  of
      the first appellant was  one  which  included  to  the  two  observers
      entreating the attackers to stop and to leave it to later  to  seek  a
      revenge attack for the father's death.

   9. These passages add context to the December 2007 episode, but we  still
      understand the First-tier Tribunal's essential conclusion that even if
      December 2007 happened, and even if it was fuelled  by  resentment  in
      relation to the death of the father, it was an episode  that  was  not
      sufficient to justify a finding of an active  blood  feud,  especially
      when taken in the context of the other findings and overall  treatment
      of the evidence undertaken by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   That
      includes the point that there was no incident  after  2007,  a  matter
      that we accept must be seen in the context of  the  first  and  second
      appellants' keeping to the family home throughout that period as  they
      had largely done between 2003 and 2007.

  10. The fourth ground of appeal that is raised concerns the period 2003 to
      2007.This was a  period  in  which  the  appellant's  mother,  on  the
      findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  on  the  evidence,
      confined the first appellant to the family home, through fear that  he
      would be attacked in revenge.  Over that period, however,  he  did  go
      out once or twice a year.  The challenge by Ms Radford focuses in this
      respect on paragraph 56 of the reasons of the First-tier Tribunal  and
      she criticises that paragraph in a number of ways. These include  what
      is suggested to be a failure to examine the  matter  in  context  with
      reference in particular to expert evidence and country guidance.

  11. But the starting point of Ms Radford's criticism was that paragraph 56
      does not bring out the fact that when the home was left  it  was  left
      for reasons of emergency and in circumstances of secrecy.  As to  that
      point, we think again, reading the First-tier Tribunal decision  as  a
      whole, it is very clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge kept  those
      features in mind. She referred to them expressly at paragraph  29  and
      also at paragraph 3.

  12. Moving to the contextual criticism, this centred really on the subject
      of self- confinement.  Ms Radford rightly drew attention to  the  fact
      that in the case of blood feuds, self-confinement  can  be  a  feature
      that is undertaken as a sign of respect, as it is put in some  of  the
      materials.

  13. Of course the question in the present case is whether that was in fact
      the reason for the self- confinement, and if it was the reason for the
      self confinement, how much further that can inform the  question  that
      was at the heart of things, which is whether there was an active blood
      feud.  In fact the evidence in the case suggests that the  reason  for
      self- confinement was for reasons of safety and the evidence does  not
      develop the point further.

  14. We see paragraph 56 as satisfactory  in  its  own  terms  and  not  as
      deserving criticism. Moreover  it  sits  within  the  overall  set  of
      findings and  reasoning  and  elaboration  undertaken  throughout  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

  15. The fifth ground that is raised is quite a narrow one. By reference to
      the indication in EH that press reports from Albania will, unless they
      are  factual,  prompt  and  consistent,  tend  to  add  little  or  no
      evidential weight in the consideration of whether a  feud  exists,  Ms
      Radford challenges the approach of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
      paragraph 60 of her reasoning.  Here  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      says: "I ... find it of some concern that nothing  has  been  produced
      such as a local newspaper or other report to  confirm  the  murder  of
      [the father of the other family] in 2003".

  16. We do not see a true match here. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
      entitled to observe that there was no document such as a  local  paper
      referencing the  murder.  That  does  not  mean  that  the  judge  was
      considering the question whether if there  had  been  a  newspaper  or
      similar report it would have been deserving of weight. That  would  of
      course have to do with the question whether it was factual, prompt  or
      consistent.  But here, as, with great respect, is the position  across
      all five grounds, we think that there is  a  danger  in  addressing  a
      criticism to one piece of the reasoning or one  reference or   comment
      or observation made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  rather  than
      standing back and examining the decision  as a whole.

  17. When one does stand back and examine the treatment by  the  First-tier
      Judge of the evidence as  a  whole,  including  by  reference  to  the
      decision in EH and the relevant provisions that are engaged,  we  find
      overall conclusions that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to
      make. Whatever pause  for  thought  the  cogent  submissions  of  Miss
      Radford have given us in the course of her treatment of certain of the
      five grounds, we are left with no lack of confidence that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge reached a decision that she was entitled to reach,
      and  explained  that  reason  satisfactorily  after  a   conscientious
      consideration of the materials as was her duty.

  18. In those circumstances the appeal must be dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Knowles


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



































