
[pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04633/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th October 2014                         |On 11th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                MS. GA BLACK


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday (Senior Home Office presenting
officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Kamara) promulgated on 7th August 2014 in  which  she  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  grounds
    under Articles 2 and 3.

 2. The appellant was born on 22 October 1986 and he is a citizen  of  Iran
    and of Kurdish ethnicity.

    Background

 3. The respondent refused the application on 22 May 2014, on  the  grounds
    that none of the aspects of the appellant's claim  were  accepted  save
    for his nationality.  The evidence, including the documents relied  on,
    was considered to be lacking in consistency and plausibility.

 4. In a determination  the  Tribunal  considered  the  original  documents
    produced by the appellant.  It found no reliable evidence that the same
    had ever been posted to the appellant having regard to the state of the
    envelope which was produced, and   from  which  it  was  impossible  to
    identify the sender, the recipient or the date of postage.  [12]  There
    after the Tribunal considered in turn each document relied  on  by  the
    appellant and giving reasons for placing no weight on the evidence [12-
    16]. At [17] the Tribunal  considered  the  medical  evidence  from  Dr
    Hajioff.  It found his   psychiatric opinion to be reliable but not his
    views as to the causes of scarring from physical injury.  The  Tribunal
    agreed with the conclusion reached  by  the  respondent  and  found  no
    aspect  of  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  credible  save   for   his
    nationality.  The determination set out detailed reasons in support  of
    its decision. [18 -32].

 5. In lengthy grounds of appeal seeking permission, the  appellant  argued
    that the Tribunal's conclusion as to the lack  of  credibility  of  his
    claim arose as a result of errors in that the Tribunal

      i)  misdirected itself by failing to take into account the appellant's
         inability to recall dates,

     ii) made inconsistent findings as to the evidence  of  the  appellant's
         identity,

    iii) wrongly found discrepancy at [21-31] in  the  appellant's  evidence
         where there was none,

     iv) wrongly rejected the evidence  of  the  original  documents  having
         regard to supporting evidence that it was posted to the appellant,

      v) wrongly found the appellant's account to be  implausible  regarding
         the PJAK incident.

Permission to appeal

 6. Permission was granted by Judge Cruthers  on  4th  September  2014  who
    stated

         "In essence, the grounds (from paragraph 4 on) raise  a  number  of
         quarrels as regards the Judge having put little weight on  some  of
         the appellant's "supporting documents", and as regards the  judge's
         "credibility assessment" generally. I suspect that there is  little
         substance in in at  least  some  of  the  complaints  made  in  the
         grounds. For instance I note that there is no comment  on  some  of
         the Judge's potentially very significant "credibility points" - her
         paragraphs 30 and 31 for example. But it may be that the Judge  did
         materially err in some of  the  ways  alleged.  Overall,  there  is
         sufficient  in  the  grounds  to  make  a   grant   of   permission
         appropriate.

         As already intimated the appellant should not take  this  grant  as
         any indication that the appeal will ultimately succeed. "

The hearing

Submissions

 7. Ms Nnamani  amplified  her  grounds  of  appeal  and  focused  on  four
    complaints made in respect of findings at paragraphs 11, 19, 25  &  26,
    and 27 & 31 of the determination.   Her  main  argument  was  that  the
    Tribunal's decision was reached entirely on credibility issues  and  no
    attention given to any objective material.  She was unable  to  specify
    what objective material actually  drawn  to  the  Tribunal's  attention
    other than the COIR September 2013 at 20.13 in relation to events  post
    2009.  She submitted  that  the  medical  evidence  was  considered  in
    isolation and rejected in the absence of a holistic assessment  of  all
    the evidence, and for inadequate  reasons.   The  Tribunal  placed  too
    great  weight  on  the  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's   account
    internally and  failed  to  consider  it  in  light  of  the  objective
    material.

 8. Mr Shilliday submitted that the determination was complete  and  should
    stand.  He remarked that even the terms permission were  ambiguous  and
    failed to identify any error of law.  It was clear  that  the  Tribunal
    found the appellant's credibility to be low. The grounds amounted to  a
    disagreement with the findings, which were sustainable. The Tribunal is
    assumed to have regard to the objective material  notwithstanding  that
    the Secretary of State is not obliged to produce it. The  Tribunal  did
    not need in any event to go to the objective material in  view  of  its
    findings as to  credibility.   The  determination  fully  assessed  the
    evidence including the documentary evidence in dismissing the appeal.

 9. Ms Nnamani relied on the original envelope found  in  the  respondent's
    file. She submitted that the evidence clearly showed that it  was  sent
    from Iraq.  She submitted that the  appellant  had  produced  objective
    material in his bundle which the  Tribunal  was  obliged  to  consider.
    The appellant had dealt with the most recent incident in  evidence  and
    his comments on the refusal letter.

Discussion and conclusion

10. The main criticism of the determination raised by  Ms  Nnamani  in  her
    submissions  is  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to   assess   the   claim
    holistically and that it placed weight on the  appellant's  failure  to
    provide accurate dates and time.  Her oral submission that the Tribunal
    did not engage in any assessment of the appellant's evidence  in  light
    of the objective material, was not a specific ground that  formed  part
    of the grounds for permission. The grounds argued that  the  Tribunal's
    credibility  findings  as  regards  the  documentation  were  made   in
    isolation and that a holistic assessment was not made.   I  shall  deal
    with each ground in turn and then address the overall concern.

11. Firstly, there was no reliance in the grounds of appeal on any point in
    relation to the medical evidence. In the absence of any application  to
    amend the grounds of appeal, and none was made, the submission made  as
    regards the medical evidence is not arguable.  In any event I  find  no
    error of law because the Tribunal set out clear and sustainable reasons
    for why it placed little weight on the Dr's findings as to the physical
    injury.  The Tribunal found that the doctor specialised  in  psychiatry
    and found his opinion as to the appellant's mental state to be reliable
    evidence. It found that he had no qualification to deal  with  scarring
    and he had not considered any alternative cause for the scars. [17]

12.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  ground  relating  to  the   evidence   of
    documentation sent from Iran lacks merit.  The  Tribunal,  having  seen
    the original envelope, was  entitled  to  find  that  it  was  reliable
    evidence as it failed to show the identity of the sender, recipient  or
    date of postage [12].

13. As regards the Tribunal's consideration of the documentary evidence,  I
    find that there can be no  complaint.   It  carefully  looked  at  each
    document and its content and found that there were  inconsistencies  or
    discrepancies with the account given by the appellant.   The  complaint
    is that the Tribunal failed to take into account the difficulty of  the
    appellant in recalling dates.  In considering the  appellants'  account
    the Tribunal referred to the  detailed  account  given  in  his  asylum
    interview of his  return to Iran in early 2010. The Tribunal found that
    this contradicted the dates shown on the documents  purportedly  issued
    at the time of his arrest which referred to dates at the end  of  2010.
    The findings are entirely  sustainable.  Even  if  the  appellant  were
    unable to recall precise dates, given that the events were  recent,  it
    was reasonable that he  could  recall  whether  an  event  was  at  the
    beginning or end of the year.

14. I find that the Tribunal's findings [27-29] that the PJAK incident  was
    implausible is fully and properly reasoned in  the  determination.  The
    Tribunal found that the appellant's account of his escape in  interview
    was significantly different from that given in evidence.  There was  no
    objective evidence in support of this aspect of his  claim  that  could
    have rendered it plausible.

15. As to the concern that the Tribunal considered the evidence  separately
    and in isolation of each other, I can find no  real  basis  to  support
    this submission. I specifically asked Ms Nnamani to draw  my  attention
    to that objective evidence which  would  if  taken  into  account  have
    supported the appellant's case.  As stated above she referred  only  to
    the background material for Iran post 2009 in the COIR 2013 at 20.13 in
    support of the generality of the appellant's  claim.   I  am  satisfied
    that there was no background evidence that the Tribunal  did  not  take
    into account that would have caused the Tribunal to reach  a  different
    conclusion overall.  I am satisfied that the Tribunal did look  at  the
    totality  of  the  appellant's  claim  including  background   material
    included in the appeal  bundle.   The  Tribunal  found  [31]  that  the
    appellant's evidence was vague and devoid of detail. The  determination
    expressly dealt  with  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  difficulty  in
    recalling dates and found no good reason for his  vagueness  [31].  The
    Tribunal  has  evaluated  all  the  evidence  together  including   the
    appellant's account, the documentary evidence and the medical  evidence
    and reached proper intelligible and adequate reasons  for  arriving  at
    the conclusion that the claim lacked credibility.


Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the determination .
The determination shall stand.


Anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 10.11.2014

Judge GA Black
Judge of the Upper-tier Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 10.11.2014

Judge GA Black
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

