


[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04633/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 December 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                chun long lin
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Parry, Counsel instructed by Messrs K & G
                  Legal Consultants Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of China born on 8  April
    1975 against the decision of the Respondent  dated  26  April  2013  to
    refuse to him the grant of asylum under paragraph 336  of  HC  395  (as
    amended) and to refuse him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

The Proceedings

2.   This was the resumed hearing of  the  Appellant's  appeal,  the  matter
    having come before Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  following  a  grant  of
    permission to the Appellant to appeal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal.

3.   In a determination promulgated on 1 November 2013, a copy  of  which  I
    have attached to this determination marked "Appendix A", Upper Tribunal
    Judge Kebede noted that permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was
    sought on the grounds that the judge had erred by finding, contrary  to
    the principles in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40  and  MA  (Pakistan)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 953, that the Appellant's removal  was  proportionate  on  the
    basis that the Appellant could apply for entry clearance  and  that  he
    had erred in his assessment of where the best interests of the children
    lay and further that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  erred  in  his
    approach to the requirements of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

4.   In summary, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede concluded,  firstly,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his interpretation of  paragraph  S-
    LTR.1.7 (a) in that the Appellant's claim did not  fall  for  mandatory
    refusal under that provision (a failure to attend  an  interview)  that
    she found applied to a failure that occurred in a previous  application
    and thus was not a provision that related to the current  proceedings).



5.   Secondly, that the First-tier Judge  was  "plainly  in  error"  in  his
    finding that the Appellant's inability to  meet  the  English  language
    requirement in E-ECP.4.1 was  relevant  to  his  ability  to  meet  the
    requirements under Appendix FM, that the judge had failed  to  consider
    the relevant provision at paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)  in  which  the  only
    requirements to be met in cases in which paragraph  EX.1  applied  were
    those in paragraphs E-LTRP.2.1-1.12 and E-LTRP.2.1 that did not include
    the English language requirement.

6.   Thirdly, the Upper Tribunal Judge found,  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings,  the  judge  did  not  go  on  to
    consider EX.1 of Appendix FM.  It was plain that consideration ought to
    have been given to whether  the  Appellant  could  benefit  from  EX.1.
    Whilst the Upper Tribunal Judge accepted that  the  First-tier  Judge's
    findings could be said to address the requirements of  paragraph  EX.1.
    (a) there were "plainly no equivalent findings with  respect  to  EX.1.
    (b).

   7. Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede further concluded that it was  plain  that
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept that the Appellant had  a
      genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his  partner's
      children but she considered that the judge's findings in  that  regard
      were adequate in that he had given detailed reasons for so  concluding
      that were  open  to  him  and  supported  by  the  evidence  and  thus
      sustainable in law.


   8. Insofar  as  the  judge's  consideration  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  was
      concerned, the Tribunal Judge noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      had accepted that the Appellant's relationship with  his  partner  was
      genuine:

         "...He went on to find that the relationship was nothing more  than
         boyfriend and girlfriend, a finding, reflected also at paragraph 32
         of his determination.  There was no specific finding on whether the
         Appellant's relationship  with  his  partner  was  a  'genuine  and
         subsisting' one for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  and  I
         consider that this is accordingly a matter that still needs  to  be
         addressed."


9.   The Upper Tribunal Judge continued, that in relation to the  principles
    in the cases of Chikwamba, Hayat and MA, were concerned, it  seemed  to
    her that this was:

          " .. very much  dependent  upon  the  findings  to  be  made  with
    respect to EX.1. (b).  In any event, as I indicated to Ms  Revill,  the
    merits of that ground are substantially reduced in  the  light  of  the
    recent judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192".

  10. The Upper Tribunal Judge concluded that in light of the errors of  law
      that she had found to be established, the judge's determination  could
      not stand and must be set  aside.   She  proceeded  to  establish  the
      parameters of the resumed hearing as follows:

         "Further evidence will be considered at a resumed hearing in  order
         for findings to be made in relation to the Appellant's relationship
         with his partner and for a decision to be made with respect to  his
         ability to meet the requirements of EX.1.(b) and R-LTRP.1.1."

11.  The Upper Tribunal Judge did however point out that she saw  no  reason
    why the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  finding  with  respect  to  the
    Appellant's relationship with his  partner's  children  should  not  be
    preserved.

12.  At the outset of the resumed hearing  before  me,  the  parties  agreed
    that the sole issue for my consideration was whether the Appellant  met
    the requirements of paragraph EX.1.(b) that in light of Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede's determination, would be determinative  of  this  appeal.
    Ms Parry further informed me that in the circumstances she would not be
    pursuing issues relating to Chikwamba and other related cases with  any
    vigour and indeed it is right to say she made no further  reference  to
    this particular issue, within her closing submissions.  Further it  was
    not a matter to which Ms Revill's skeleton argument dated 12 June  2013
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  upon  which  Ms  Parry  relied,
    referred.




The Secretary of State's Letter of Refusal dated 25 April 2013

13.  In the Respondent's Letter of Refusal dated 25 April 2013  and  insofar
    as it is relevant to the present appeal, reference was made inter alia,
    to Appendix FM EX.1 that inter alia applied where the applicant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner.  The  Secretary  of
    State continued in that regard:

         "You have stated that you have a girlfriend in the UK and that  she
         has two children.  Your past history in the UK shows that you  have
         resided unlawfully in the UK  and  therefore  the  Home  Office  is
         entitled to regard your relationship as not  being  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with your partner or children  in  the  UK.
         However, even  if  you  had  evidenced  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with your girlfriend and her two children, as  already
         stated above, you have not complied with the requirements under  S-
         LTR.1.7 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


         Therefore you do not  qualify  for  Article  8  under  Appendix  FM
         (family life)."

14.  The Secretary of State considered whether the Appellant  qualified  for
    leave under private life (276ADE).  It was noted that the Appellant had
    claimed to have arrived in the UK in June 2002 as an  illegal  entrant.
    He claimed to have resided in the UK for approximately eleven years but
    there was no evidence that he  was  in  the  UK  before  October  2007.
    Either way he had failed to fulfil the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules as he had failed to demonstrate that he  had  had  twenty  years'
    residence in the UK as required in Immigration Rule 276ADE(iii).

15.  The Appellant's claim in this regard was thus  refused  under  Appendix
    FM and Rule 276ADE of the Immigration Rules by virtue of Rule 326B  and
    it was considered that his removal was proportionate in  pursuit  of  a
    legitimate aim under Article 8(2) of the ECHR.

The Law

   16.  There were major changes in  July  2012  in  the  Immigration  Rules
   covering applications for entry clearance and leave to remain as a family
   member.  However, in that regard Appendix  FM  is  the  route  for  those
   seeking to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of  their  family  life
   with a person who is a British citizen, is settled in the UK or is in the
   UK with limited  leave  as  a  refugee  or  person  granted  humanitarian
   protection.


  17.  GEN.1.1. explains the purpose of the Appendix as follows:

         "It sets out  the  requirements  to  be  met  and,  in  considering
         applications under this Rule, it reflects how, under Article  8  of
         the Human Rights Convention, the balance will be struck between the
         right to respect for private and family  life  and  the  legitimate
         aims  of  protecting  national  security,  public  safety  and  the
         economic well-being of the  UK;  the  prevention  of  disorder  and
         crime; the protection of health or morals; and  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others.  It also takes into account  the
         need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the UK."

18.  Section  R-LTRP.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  contains  the  requirements  for
    limited leave to remain as a partner. The child of  the  applicant  and
    their partner must be in the United Kingdom; the  applicant  must  have
    made a valid application for limited or indefinite leave to remain as a
    partner; the applicant  satisfied  the  suitability  requirements;  and
    either the applicant meets all of the requirements of  Section  E-LTRP,
    or the applicant meets the requirements of  paragraphs  E-LTRP.1.2-1.12
    and E-LTRP.2.1 and paragraph EX.1 applies.

19.  I pause there, because at the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Parkinson
    raised a preliminary issue that in such circumstances, as  the  present
    Appellant had not made a valid application for  limited  or  indefinite
    leave to remain as a partner, it would  follow  that  consideration  of
    paragraph EX.1 would not apply.  Mr Parkinson did  not  however  pursue
    that submission any further,  it  having  rightly  been  drawn  to  his
    attention by Ms Parry, that under GEN.1.9. the requirement  to  make  a
    valid application would not apply when the Article 8 claim  was  raised
    as part of an asylum claim, in an appeal.

20.  Section FM1.0 of the October 2013 Immigration Directorate  Instructions
    (IDI's) is headed "Partner and ECHR Article 8  Guidance"  and  concerns
    family members who make applications after 9 July 2012 under Chapter 8,
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  provides  the  Guidance  for
    caseworkers in their approach to decision-making under the  new  Rules.
    The Guidance makes clear that caseworkers must consider first,  whether
    the applicant meets the requirements of the Rules.   If  the  applicant
    does not meet those requirements then the caseworker must move on to  a
    second stage:

         "Whether, based on an overall consideration of  the  facts  of  the
         case, there are exceptional circumstances which mean refusal of the
         application would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
         the individual or their family  such  that  refusal  would  not  be
         proportionate under Article  8.   If  there  are  such  exceptional
         circumstances, paragraph 3.2.7(c) concerns assessing whether  there
         are insurmountable obstacles in EX.1 (b)".


21.  "Insurmountable obstacles" are dealt with in paragraph 3.2.7(c) of  the
    Guidance and requires the decision-maker to consider the seriousness of
    the difficulties which the applicant and his/her partner would face  in
    continuing their family life outside the UK  and  whether  they  entail
    something that they could not (or could not be expected  to)  overcome,
    even with a degree of hardship for  one  of  more  of  the  individuals
    concerned.  The approach should be whether it would be  'reasonable  to
    expect' the applicant's partner to join them overseas.  Thus, a British
    citizen partner who has lived in the UK all of his/her life  and  spoke
    only English, might not wish to travel across the world to  a  country,
    culture and language with which he/she  is  unfamiliar.   The  Guidance
    makes  clear  however  that  "a  significant  degree  of  hardship   or
    inconvenience does not amount to an insurmountable obstacle".  Thus the
    decision-maker should look at whether there is an inability to live  in
    the country concerned.  The focus should also be  on  the  family  life
    that would be enjoyed in the country to which the  applicant  would  be
    returned, not a comparison to the life they would enjoy  were  they  to
    remain here.

22.  Paragraph 3.2.8 of the Guidance relates to "exceptional  circumstances"
    where an applicant does not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  under
    Appendix FM.  If that is the case,  refusal  of  the  application  will
    normally be appropriate, but leave can be  granted  outside  the  Rules
    where exceptional circumstances apply.

23.  However "exceptional" does not mean "unusual" or "unique".  An  example
    is given in a case which is not exceptional just because  the  criteria
    set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM had been missed by a small margin.   The
    Guidance continues that 'exceptional' means:

         "...Circumstances in which refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences for the individual  such  that  refusal  of  the
         application would not be proportionate.  That is likely to  be  the
         case  only  very  rarely.   In  determining   whether   there   are
         exceptional circumstances, the  decision-maker  must  consider  all
         relevant factors, such as:


         (a)  the circumstances around the applicant's entry to the  UK  and
             the proportion of the time they have been in the UK legally as
             opposed to illegally.  Did they form their  relationship  with
             their partner at a time when they had no immigration status or
             this  was  precarious?   Family  life   which   involves   the
             application of putting down  roots  in  the  UK  in  the  full
             knowledge that their stay  here  is  unlawful  or  precarious,
             should be given less weight, when balanced against the factors
             weighing in favour of removal, than family life  formed  by  a
             person lawfully present in the UK.


         (b)   Cumulative factors should be considered.  For example,  where
             the applicant has family members in the UK  but  their  family
             life does not provide  a  basis  for  stay  and  they  have  a
             significant private life in the UK.  Although under the  Rules
             family life and private life are considered  separately,  when
             considering  whether  there  are   exceptional   circumstances
             private and family life can be taken into account.


              If the applicant  falls  to  be  granted  because  exceptional
             circumstances apply in their case, they may be  granted  leave
             outside the Rules for a period of ......and on a 10 year route
             to settlement."

24.  In Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) Sales J  considered  the  relationship
    between the 2012 Immigration Rules in relation to claims for  leave  to
    remain and Article 8 and he held that since the new Guidance recognised
    the discretion to grant leave to remain  outside  the  Rules,  the  new
    Rules thus contemplated that there would be cases  falling  outside  in
    which a right to remain could be established.  His  Lordship  continued
    at paragraph 29 of his judgment as follows:

         "29. Nonetheless, the new Rules do provide better explicit coverage
             of the factors identified in case law as relevant to  analysis
             of claims under Article 8 than was formerly the  position,  so
             in many cases the main points for consideration in relation to
             Article 8 will be addressed by  decision-makers  applying  the
             new Rules.  It is only if, after doing that, there remains  an
             arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for  granting
             leave to remain outside the Rules by reference  to  Article  8
             that it would be necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to
             consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances   not
             sufficiently recognised under the new  Rules  to  require  the
             grant of such leave."

25.  His Lordship proceeded  to  review  relevant  Strasbourg  Guidance  and
    concluded that where such family life relationships arose when  it  was
    known to both parties as to the precarious immigration  status  of  the
    applicant, it would only be in exceptional circumstances  that  removal
    of the non-national family  member  would  constitute  a  violation  of
    Article 8.  Thus and in relation to Section EX.1 (family life), it  was
    possible to envisage cases where the new Rules did not completely cover
    every conceivable case in which a foreign national might  have  a  good
    clean claim for leave to remain under Article 8, in that there might be
    individual cases in circumstances  where  leave  to  remain  should  be
    granted under Article 8 even though there  may  not  be  insurmountable
    barriers to family life continuing outside the United Kingdom,  in  the
    applicant's country of  origin.  However,  for  the  purposes  of  thus
    establishing that the applicant's removal would be disproportionate, it
    would be necessary to show other non-standard and  particular  features
    of the case of a compelling nature demonstrating that removal would  be
    unjustifiably harsh.

26.    His Lordship in Nagre concluded that the gap  between  the  test  for
    leave to remain under EX.1 (b)  and  that  within  a  consideration  of
    Strasbourg case law in precarious family life cases was  likely  to  be
    small.  In the majority of such cases  where  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that a family member applying for leave to remain  could  not
    satisfy the test in Section EX.1. (b) (insurmountable obstacles) in the
    new Rules, it was unlikely that there would be  a  good  arguable  case
    that Article 8 would require that leave to  remain  should  be  granted
    outside the Immigration Rules.

27.  His Lordship continued that Section EX.1  was  not  unlawful  and  thus
    held that the Secretary of State was entitled to refuse  the  Appellant
    Nagre (an overstayer) leave to remain as the  unmarried  partner  of  a
    British citizen under EX.1 without going outside the Rules.

28.  The decision in Nagre has since been approved in  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192 where the Court of Appeal held that the Immigration Rules
    of 2012 as they apply to a foreign national criminal  were  a  complete
    code. In that the  new  Rules  spoke  of  "exceptional  circumstances",
    exceptionality was a likely characteristic of  a  claim  that  properly
    succeeded rather than a legal test to be  met.   Their  Lordships  also
    remarked obiter that  the  term  "insurmountable  obstacles"  were  not
    obstacles that were impossible to surmount, but concerned the practical
    possibilities of relocation, as held in Nagre.  In the absence of  such
    insurmountable obstacles if removal was to be disproportionate  it  was
    necessary  to  show  other   non-standard   and   particular   features
    demonstrating that removal would be unjustifiably harsh.

29.  Finally it would be as well for the sake of  completeness  to  set  out
    the provisions of Section EX.1 (b) that applies if:

         "(b) The applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  who  is  a  British
             Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK."



The Evidence of the Appellant

30.  In oral evidence before me, the Appellant adopted his statements  of  6
    June and 12 August 2013 as true and to be relied upon as  part  of  his
    evidence-in-chief.

31.  So far as those statements are relevant to the issue I have  to  decide
    in the present appeal, in his statement of 6 June  2013  the  Appellant
    stated that he was married when he was in China and had  a  child  with
    his previous wife.  Their marriage broke down.   He  had  not  been  in
    touch with his previous wife for many years.

32.  In October 2008, he met Ms Gan, his partner who had also  come  from  a
    failed marriage.  Their  relationship  grew  slowly  "as  our  previous
    relationship setbacks had given each of us our own doubts".   As  their
    relationship grew  stronger  they  "made  many  plans  for  our  future
    together".  The couple fell in love and their relationship  "grew  into
    something that became a big part of my life".

33.  Ms Gan had two daughters from her previous marriage, both born  in  the
    UK.  The Appellant maintained that the children approved of him and his
    relationship with their mother and looked up to him as a father figure.



34.   I pause there to remind myself, that Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  in
    her error of law determination upheld the  finding  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, who did not accept that the Appellant had a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with his partner's children.

 35.   The Appellant continued that the couple did not take the decision  to
    introduce his partner's daughters to him lightly and only did so  after
    two years "when we knew that our relationship was a permanent  one  and
    one that we knew we would be in for the long run".

36.    The Appellant claimed that he was baptised on 3 August 2008.  It  was
    demonstrated by his pastor in a letter, that he  was  not  a  dishonest
    person "naturally". He maintained that when he absconded,  he  had  not
    fully understood the gravity of his actions until recently and  he  was
    now an active and participating member of his church and its community.


37.    The Appellant considered himself an integral part  of  his  partner's
    family "as I can see from her daily life that she has a lot  of  burden
    on her shoulders.  Every day she has to manage her business as well  as
    look after her two daughters.  I have tried my best to take the  weight
    off her shoulders by doing as much as possible for her by  taking  care
    of her two daughters".

38.  The Appellant's statement of 6 June concluded that he had  been  living
    in the United Kingdom for over ten years for which he  had  established
    his "whole personal life in the UK" and that the  Respondent's  refusal
    had "jeopardised my entire life and future plans as well as my family".

39.  In his subsequent statement of 12 August 2013 and again insofar  as  it
    is relevant to  the  present  appeal,  the  Appellant  stated  that  he
    continued to live with his partner and her children "as a close  family
    for the past three years".

40.  His statement detailed the manner in which his  relationship  with  his
    partner's children had developed.  It would be as well for the purposes
    of this appeal to refer to paragraphs 8 and 9:

         "8.  At present, it is very  difficult  for  my  partner;  her  two
             children are young and she needs to earn a living for  herself
             and them.  She runs a business which  naturally  suffers  when
             she takes time away for paternal matters.  We have got to know
             each other well, and care for one another.  Her health is  not
             good and she suffers from back pain.  I often help by applying
             lotions and massaging the affected area.   Even  minor  things
             like lifting or routine trips like doing the shopping together
             remind me of how much we operate as a  family  and  need  each
             other.  To us, our meeting is a matter of  fate.   My  partner
             and I care so much for each other and the arrangement works so
             well for all four of us that we have continued in this way for
             three years now.


         9.   My partner has suffered a lot in the past, so  I  am  thankful
             that I can step in and help her now.  I won't forget  the  day
             she told me that I was the only man she needed  and  that  she
             would never look for another if  I  were  to  be  removed.   I
             remember when I was arrested she cried for days few  days  and
             became ill.  In just the few months that we were separated, we
             both looked visibly weak and she had grey hairs.   My  partner
             just wants a simple life with someone to take care of her  and
             support her family.  If I am returned, this will of course  be
             impossible."

41.  When cross-examined, the Appellant stated that his wife  was  in  China
    and that they had been separated for more than ten years.   When  asked
    if he had sought to divorce his wife he answered:

         "Yes.  If I decide to stay with my current partner, then I will".



42.  The Appellant when further pressed accepted that he  had  not  in  fact
    started the divorce proceedings, but that he had:

         "tried to contact somebody because I don't  know  how  to  proceed.
         Another thing is she is over there and I am here and so I  need  to
         get some advice regarding the issue".

43.  The Appellant continued that he had been  with  his  partner  for  more
    than three years "since 2010".  When asked if during that period he had
    made any attempt to get advice as to how to proceed to divorce his wife
    in China, the Appellant initially replied that he had.  When asked what
    steps he had actually taken he responded:

         "I jut have this kind of thought, because my girlfriend  is  doing
        this process and I have to wait until  she  finishes  this  process
        then I will know how to proceed".

44.  The Appellant continued that Ms Gan had "just started  the  process,  a
    while ago.  Not a very long time ago - just by the time  I  started  my
    case".  It was the  Appellant's  understanding  that  his  partner  had
    started the divorce "process" around April or May of this year, but  he
    was not quite sure about that - "she is the person who  is  doing  this
    process I didn't ask too much".  The Appellant continued  that  he  had
    "just heard my partner mentioning that she is looking for  a  solicitor
    to do the divorce".

45.  The Appellant claimed  that  his  daughter  in  China  lived  with  his
    mother.  He spoke to her rarely and when he telephoned to speak to  his
    mother.

46.  When asked if he had enquired of his daughter  in  the  course  of  any
    telephone conversation with her, if she was in contact with her  mother
    and as to her mother's current  whereabouts,  the  Appellant  responded
    that when he left China his daughter was 2 years old.

47.    He described her feelings towards him  as  "quite  strange".   If  he
    spoke to his daughter he would just ask about her studies and her  life
    but  did  not  wish  to  mention  anything  about  her  mother  or  the
    relationship between her mother and himself because  he  did  not  wish
    such matters to affect her studies. His daughter was born in  2000  and
    would now be 13 years old.  The Appellant did not know why his daughter
    was living with his mother rather than his wife and he speculated  that
    it might be because his wife "goes to  other  cities".   The  Appellant
    telephoned to speak to his mother "every few weeks or once a month" and
    he would speak to his daughter on such occasions  "maybe  about  a  few
    times a year.  She really talks to me.  Even when I make a  phone  call
    home and ask for her she doesn't want to talk to me".

48.    The Appellant had asked his mother if she  knew  anything  about  the
    whereabouts of his wife but "she just only knows that she goes to other
    cities.  He did however confirm when asked, that he understood his wife
    did visit their daughter at his mother's home.  He had  not  asked  his
    mother to make enquiries about how to go about  getting  a  divorce  in
    China.  As she did not have any schooling she would not have known  how
    to go about it.
  49.  When it was put to the Appellant, that he  could  have  suggested  to
    his mother that she ask other people, he confirmed that he did not  ask
    her to do so but when asked if he had  made  any  direct  enquiries  in
    China as to how to go about  getting  a  divorce  from  his  wife,  the
    Appellant responded "not yet - because I still have not  been  able  to
    contact my wife".  The Appellant maintained that his daughter  did  not
    have much contact  with  her  mother,  maintaining  that  she  had  not
    received a visit from her mother "in a long period of time".

  50.  The Appellant hoped that he and  Ms  Gan  would  be  able  to  remain
    together "and build a happy family".  When asked if the couple had made
    any particular plans he responded that it was  "just  to  try  to  live
    every day happily" but they had not "thought about  this  part  of  the
    issue".  When it was put to  the  Appellant  that  at  page  5  of  his
    statement of 6 June, he had maintained that the couple had  made  plans
    for their future, the Appellant responded that the couple "chat to each
    other and also mention marriage later".

51.  When asked if he had asked his  partner  to  marry  him  the  Appellant
    responded:

         "I haven't asked my girlfriend to marry me yet.  We just talk about
         it".


52.  The Appellant stated that he first  met  Ms  Gan  "about  May  or  June
    2009".  He had met Ms Gan's daughter "also 2009".  He had moved in with
    her in 2010 "close to Christmas time".

53.  The Appellant confirmed that Ms Gan had not visited him when he was  in
    detention in Scotland from August 2012 until April 2013,  although  she
    did attend the Glasgow Hearing Centre in  support  of  his  immigration
    bail application.

54.  The Appellant was aware that Ms Gan had relatives  in  China  and  that
    she had visited them this year in July 2013.  Normally she visited  her
    family in China every two years, more particularly to see her  parents.
    She always took her children.  The Appellant confirmed both he  and  Ms
    Gan were from the same province in China, namely  Fujian.   The  couple
    spoke in the Fujian dialect with each  other  and  with  Ms  Gan's  two
    children.

The Evidence of Min Qing Gan

55.  Ms Gan began her evidence by adopting  as  true  and  as  part  of  her
    evidence-in-chief her statements dated 21  March  and  12  August  2013
    respectively.

56.  In her statement of 21 March 2013 she confirmed that her date of  birth
    was 30 May 1980 and that she had resided in the  United  Kingdom  since
    August 1996.  As  with  my  consideration  of  the  statements  of  the
    Appellant, I have focused my attention on those  passages  relevant  to
    the present appeal.  That of course takes into account the findings  of
    the First-tier Judge that there were "substantial reasons to doubt  the
    strength and depth of the Appellant's relationship with  the  partner's
    daughters" that was upheld by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede in her recent
    Error of Law determination. Ms Gan  had  first  met  the  Appellant  in
    October 2008 and they had started living together "after  knowing  each
    other for a short time".  Ms  Gan  ran  a  Chinese  takeaway  with  her
    business partner, Mr Chen, with  whom  they  had  jointly  purchased  a
    property at 81 Hyde Park Road,  Plymouth  in  June  2009.   During  the
    busiest period of the takeaway in the evenings  Mr  Lin  would  "always
    come down to give a hand.  As he was living with me, I felt the  burden
    on  my  shoulders  becoming  less  and  less.   Unfortunately  all  the
    wonderful prospects of my future life broke up when Mr Lin was arrested
    by the Immigration Officer on 23 August 2012".

57.  Ms Gan's statement, made at a  time  when  the  Appellant  remained  in
    detention in Scotland, continued:

         "Life was extremely difficult as I am the sole  financial  provider
         for my family.  I have to run a business, manage the staff at  said
         business and keep tabs on all financial matters of my domestic life
         as well as the business side of things.  In addition to this I also
         had to look after my children during this difficult time without my
         boyfriend, Mr Lin.  I have no other trusted people in this  country
         who are able to help me out.  As a result I am unable to help  them
         with their homework or take them to their frequent gatherings  with
         their school friends making them  feel  very  isolated  from  their
         school community...  I find myself crying every  night  because  of
         the situation we are in and becoming  increasingly  depressed  with
         each passing day."

58.  Notably, later in her statement, Ms Gan had this to say:

         "If I want to keep our relationship I have to go back with  him  to
         China.  However I am unable to do so as I  have  two  children  who
         were born in the UK and have been living  in  the  UK  as  well  as
         receiving education in the UK.  Both of them are over 14 years  old
         and are only able to speak English.  They have become accustomed to
         life here and that is all they have known and to  uproot  them  and
         move to a country completely foreign to them would be too much of a
         shock to their system" [emphasis added].


59.  In her subsequent statement of 12 August 2013,  Ms  Gan  described  the
    circumstances of her marriage in 1997 which resulted in  the  birth  of
    her two daughters and the events that  led  to  the  break-up  of  that
    marriage.  She stated that her husband was eventually deported back  to
    China.

 60.  When Ms Gan first met the Appellant, she  had  never  entertained  the
    idea of the relationship being more than one of friendship but  "slowly
    things began to become better when he was around".  She continued  that
    "bit by bit he integrated into our lives and slotted himself  into  our
    family unit comfortably".

61.    Ms Gan had "tried many times to  divorce  (her  husband)  and  sought
    advice regarding it but never could because I am not  able  to  provide
    his contract address.  I have no contact since  he  was  sent  back  to
    China".

62.    Her statement concluded that after everything that  had  happened  to
    her family, the Appellant had "been one of the best things.  When he is
    gone, it is like a part of our family unit is missing and  when  he  is
    here; it honestly feels like a complete jigsaw puzzle".

63.  When cross-examined, Ms Gan was closely  questioned  about  what  steps
    she had taken in terms of divorcing her estranged husband,  going  into
    some considerable detail as to the steps that she had recently taken to
    employ a solicitor to provide insofar as she was able, the  information
    sought for the purposes of  instituting  divorce  proceedings  in  this
    country on the basis of five  years'  continuous  separation,  She  had
    forwarded to the solicitor, the court  fee  of  �410.    She  had  been
    unable to fully complete the necessary form in support of the  petition
    and was waiting to hear from her solicitor for that purpose.

64.  I  was  also  handed  by  Ms  Parry,  correspondence  relating  to  and
    supporting Ms Gan's evidence as to the steps that she had tried to take
    in July 2007 to commence proceedings against her husband and I am  able
    to say now, as indeed I made clear in the course of the hearing, that I
    was satisfied that her evidence with regard to the steps that  she  had
    taken to divorce her estranged husband, was credible.

65.  A notable aspect of her evidence in this regard was  supported  by  the
    2007 correspondence that showed that she had been trying to divorce her
    husband since 2007 and that then, as now, and as she confirmed  to  me,
    her reasons for  so  doing  had  nothing  to  do  with  her  subsequent
    relationship with the  Appellant.   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt  she
    confirmed that whether she had formed a relationship with the Appellant
    or not, she would still have been seeking to pursue her divorce.

66.  When asked as to her reasons for failing to visit the Appellant  whilst
    he was in detention from Scotland between August 2012 and  April  2013,
    Ms Gan maintained that she "couldn't take the long haul coach or  train
    and my back was aching.  Every time when I come back from long distance
    travel I feel sick".  Ms Gan maintained that she had  medical  evidence
    to support this claim but she had not brought it  with  her.   She  did
    however point out that she attended the Appellant's bail hearing.

67.  Ms Gan had telephoned her mother in China the previous week.   She  had
    flown out at the end of July 2013 and stayed in China until 22  August,
    about four to five weeks.  She had taken the children with her.

68.  She had previously gone with her children to visit family in  China  in
    2011 for a period of three weeks, more specifically to see her  parents
    and younger sister in Fujian province.

 69.    She said that as the Appellant spoke  little  English  and  as  they
    both came from Fujian province they spoke to each  other  in  the  same
    dialect.  It was more convenient for them to speak in that dialect  and
    indeed between themselves and the children who also spoke the  language
    fluently.

70.  It was put to her, that in her statement of  31  March  2013,  she  had
    unequivocally stated that the children  only  spoke  English.   Ms  Gan
    responded that she assumed "there was a problem with the translation as
    my English is not fluent".

71.  She had taken her children with her to China  about  four  times  since
    they were born always for periods of about three  weeks  but  the  last
    visit in July was the longest.

72.  When not visiting China she  spoke  to  her  mother  on  the  telephone
    "always at weekends".

73.  Ms Gan agreed that the children had  a  strong  connection  with  China
    because of their visits; the  relationship  with  Ms  Gan's  family  in
    China; their cultural experience and; the  fact  that  they  spoke  the
    language.  They had  formed  a  very  strong  relationship  with  their
    grandparents since they were small.  Mr Gan explained "it  was  a  very
    difficult time, my parents  supported  me  during  the  period  so  the
    children have grown close to their grandparents".

74.   When asked as to why she had come to the United Kingdom in  1996,  her
    response was somewhat vague.  She initially stated  it  was  "for  some
    reason...".  When asked as  to  the  nature  of  that  reason,  Ms  Gan
    responded "I used to take part in some activities in China and  at  the
    time the environment was not very open-minded.  These  activities  were
    not all welcome". When further questioned as to the reason why she left
    China Ms Gan stated it was due to "religion".

75.  Ms Gan stated that she had applied for and  been  granted  asylum.   Ms
    Parry informed me that unfortunately documentation had not been brought
    to the hearing to establish Ms Gan's status, but it was  clear  on  the
    evidence that she was now a British citizen.

76.  When asked if she had  made  any  plans  to  marry  the  Appellant  she
    replied that there were such  plans  but  that  she  was  awaiting  her
    divorce.

77.  When asked if the Appellant had asked her  to  marry  him  she  replied
    "Yes.  He told me so when we got together initially but at the  time  I
    hadn't divorced".  When further asked,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,
    whether the Appellant had actually  asked  Ms  Gan  to  marry  him  she
    responded "Yes.  We got together  in  2010,  maybe  in  2011,  I  can't
    remember".

78.  When asked whether the Appellant was getting a divorce  from  his  wife
    Ms Gan responded "I am not sure about this one because I  haven't  seen
    the divorce certificate".

79.  When asked if this meant that she did not know if Mr  Lin  was  married
    or divorced Ms Gan responded, "I know he married in China but  I  don't
    know if they divorced after he came to the UK.  I didn't  ask  him.   I
    just know they married in China but he has been  here  for  ten  years.
    They are not together but I am not sure if they have separated by  law.
    I know that they have been separated for a long time but I  don't  know
    if they have divorced or not".

80.  When asked if she saw her estranged husband  on  her  visits  with  her
    children to China, Ms Gan recalled that "their father returned to China
    in 2008.  I believe they saw their father  after  that.   I  remembered
    they saw each other once after their father returned to China and  then
    we lost contact.  Their father returned to China for reasons of the law
    in the UK.  They are not allowed to have any contact".

81.  When further asked if Ms Gan's children had seen their father in  China
    since his return, she stated that she believed they had met once "in  a
    city close to my home".  I can't remember whether it was 2008 or  which
    year or Christmas time, I can't remember".  She  believed  the  meeting
    was arranged by her parents or her younger sister.

82.  When asked as to who  might  have  arranged  the  meeting  between  her
    children and her estranged husband, Ms Gan responded:

         "The education I received in China was traditional and  the  people
         are not very open-minded - they consider if it is not  the  end  of
         the marriage the couple should not separate.  My parents don't know
         the reasons what happened in the UK.  They thought we just had some
         arguments.  The meeting was arranged by my parents."

     Ms Gan continued that she did not believe that her parents  were  still
    in touch with her estranged husband.

83.  Ms Gan was referred to paragraph 29 of the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge; Ms Parry having confirmed to me that  she  had  no
    objection to my referring to any  passages  within  that  determination
    that had no bearing on the matters referred to  therein  that  had  led
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede to identify errors of law.   In  particular
    she had  no  objection  to  the  reference  to  paragraph  29  of  that
    determination.  The relevant passage from that paragraph  to  which  Ms
    Gan was referred, began with the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that
    there were "substantial reasons to doubt the strength and depth of  the
    Appellant's relationship with the partner's  daughters".   Within  that
    paragraph the following was stated:

         "The partner stated that her husband left to go to  China  in  2008
         and that was the last that she saw of  him.   Lolynda  Chen  stated
         that she saw her father two years ago".

84.  It was put to Ms Gan that it followed (given that  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  took  place  in  June  2013)  that  the
    children must have met with their father in China in 2011.  It  was  in
    turn contrary to Ms Gan's claim, that they  had  only  met  with  their
    father in or around 2008.  Ms Gan replied that "If it happened it would
    have been arranged by my parents".

85.  Ms Gan recalled that when they met with her husband in or around  2008,
    she accompanied them "for the safety of the children".   She  continued
    if they had subsequently met with their father  on  other  visits,  she
    assumed it would have been arranged by her parents and/or  her  younger
    sister and that they had not told her the children had met  again  with
    their father.  She maintained  that  she  would  find  this  surprising
    because the children "actually hate him".

86.  Ms Gan repeated that she would not  be  marrying  the  Appellant  until
    "after the divorce".  She continued:

         "I run a takeaway restaurant with my business partner.  I  plan  to
         end that business relationship and plan to take on  Mr  Lin  as  my
         business partner in that restaurant.


         For the time being I have to do things step-by-step.  If there  are
         too many plans then I won't be able to cope with it."


87.  Ms Gan continued that the children met with the Appellant in 2010.   It
    was drawn to Ms Gan's attention, that at paragraph 6 of the Appellant's
    statement of 6 June 2013, he had stated:

         "We did not take the decision to  introduce  her  daughters  to  me
         lightly and only did so after two  years  when  we  knew  that  our
         relationship was a permanent one and one that we knew we  would  be
         in for the long run."

88.  It was put to Ms Gan, that given that she claimed that the  couple  had
    met in May 2009 and had lived together in 2010 that amounted to  a  lot
    less than two years.  Ms Gan maintained that  the  Appellant  "probably
    remembered wrong".  She continued, "I can confirm that I  knew  him  in
    2009 at that time I bought the restaurant on  the  ground  floor.   The
    first floor was for my business partner and the top floor was mine."

89.  When asked if there was any reason why Ms  Gan  and  her  two  children
    could not return to China with the Appellant, she replied,

         "They were born here and are educated here.  They enjoy  a  British
         lifestyle, although they have a Chinese lifestyle  as  well.   Half
         and half.  When we visit China, my  daughters  and  I  stay  in  my
         parents' home.  My younger sister got married and  is  living  with
         her husband about half an hour away."

90.  When asked as to what  Ms  Gan's  children  would  do  if  Mr  Lin  was
    returned to China she responded:

         "They will be hurt one more time.  We make a lot of effort and time
         to build up a happy family.  If in the end we have to be  separated
         then we will feel sorry about that.  We are simple and kind people.
          We just long for simple happiness and an intact family."

91.  When asked did this mean, regrettable though it might be, that  if  the
    Appellant was returned to China, Ms Gan's choice would be to remain  in
    the United Kingdom with her children she replied:

         "Maybe.  For this relationship I would keep the contact.  It  would
         be hard for me but I would keep the contact.  I am not sure."

92.  When asked if this meant that Ms Gan was not  entirely  sure  that  she
    would join the applicant in China she responded:

         "The children are still young.  It doesn't mean  I  won't  want  to
         join him but I don't want my children to live in China."

93.  When asked as to how the Appellant's removal to China would affect  her
    business Ms Gan responded:

         "My life would be a mess.  If he is allowed to remain here we would
         have very good plans very good family.  If he is returned to  China
         then it means this family is broken.  There is no meaningful way of
         talking about future plans.  If he can stay here, he can look after
         the children and I can look after my business but if he  goes  back
         to China I am only able to do  one  thing  at  a  time."  (Emphasis
         added)

94.  Having then listened with  care  to  the  parties'  respective  closing
    submissions I reserved my determination.




Assessment
95.  The Respondent has addressed  the  Article  8  family  aspects  of  her
    position through the medium of the Immigration Rules, in particular EX1
    and the family and private  life  Rules  therein  and  under  paragraph
    276ADE-DH.

96.  Appendix FM1.0 of the October 2013 IDIs ("Partner and  ECHR  Article  8
    Guidance") is about family members after 9  July  2012.  Chapter  8  of
    Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out  the  Guidance  for
    caseworkers in their approach to decision-making under  the  Rules,  to
    which I have earlier referred.  I have paid careful  attention  to  the
    Guidance.  The Secretary of State's conclusion under EX.1, did  not  go
    so far as to consider whether there were any  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing the continuation of the relationship between  the  Appellant
    and Ms Gan outside the UK, because it was her view,  maintained  by  Mr
    Parkinson before me in his closing submissions, that  given  not  least
    the Appellant's past history in the UK, that showed that he had resided
    here unlawfully, the Respondent was entitled to regard his relationship
    with Ms Gan as not being a genuine and subsisting one in the UK.

97.  As  I  mentioned  to  the  parties  in  the  course  of  their  closing
    submissions, I was mindful in the present case, that  we  were  dealing
    with an Appellant and his partner and as to whether the  Appellant  has
    established a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  Ms  Gan.  I
    referred the parties' to the guidance in the starred Tribunal  decision
    of GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana* [2006] UKAIT 00046,   that  whilst
    in the context of a married couple and as to whether they  intended  to
    live permanently with each other,  was  of  relevance,  notwithstanding
    that the Appellant and his  partner  were  not  married.   In  GA,  the
    Tribunal made clear that such requirement went to the substance of  the
    relationship rather than the form and was looking at the future of that
    relationship from the perspective of  the  present  intentions  of  the
    parties.  I have asked myself whether on the evidence in its  totality,
    I am able to find that the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with Ms Gan.  Certainly other aspects of EX1 (b)  are  not
    in dispute.  Ms Gan is in the UK and she is a British citizen.

98.  It was submitted to me by Ms Parry, that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had in his determination made a finding as follows:

         "25. Mr Richards  conceded  that  the  Appellant  has  developed  a
             private life in the UK.  The relationship with the partner  is
             not accepted by the Respondent but appears to be genuine."

99.  Ms Parry's initial submission was that this was an unequivocal  finding
    that the Appellant and his partner were in a genuine  relationship.   I
    suggested to her, that a reading of paragraph 25 as a  whole,  rendered
    it unclear as to whether those opening sentences refer to the  view  of
    the  Presenting  Officer  before  the   First-tier   Judge   that   the
    relationship appeared to be genuine, or whether that  was  the  Judge's
    expressed view.

100. I find that this was not the expressed  and  unequivocal  view  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge because later in the same  paragraph  he  had
    this to say:

         "The Appellant was working  in  the  take  away  when  the  partner
         purchased it in 2009.  I find that the relationship remains at  the
         boyfriend-girlfriend stage although the parties do  live  together.
         They are both married to other people and have  had  children  from
         those marriages.  They do not  have  any  children  together.   The
         Appellant has a 13 year old daughter in China and confirmed in oral
         evidence that he is still in contact with her every now  and  then"
         [emphasis added].

101. Indeed at paragraph 21 of Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede's  determination,
    whilst concluding that the judge's findings at paragraph  25  were  not
    sufficient to address paragraph EX.1. (b), she observed that, whist  he
    accepted the Appellant's relationship with his partner as genuine:

         "....he went on to find that the relationship was nothing more than
         boyfriend and girlfriend, a finding reflected also at paragraph  32
         of his determination.  There was no specific finding on whether the
         Appellant's relationship  with  his  partner  was  a  "genuine  and
         subsisting" one for the purposes of EX.1. (b) and I  consider  that
         that is accordingly a matter that still needs to be addressed."


102. Mr Parkinson submitted  that  there  were  significant  inconsistencies
    between the evidence of the Appellant and Ms Gan.  Ms  Parry  submitted
    upon  a  consideration  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole  including  the
    statements of the Appellant and Ms Gan, that  it  was  open  to  me  to
    conclude that such inconsistencies were "minor and peripheral in  terms
    of whether they are in a genuine and subsisting relationship".  It  was
    notable that Ms Parry did not seek  to  challenge  the  inconsistencies
    identified.  They included in no particular order, the Appellant's oral
    evidence when asked whether he had sought to divorce his wife responded
    "yes if I decide  to  stay  with  my  current  partner  then  I  will".
    (Emphasis added).

103.  Bearing  in  mind  that  one  is  looking  at  the  substance  of  the
    relationship rather than the form and the future of  that  relationship
    from the perspective of the present intentions of the parties,  such  a
    response is not I find, consistent with that of a couple in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship.

104.  Further, the Appellant has not as yet sought to divorce  his  wife  in
    China and as he made in clear in evidence before me, he would  only  do
    so, if he decided to stay with Ms Gan.

105. When pressed further in  cross-examination,  he  claimed  that  he  had
    "tried to contact  somebody  because  I  don't  know  how  to  proceed.
    Another thing is she is over there and I am here and so I need  to  get
    some advice regarding this issue". He never specified in evidence as to
    whom he had tried to contact in order  to  get  advice  as  to  how  to
    divorce his wife in China and despite his expression of a need  to  get
    such advice "regarding the issue" his oral evidence did not demonstrate
    that he had in fact made any serious if any attempt to do so.

106. Indeed later in his evidence, he confirmed  he  was  in  regular  touch
    with his mother on  the  telephone  in  China  and  on  such  occasions
    occasionally spoke with his daughter when she was inclined and  willing
    to speak to him.  He claimed that he had not asked his mother  to  make
    enquiries about how to go about divorcing his wife in China because she
    was not educated and not sophisticated in such matters.  He did however
    confirm that his wife, his daughter's mother had attended his  mother's
    home on occasions to visit her daughter and one would have thought that
    if he had any  serious  intention  to  divorce  his  wife  despite  his
    mother's shortcomings, it would not have been beyond his wit to ask his
    mother to ensure that the next time  his  ex-wife  visited,  he  should
    endeavour to ascertain his wife's whereabouts for the purposes of  such
    proceedings and also get some indication as to her intentions  in  that
    regard.  I find that he did not do so, because he has had no  past  and
    no present intention to institute such proceedings.

 107.  The Appellant gave a further explanation for the  delay,  maintaining
    that he first needed to await the  finalisation  of  Ms  Gan's  divorce
    proceedings before he commenced his own.  I struggle even to the  lower
    standard of proof let alone that of  a  balance  of  probabilities,  to
    regard as acceptable or plausible,  that  if  the  Appellant  genuinely
    sought to divorce his wife, he would not choose to await the outcome of
    his partner's divorce proceedings.  He told me in evidence that he  was
    now aware that she had commenced such proceedings but yet this had  not
    triggered any present intention on his part to do  likewise.   I  would
    thus agree with Mr Parkinson  who  submitted  there  was  clearly  some
    "reticence  on  (the  Appellant's)  part  as  to  the  future  of   the
    relationship".

108. It was also apparent that the  Appellant  was  somewhat  vague  in  his
    understanding as to the progress of the steps that Ms Gan had taken  to
    divorce her husband even though on Ms Gan's evidence, evidence  that  I
    accept, she had restored that process as  recently  as  November  2013.
    The Appellant stated he was aware that Ms Gan  had  "just  started  the
    process" but knew nothing more.  When asked when she had  "started  the
    process" he responded "a while ago".  It was his understanding that  it
    was "not a very long time ago - just by the time I  started  my  case".
    He thought it was "around April or May this year" although he was  "not
    quite sure about that - she is the person who was doing  this  process.
    I didn't ask too much".

109.  I would have thought that if the Appellant had serious  intentions  to
    give permanence to his relationship with Ms Gan, not only would he have
    long before, taken active steps to make every  effort  to  divorce  his
    wife in China and in similar  vein,  he  would  have  been  anxious  to
    ascertain the progress that his  partner  was  making  in  her  divorce
    proceedings.  The fact that he was vague about these  matters  and  did
    not do so was, I find, because  it  was  not  a  matter  of  particular
    importance to him.

110. In oral evidence the  Appellant  was  asked  whether  he  had  directly
    proposed marriage to Ms  Gan  and  whether  the  couple  had  made  any
    particular plans in that regard.  The Appellant responded  that  whilst
    the couple tried to live every day happily they had not "thought  about
    this part of the issue".  It was drawn  to  the  Appellant's  attention
    that this contrasted with his witness statement of June that the couple
    had made plans for their future.  The Appellant sought to explain  that
    whilst the couple chatted to each other they "also  mentioned  marriage
    later". The Appellant was clear that "I haven't asked my girlfriend  to
    marry me yet.  We just talk about it".

111.   Such a claim is not consistent with  Ms  Gan's  evidence  before  me.
    She said, when asked if they had made any plans to  get  married,  that
    they had made such plans but that she had not yet  divorced.   She  was
    then asked quite clearly "Has he asked you to marry him?" to  which  Ms
    Gan unequivocally replied "Yes".  When asked when the Appellant did so,
    she claimed that he had told her "when we got together  initially,  but
    at the time I hadn't divorced". Ms Gan was asked again "Has he actually
    asked you to marry him?"  She again replied "Yes".  When asked when the
    Appellant had done so, she stated "We got together in 2010 -  maybe  in
    2011 - I can't remember".

112. One would have thought the question as to when a marriage proposal  was
    put would not result in such a vague recollection.   One  would  surely
    remember whether it was in one year  or  another.   Ms  Gan  could  not
    remember whether it was when the couple got together in 2010 or whether
    it perhaps was in 2011.

113. The vagueness as to when according to Ms Gan,  the  Appellant  proposed
    marriage to her is not limited to simply that issue.  Ms Parry  rightly
    invited me as of course I have done,  to  carefully  consider  all  the
    evidence including not just the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner but their respective witness statements.  In that regard I have
    noted that in Ms Gan's witness statement of 21 March  2013  she  stated
    that she first met the Appellant in October 2011 and that  "we  started
    living together after knowing each other for some time".

114. The First-tier Judge in his determination recorded  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant was working in Ms Gan's takeaway when it was purchased in
    2009.  Further at paragraph 29 of the  determination  it  was  recorded
    that the Appellant and Ms Gan both stated that the Appellant  moved  in
    with the family  in  the  winter  of  2010,  although  that  in  itself
    contrasts with the evidence of one of Ms Gan's daughters,  Helen  Chen,
    who stated in her letter before the judge that she knew  the  Appellant
    as a friend of her mother until "only just last year when he  became  a
    member of my family and now lives with us".  That would have placed the
    Appellant having moved in with Ms Gan sometime in  2012.   Ms  Gan  had
    stated in oral evidence that the couple had got together in 2010.   The
    Appellant in his evidence stated that he had met Ms Gan "about  May  or
    June 2009" whereas at paragraph 5 of his statement of June 2013 he  had
    stated that they had met in October 2008.

115. The uncertainty  of  both  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  in  their
    recollection as to when they first met deepens, when despite  the  fact
    that in both the Appellant's  and  Ms  Gan's  first  statement  it  was
    claimed that the couple met in October 2008, in  oral  evidence  before
    me, Ms Gan said "I met Mr Lin in 2009".

116. So here we have a couple who are unclear between them, as to when  they
    first met and more particularly whether  it  was  in  October  2008  or
    sometime in 2009, perhaps May or June; although the Appellant is  clear
    that despite their years together he has not as yet  directly  proposed
    marriage of Mr Gan whilst in contrast, her recollection is clearly that
    he had.

117. The matter does not end there.  Whilst it was the Appellant's  evidence
    that he was still married to his wife in China and had yet to start any
    divorce proceedings, it was Ms Gan's evidence that  she  did  not  know
    whether the Appellant was married or divorced. One would  have  thought
    that if Ms Gan was as claimed,  in  a  serious  relationship  with  the
    Appellant that was intended to eventually lead to marriage, that at the
    very least, she would be interested and indeed anxious to establish her
    partner's current marital status. She told me that she  had  not  asked
    the Appellant.  She knew that he was married in China but given that he
    had been in the UK for ten years, and no longer living with  his  wife,
    she was not sure  if  the  couple  "had  separated  by  law".   Ms  Gan
    continued, "I know that they have been separated for a long time but  I
    don't know if they have divorced or not?"

 118.   It thus follows that not only was the Appellant  somewhat  vague  as
    to what stage had been reached in Ms Gan's divorce proceedings, but his
    partner Ms Gan, despite their claim to be in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, had no idea as to whether the Appellant  was  married  or
    divorced.  Such is simply not conduct consistent with the behaviour  of
    a couple who in terms of the guidance in Gen1.2 are in  a  relationship
    akin to marriage for at least two years.

119.  My findings in this regard has been further  reinforced  by  Ms  Gan's
    evidence in terms of the explanation that she offered, for  failing  to
    visit the appellant throughout the period of his detention in  Scotland
    over a period of some nine months between August 2012 and  April  2013.
    She said that she had not done so because she "couldn't take  the  long
    haul coach or train" because of back pain. She continued: "Every time I
    come back from long distance travel I feel sick". She did  not  produce
    medical evidence in support of the claim although she informed me  that
    she had such medical evidence. I note however, that  such  difficulties
    did not prevent her from  attending  the  appellant's  subsequent  bail
    hearing. More particularly, it does not appear to  have  prevented  her
    from visiting her family in China in 2011 and as recently as July 2013.
    Indeed no significant evidence, if any of contact at  all  between  the
    couple during that period has been advanced by either of them. Further,
    there was no evidence before  me  that  Ms  Gan,  who  has  a  business
    partner, would have been unable to  maintain  the  restaurant  and  her
    family life with their children, by arranging several if not  at  least
    one visit to see her partner throughout that 9 month  period,  but  she
    chose not to do so.

120. It cannot be said as submitted by Ms Parry,  that  the  inconsistencies
    that I have above  identified,  viewed  upon  a  consideration  of  the
    evidence in its totality, can but only be  regarded  as  peripheral  in
    terms  of  whether  this  couple  are  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship.

121.   In that regard I am mindful of Ms Parry's submission that one had  to
    bear in mind, that the Appellant is an illegal entrant who claims to be
    unaware as to the present whereabouts of his wife in China.  She refers
    to "obvious logistical difficulties"  in  the  Appellant's  ability  to
    start divorce proceedings against her.  I find on the evidence this  is
    not a case of an Appellant who has tried to start  divorce  proceedings
    against his wife but has been unable to do so due to  such  "logistical
    difficulties".  I find that he has not made the slightest attempt to do
    so, because he has no present intention to divorce his wife.   Indeed I
    find that he has no present intention to  marry  Ms  Gan  even  if  her
    present divorce proceedings prove to be successful.

122. Whilst it is right to say that they both expressed the wish to  live  a
    happy life together,  it was however notable that when Ms Gan was  told
    of the Appellant's evidence that he had made plans for their  future  ,
    she responded as follows:

         "Right now I apply for a divorce.  We will get  married  after  the
         divorce.


         I run a takeaway restaurant with my business partner.   I  plan  to
         end that business relationship and plan to take on  Mr  Lin  as  my
         business partner in that restaurant."


123. When asked if she had made any other plans she responded:

         "For the time being I have to do things step-by-step.  If there are
         too many plans then I won't be able to cope with it."

124. That evidence of course, is in contrast to what she had  earlier  said,
    as to her plans for the couple to get  married  after  she  obtained  a
    divorce.  Apparently it had not occurred to her that even after she had
    obtained a divorce, the couple would not be able to get married  unless
    or until the  Appellant  was  divorced  and  surprisingly  for  someone
    claiming to be in a serious relationship with a view to  marriage,  she
    was wholly unaware as to the Appellant's current marital status.

125. Ms Gan was asked whether, if the Appellant was returned  to  China  she
    would join him there with her children.  In fairness to her,  Ms  Gan's
    response was that her children would be hurt by the Appellant's removal
    because of the effort that had been made to build up a happy family and
    quite understandably, and very  properly,  she  pointed  out  that  her
    children were British citizens, born and educated here  who  enjoyed  a
    British way of life, although  she  acknowledged  they  had  a  Chinese
    lifestyle and so "half and half" and spoke the Fujian dialect, it would
    not be right to remove them from  the  benefits  they  enjoyed  in  the
    United Kingdom.

126. Ms Gan was however also asked how she would feel  about  the  Appellant
    being removed to China.  She responded that she would keep  in  contact
    with the Appellant, that it would be hard for her "but I will keep  the
    contact.  I am not sure".  When asked if that meant that Ms Gan was not
    entirely sure whether she  would  join  the  Appellant  in  China,  she
    responded that would not be the case whilst  her  children  were  still
    young but it did not mean that she would not want  to  join  him  at  a
    later stage although "I don't want my children to live in  China".   Ms
    Gan also notably stated as follows:

         "My life would be a mess.  If he is  allowed  to  remain  here,  we
         would have very good plans very good family.  If he is returned  to
         China then it means this family is broken.  There is no  meaningful
         way of talking about future plans.  If he can stay here,  he  could
         look after the children and I can look after my business but if  he
         goes back to China I can only do one thing  at  a  time"  [emphasis
         added].


    127.  Those remarks are indeed consistent with what Ms Gan had  to  say
    in her statement of 21 March 2013 at a  time  when  the  Appellant  was
    detained in Scotland.  She said that her day-to-day life was  extremely
    difficult because she was the sole financial  provider  for  a  family.
    She continued:


         "I have to run a business, manage the staff at  said  business  and
         keep tabs on all financial matters of my domestic life as  well  as
         the business side of things.  In addition to this I have  also  had
         to look after my children during this  difficult  time  without  my
         boyfriend. Mr Lin.  I have no other trusted people in this  country
         who are able to help me out."


128. A consideration of the couples' evidence in the round  and  bearing  in
    mind not least, those aspects of their evidence  as  above  identified,
    has caused me to question, the true nature of  their  relationship.   I
    have reached the conclusion that in common with the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge who described the couple's relationship as one that remained  "at
    the boyfriend-girlfriend stage although the parties do  live  together"
    that their relationship is one of mutual convenience, rather  than  one
    akin to marriage.

129. I find, looking at the future of this couple's  relationship  from  the
    perspective of their present intentions, that it cannot be described as
    a relationship that is both genuine and subsisting.  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has not at the time of the hearing the slightest intention of
    seeking a divorce from his wife nor has he made any attempt to do so in
    the past.

130.   I find that Ms Gan had formed the intention to  divorce  her  husband
    following a very unhappy marriage, before she met the Appellant and  as
    she confirmed to me in evidence,  her  intention  to  divorce  him  had
    nothing to do with her subsequent relationship with the Appellant.  She
    would be seeking to divorce  her  husband  whether  she  was  with  the
    Appellant or not.

131.  I find it telling that on the Appellant's part, he was  clear  at  the
    outset of his oral evidence before me, that he would  seek  to  divorce
    his wife if he decided "to stay with my current partner, then I  will".



132. In consequence, I find that the Appellant has failed to  discharge  the
    burden upon him to show whether to the lower standard of proof relevant
    to asylum appeals or to that of a balance of probabilities in terms  of
    immigration appeals, to show that he enjoys a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with Ms Gan.

133. For the avoidance of doubt, even if on the evidence I had concluded  to
    the contrary, I would still have had to satisfy myself that there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  Ms  Gan  continuing
    outside the UK.

134. As I have mentioned earlier "insurmountable obstacles" are  dealt  with
    in paragraph 3.2.7(c) of the Guidance.  That states that the  decision-
    maker should consider the seriousness  of  the  difficulties  that  the
    applicant and their partner would face  continuing  their  family  life
    outside the United Kingdom whether they entail something that could not
    (or could not be expected  to)  be  overcome  even  with  a  degree  of
    hardship for one or more of the individuals concerned.  It is  said  to
    be a different and  more  stringent  test  than  whether  it  would  be
    "reasonable to expect" the applicant's partner to join him overseas but
    it is stated that "a significant degree of  hardship  or  inconvenience
    does not amount to an insurmountable obstacle".  One  has  to  look  at
    whether there is an inability to live in the country concerned and  the
    focus should also be on the family life which would be enjoyed  in  the
    country to which the applicant would be returned and not  a  comparison
    of the life they would enjoy were they to remain in the United Kingdom.
     As for cultural barriers the Guidance states  it  must  be  a  barrier
    which either cannot be overcome or would present a very high degree  of
    hardship to the partner such that  it  amounted  to  an  insurmountable
    obstacle.

135.    I have reminded myself that in  Sanade  &  Others  [2012]  UKUT  468
    (IAC) it was held it was not reasonable to expect a spouse to leave the
    EU or require a mother to leave her British minor children.   The  UKBA
    continue to accept that EU law prevents the state requiring an  EU  law
    citizen from leaving the United Kingdom  although  contends  with  good
    reason, this is to be distinguished from a case  where  an  independent
    adult can choose between continued residence in the United  Kingdom  or
    continued cohabitation abroad.

136. It follows that in terms of the present case, there is  no  basis  upon
    which Ms Gan and her children can be  compelled  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom to join the Appellant in China.   Whilst  one  understands  and
    accepts Mr Gan's reasons for so stating, not least because her priority
    is that of the best interests of her  children  and  their  educational
    needs amongst other things, that of course is a matter of choice on her
    part.  Indeed in common with the Appellant, she  is  also  from  Fujian
    province and on her evidence her children are immersed "half and  half"
    between British and Chinese culture, and at home,  the  couple  and  Ms
    Gan's children converse with each other in a Fujian dialect  that  they
    all understand. Further, both the Appellant and Ms Gan have  family  in
    Fujian province.  Ms Gan visited her parents and her younger sister  in
    Fujian province in 2011 and as recently as last July  when  she  stayed
    for four to five weeks together with the  children  who  enjoy  a  very
    close relationship with their maternal grandparents.   The  Appellant's
    mother continues to live in Fujian province, indeed his  daughter  also
    lives with her.

137.  It cannot therefore be said, that returning to China as a family  unit
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for them  individually
    and as a family.  As the Guidance states it would only be in very  rare
    circumstances that the removal of the Appellant in  such  circumstances
    would not be proportionate and I do not find such circumstances  to  be
    present in this case.

138.  As  I  earlier  pointed  out,  paragraph  3.2.8  continues   that   in
    determining whether there are exceptional circumstances  the  decision-
    maker must consider all relevant  factors.   These  would  include  the
    circumstances around the applicant's entry to the UK and the proportion
    of the time he had spent in the UK legally  as  opposed  to  illegally.
    Further, as to whether the relationship was formed with the applicant's
    partner was at a time when the applicant had no immigration  status  or
    this was precarious.  The Guidance continues:

         "Family life, which involves the applicant putting  down  roots  in
         the UK in the full knowledge that their stay here  is  unlawful  or
         precarious should be given less weight when balancing  against  the
         factors weighing in favour of removal than family life formed by  a
         person lawfully present in the UK."

139. Applying that Guidance to the present case, it is not in  dispute  that
    whilst the Appellant claimed to have arrived in the UK on 9  June  2002
    he did not apply for asylum until 25 October 2007. He  then  failed  to
    turn up to his asylum interview on 9 April 2008 as a  result  of  which
    his claim was withdrawn.  He was treated as an absconder.  As  recorded
    by Judge Kebede at paragraph 3 of her determination:

         "On 25 August 2012 he was encountered working in a Chinese takeaway
         [that no doubt being the takeaway of Ms Gan] and  was  arrested  on
         suspicion of illegal entry and detained.  Following  his  acquittal
         on  23  January  2013  on  charges  of  attempted  murder,  removal
         directions were made for his removal on  9  February  2013  but  he
         claimed asylum on 3 February 2013.  His claim  was  refused  on  25
         April 2013 and a decision was made on 29 April 2013 to  remove  him
         from the UK."

140. It is thus clearly the case that the Appellant's entry to  the  UK  and
    the proportion of time  he  has  spent  here  has  been  largely  spent
    illegally.  Further his relationship with Ms Gan if I were to accept it
    (which I do not) as being genuine and subsisting would have been formed
    when he had no  immigration  status  that  indeed  could  but  only  be
    regarded as precarious.

141. I have reminded myself of the conclusion of Sales J in Nagre,  that  in
    a precarious family life case only in exceptional  circumstances  would
    removal of a non-national  family  member  constitute  a  violation  of
    Article 8.  To show that  removal  was  disproportionate  it  would  be
    necessary to show other non-standard and  particular  features  of  the
    case of  a  compelling  nature  demonstrating  that  removal  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh.  Further in the majority of such cases  where  the
    Secretary of State concluded that the family member applying for  leave
    to  remain  could  not  satisfy  the   test   in   Section   EX.1   (b)
    (insurmountable obstacles) of the new Rules, it was unlikely that there
    would be a good arguable case, let alone a case ultimately found to  be
    established, that Article 8 would require that leave to  remain  should
    be granted outside of the Immigration Rules.  I further  remind  myself
    that Sales J also held that Section EX.1 was not unlawful.

142. For the reasons I have set out above, I find  that  the  Appellant  has
    not established any particular features of his  case  of  a  compelling
    nature demonstrating that his removal from the United Kingdom would  be
    unjustifiably harsh either to the Appellant or his  partner  such  that
    refusal would not be proportionate under Article 8.

143. I find for the sake  of  completeness,  that  the  seriousness  of  the
    difficulties that the Appellant and his partner and her children  would
    face in continuing their claimed family life outside the United Kingdom
    would not entail something that they could not or could not be expected
    to overcome even with a degree of hardship  for  one  or  more  of  the
    individuals concerned.

144. It is apparent to me for the reasons  that  I  have  above  identified,
    that neither the Appellant nor Ms Gan have given credible  evidence  as
    to the true nature of their relationship or as to the  true  nature  of
    their relationship in the future.

Conclusions

145. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
    error on a point of law.

146. I set aside the determination.

147. I re-make the decision in the Appellant's appeal by dismissing it.


Signed                                  Date 13 January 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

                                [pic]ANNEXE A
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04633/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 30 October 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                chun long lin
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, instructed by K & G Legal Consultants
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This matter  comes  before  me  following  a  grant  of  permission  to  the
appellant  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision to remove  him  from
the United Kingdom.

The appellant is a citizen of China born on 8 April 1975. He arrived in  the
UK on 9 June 2002. He applied for asylum on 25 October 2007  but  failed  to
turn up to his asylum interview on 9 April 2008, as a result  of  which  his
claim was withdrawn and he was treated as an absconder. On  25  August  2012
he was encountered working in  a  Chinese  take-away  and  was  arrested  on
suspicion of illegal entry and  detained.  Following  his  acquittal  on  23
January 2013 on charges of attempted murder, removal  directions  were  made
for his removal on 9 February 2013, but he  claimed  asylum  on  3  February
2013. His claim was refused on 25 April 2013 and a decision was made  on  29
April 2013 to remove him from the UK. His appeal against that  decision  was
heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Archer  on  13  June  2013  and  was
dismissed.

The Appellant's claim

The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was at  risk  of  persecution
in China as a  result  of  his  challenge  to  the  decision  of  the  local
authorities to demolish his home in order to build a road and to  offer  him
only limited compensation. He claimed to have been threatened  and  harassed
by local government officials, although he was never arrested  or  detained.
The appellant also claimed to have  formed  a  relationship  in  the  United
Kingdom with a British national of Chinese origin, whom he had met  in  2009
and with whom he had lived since 2010 together with her  two  daughters.  He
had a wife and 13 year old daughter in China whom he had last seen in  2002.


The respondent did not accept that the appellant was genuinely  in  fear  of
persecution or that the Chinese authorities would have any adverse  interest
in him and considered that he would be at no risk on return to  China.  With
regard to his Article 8 claim, it was considered that as  a  result  of  his
failure to attend his asylum interview and of the breach  of  the  terms  of
his temporary admission he had failed to comply with the requirements  under
S-LTR.1.7  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration  rules.  Furthermore,  the
respondent did  not  regard  his  relationship  with  his  partner  and  her
children as genuine and subsisting and accordingly found that he  could  not
meet the requirements of Appendix FM  EX.1.  He  did  not  fall  within  the
requirements of the immigration rules  relating  to  private  life.  It  was
accordingly not accepted that  the  appellant's  removal  would  breach  his
human rights under Article 8.

In the First-tier Tribunal, Judge  Archer  heard  from  the  appellant,  his
partner and his partner's daughter. He found that the appellant  was  at  no
risk on return to China and dismissed his appeal on  asylum  and  Article  3
human rights grounds. With regard to Article 8, he found that the  appellant
did not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration  rules,
since he did not meet the English language requirement in section  E-ECP.4.1
and had failed to attend an  interview  when  required  to  do  so  for  the
purposes of section S-LTR.1.7. He did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
rules  in  regard  to  private  life.  The  judge  found  further  that  the
appellant's claim also failed under Article 8  outside  the  rules.  He  had
doubts about the strength and depth of  the  appellant's  relationship  with
his partner's daughters and did not accept that their best  interests  would
be adversely affected by his removal from the United  Kingdom.  Although  he
accepted that the appellant had established a private life  here,  he  found
that his removal would not be  disproportionate.  Accordingly  he  dismissed
the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  the  grounds  that
the judge had erred by finding, contrary to the principles  in  Chikwamba  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40 and MA  (Pakistan)
v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  953,  removal
was proportionate on the basis that the  appellant  could  apply  for  entry
clearance; that he had erred in his assessment of where the  best  interests
of the children  lay;  and  that  he  had  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
requirements of Appendix FM to the immigration rules.

Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

Appeal hearing

At the hearing the appellant was present but was not required to  give  oral
evidence. I heard submissions in regard to the error of law.

Ms Revill submitted that the judge, in requiring the appellant  to  make  an
application for entry clearance from outside the United Kingdom,  failed  to
have regard to the principles in Chikwamba, MA (Pakistan) and Hayat  (nature
of Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 444.  She  submitted  that  the
judgment of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  did  not  detract  from  those
principles and could be distinguished since it dealt with deportation  cases
and those not involving children. With regard  to  his  findings  under  the
immigration rules, the judge was wrong to find  that  the  reference  in  S-
LTR.1.7 to a failure to attend  an  interview  applied  to  a  failure  that
occurred in a previous application. That provision  had  to  relate  to  the
current proceedings. There was nothing in the IDIs or in Hansard to  suggest
that the provision was to  be  applied  to  previous  proceedings  and  that
would, in effect, mean that the  appellant  would  be  permanently  excluded
from the United Kingdom, since it was a mandatory provision, which would  be
incompatible with Article 8. The judge also erred  in  failing  to  consider
that the English language requirement was irrelevant in cases  coming  under
EX 1. He did not consider whether the appellant could  benefit  from  EX  1,
particularly since he appeared to accept that he was in a relationship  with
a British citizen and that the relationship had lasted for over  two  years.
The appellant also had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
his partner's children and the judge failed to  explore  that  properly.  Ms
Revill  submitted  further  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give   proper
consideration to the best interests of the children.

Ms Martin submitted that the appellant's current application  was  the  same
one as that made in 2007 and accordingly  he  fell  within  S-LTR  1.7.  The
rules were clear and the judge was entitled to conclude that  he  could  not
meet the requirements therein. The judge had considered the  best  interests
of the children. He did not accept that  family  life  existed  between  the
appellant and his partner's children and so did not need to go further.  The
appellant's circumstances were distinguishable from those in  the  cases  of
Chikwamba, Hayat and MA.  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  Article  8  in
accordance with the principles in R (Razgar)  v  SSHD  (2004)  UKHL  27  and
therefore any failure to consider EX 1 was not  material  as  the  appellant
could not succeed on the basis of the findings he made in that regard.

Ms Revill, in her response, submitted that the  appellant  fell  within  the
requirements of EX. 1 as he was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
and there were insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  outside
the United Kingdom. She reiterated her earlier submissions  in  relation  to
the immigration rules and Chikwamba.

Consideration and findings.

In my view the judge made a material error of law in his assessment  of  the
appellant's claim under the immigration rules.

The relevant rules governing the requirements for limited  leave  to  remain
as a partner, in so far as they relate to the appellant, are as follows:

    Section R-LTRP: Requirements for limited leave to remain as a partner
    R-LTRP.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain as a
    partner are-

    (a) the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;
    (b) the applicant must have made a valid application for limited or
    indefinite leave to remain as a partner; and either
    (c) (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section S-LTR:
    Suitability leave to remain; and

    (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements of Section E-LTRP:

    Eligibility for leave to remain as a partner; or

    (d) (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under Section S-LTR:
    Suitability leave to remain; and

    (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.1.2-
    1.12. and E-LTRP.2.1.; and

    (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies.


    Section S-LTR: Suitability-leave to remain
    S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave to remain on
    grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2. to 1.7. apply.

    S-LTR.1.7. The applicant has failed without reasonable excuse to comply
    with a requirement to-
    (a) attend an interview;
    (b) provide information;
    (c) provide physical data; or
    (d) undergo a medical examination or provide a medical report.


At paragraph 26 of his determination, the judge found that  the  appellant's
claim fell for refusal under Appendix FM of the rules because the  appellant
did not meet the suitability requirements in  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.7,  having
failed to attend an asylum interview in 2008.  That  reflected  the  grounds
upon which the respondent refused the claim in  their  letter  of  25  April
2013. In the absence of any interpretation or clarification  in  the  rules,
the Immigration Directorate Instructions or the  Explanatory  Memorandum  to
HC 184, it is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  correct
interpretation of paragraph S-LTR.1.7 (a) has to be that  it  refers  to  an
interview relating to the current proceedings and not to an  interview  that
related to a previous claim.

That interpretation was rejected by the judge  on  the  grounds  that  there
could be a whole series of failures to attend interviews leading  to  claims
being terminated and that S-LTR.1.7 would still not be triggered so long  as
there was a single fresh application. However,  the  contrary  position,  as
put by Ms Revill, is that, owing to the mandatory  nature  of  paragraph  S-
LTR.1.7 and  its  equivalent  provision  in  relation  to  entry  clearance,
paragraph S-EC.1.6, the appellant would be put  in  the  position  of  being
excluded indefinitely from the United  Kingdom  with  no  prospect  of  ever
being able to apply to join his partner.  Such  a  position  would  be  more
severe than that imposed upon a foreign criminal deported  from  the  United
Kingdom who would be able to apply  for  entry  clearance  after  a  limited
period of ten years. That position does not appear to have  been  considered
by the  judge  and  indeed  was  inconsistent  with  his  own  findings,  at
paragraph 32 of his determination, that "there is  nothing  to  prevent  him
from making further applications to return to the United Kingdom within  the
immigration rules".

It seems to me that the sensible interpretation of paragraph  S-LTR.1.7  (a)
has to be that proposed by Ms Revill, namely that the failure to  attend  an
interview has to  be  in  relation  to  the  current  proceedings.  That  is
particularly so given that  the  suitability  requirements  in  Appendix  FM
relate to the specific circumstances of applications on the basis of  family
life. It cannot be the case, in my view, that those requirements  relate  to
a different claim, namely an asylum claim made some five years  earlier  and
subsequently  treated as withdrawn, at a time when  the  appellant  had  not
even formed the relationship with his partner.

In the circumstances, I find that the judge erred in his  interpretation  of
paragraph S-LTR.1.7 (a) and that the appellant's  claim  did  not  fall  for
mandatory refusal under that provision.

In addition, the judge  was  plainly  in  error  in  his  finding  that  the
appellant's inability to meet the English language requirement in  E-ECP.4.1
was relevant to his ability to meet the requirements under Appendix  FM.  In
making that finding the judge failed to consider the relevant  provision  at
paragraph R-LTRP.1.1 (d) in which the only requirements to be met, in  cases
in which paragraph EX.1. applies, are those  in  paragraphs  E-LTRP.1.2-1.12
and E-LTRP.2.1, which do not include the English language requirement.  That
is also made clear in the IDIs of October  2013  which  state  at  paragraph
3.2.1:

    "So, if paragraph EX.1 applies, they  are  not  required  to  meet  the
    immigration status  requirements  in  paragraphs  E-LTRP.2.1.  (c)  (on
    temporary admission or release) or E-LTRP.2.2 (overstayers) or  any  of
    the financial or English language requirements in paragraphs E-LTRP.3.1
    to 4.2."

  On the basis of his  findings  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
suitability   requirements   in   S-LTR.1.7   and   the   English   language
requirements, the judge did not go on to consider EX.1 of  Appendix  FM.  In
the light of my findings above with  respect  to  those  provisions,  it  is
plain that consideration ought to have been given to whether  the  appellant
could benefit from EX.1. It was Ms Martin's submission that  the  judge  did
in fact give consideration to the relevant requirements under  EX.1,  albeit
in the context of his findings under Article 8 outside the rules. However  I
do not consider that to be the case. Whilst I accept that  his  findings  at
paragraphs 29 to 31 can be said to address  the  requirements  of  paragraph
EX.1. (a), there are plainly no equivalent findings with  respect  to  EX.1.
(b).

Turning to the findings at paragraphs 29 to 31, it is plain that  the  judge
did not accept that the appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
relationship with his partner's children. Ms  Revill  submitted  that  those
findings were inadequate and that the judge should have explored the  matter
further. I do not agree. He gave detailed reasons for concluding as he  did,
based on the evidence before him, and was entitled  to  reach  the  decision
that he did. He did not make any errors of law in that respect  and  neither
did he err in his findings on the best interests of the children. I find  no
merit in the grounds of appeal in that regard.

However I do  not  agree  with  Ms  Revill's  submission  that  the  judge's
findings at paragraph 25 were sufficient to  address  paragraph  EX.1.  (b).
Although he accepted that the appellant's relationship with his partner  was
genuine, he went on to find that the  relationship  was  nothing  more  than
boyfriend and girlfriend, a finding reflected also at paragraph  32  of  his
determination. There was no specific  finding  on  whether  the  appellant's
relationship with his partner was a "genuine and  subsisting"  one  for  the
purposes of paragraph EX.1. (b) and I consider that that  is  accordingly  a
matter that still needs to be addressed.

With regard to the first ground of appeal, referring to  the  principles  in
the cases of Chikwamba, Hayat and MA, it seems to me that that is very  much
dependant upon the findings to be made with respect to  EX.1.  (b).  In  any
event, as  I  indicated  to  Ms  Revill,  the  merits  of  that  ground  are
substantially reduced in the light of the recent judgment of  the  Court  of
Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
EWCA Civ 1192.

For all these reasons I find that errors of law  have  been  established.  I
find that the judge's determination cannot stand  and  must  be  set  aside.
Further evidence will be considered  at  a  resumed  hearing  in  order  for
findings to be made in relation to the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
partner and for a decision to be made with respect to his  ability  to  meet
the requirements of EX.1.(b) and R-LTRP.1.1. At present, however, I  see  no
reason  why  the  judge's  findings  with   respect   to   the   appellant's
relationship with his partner's children should not be preserved.

I make the following directions for the resumed hearing.

    Directions


    No later than seven days before the  date  of  the  next  hearing,  any
    additional documentary evidence relied upon by either party  is  to  be
    filed with this Tribunal and served on the opposing party.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4) (i) of the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. However I  find
    no reason to continue that order and  accordingly  I  lift  the  order,
    pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.










                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

