
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04156/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 11th July 2013                               |On 9th September 2013      |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                 JEET SINGH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M. Bradshaw,  instructed by Warnapala & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, born on 1st January 1977, is a citizen  of  Afghanistan.
    The Appellant is accompanied by his wife, Mrs Baldeep Kaur born on  1st
    January 1981 and their twin daughters Jasveen and  Sukhveen  Kaur  both
    born on 25th August 2007 whose status is to be determined in line  with
    that of the Appellant as his dependants.





The Background to the Appeal:

 1. The family entered the United Kingdom on 18th February 2011 and applied
    for asylum on that date.

 2. On 17th March 2011 the Respondent made a decision to  refuse  to  grant
    him asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended) and on 21st March
    2011 a decision was made to remove the first Appellant  as  an  illegal
    entrant under paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule  2  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

 3. The Appellants exercised their rights to appeal that decision and in  a
    determination promulgated on 11th July  2011  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Khawar) dismissed the appeals on asylum and human rights grounds
    and further found that the Appellant was not entitled  to  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.

 4. An application was made for permission to appeal which was  refused  by
    the First- tier Tribunal (Judge Juss) by  an  order  dated  4th  August
    2011. That application was renewed before the Upper Tribunal and on 4th
    January 2013 Upper Tribunal Gleeson granted permission  to  appeal  and
    set out a number of directions with the grant of leave.  On 29th  March
    2012, Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson found that the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained a material error of law and she therefore
    set the determination aside.

 5. The decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson was as follows:-

         "Error of Law Decision

         1.   On 1st January 2012, I granted the  Appellants  permission  to
             appeal  against  the  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal
             Khawar, for the reasons set out in my decision at paragraphs 4
             and 5 thereof as follows:

                  '4.  The Appellants renewed their application to the Upper
                      Tribunal.  The proposed  Grounds  of  Appeal  on  the
                      second application were that the First-tier  Tribunal
                      Judge's determination was inadequately reasoned as to
                      risk on return  and  internal  relocation,  focussing
                      almost exclusively on credibility.

                  5.   The Grounds of Appeal  are  arguable.   The  evidence
                      before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  indicated  that
                      there was discrimination and social  marginalisation,
                      and  occasionally   violence,   against   the   small
                      remaining number of Sikhs in Afghanistan.  The First-
                      tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the  Appellant  was
                      Afghan.  He does not seem to have doubted that he was
                      also a Sikh, though the determination did not say  so
                      in terms.  A more thorough and  nuanced  analysis  of
                      risk was therefore required.'

         2.   I gave directions accompanying  my  decision,  requiring  both
             parties to put in writing any further matters  on  which  they
             wished to rely.  I said in those  directions  that  if  either
             party failed to do  so,  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  likely  to
             conclude that they had nothing, or nothing further, to add.

         3.    The  Respondent  replied,  saying  that   she   opposed   the
             Appellants' appeal and that in  summary  the  Respondent  will
             submit,  inter  alia,  that  the  Immigration  Judge  directed
             himself  appropriately.   That  does  not  indicate  that  the
             Respondent has actively engaged with the Grounds of Appeal.

         4.   The Appellants' further submissions, received with  permission
             out of time, and settled by Ms Charlotte  Bayati  of  Counsel,
             may be summarised as follows:

             (i)  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's  determination  disclosed
                  material errors of law in relation to  the  assessment  of
                  credibility and risk on return; and in particular;

             (ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no  reference  to  the
                  country  background  evidence  regarding   the   risk   in
                  Jalalabad,  the  Appellants'  home  area,   or   for   his
                  conclusion that the types of  incidents  which  occur  are
                  incapable of amounting to persecution;

             (iii)    In SL and Others (Afghanistan) CG [2005] UKIAT 00137,
                  the  most  recent  country  guidance  on  the  issue,  the
                  Immigration Appeal Tribunal had  accepted  that  Jalalabad
                  was unsafe for Sikhs and had focussed  on  the  protection
                  offered by internal relocation to Kabul;

             (iv) The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  consider
                  whether relocation to Kabul was unsafe and  unduly  harsh,
                  focussing solely on safety.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge
                  should have considered the general conditions in Kabul and
                  whether the Appellant and his family had  any  connections
                  to Kabul, to assist them in  resettling,  particularly  as
                  the Sikh community in Kabul was now very small indeed.

             (v)  There had been no consideration of the best interests  of
                  the children as required by Section  55  of  the  Borders,
                  Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

             (vi) In the light of these errors the Appellant contended that
                  the determination should be set aside and  remade  afresh.
                  Ms Bayati, Counsel who settled the submissions had done so
                  without the witness statements and the other  individual's
                  evidence which had been before the First-tier Tribunal and
                  so, in  the  event  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  wishes  to
                  preserve any factual findings, she was unable to  indicate
                  which findings ought to be preserved.

             (vii)     Ms  Bayati  reserved  the  right  to  make   further
                  submissions when she was properly instructed and  to  file
                  further personal and country background evidence which has
                  not  been  available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
                  pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the Procedure Rules 2008.

         5.   That is not a proper Rule 15(2A) notice.  However,  the  lines
             of argument being pursued have been set out on the Appellants'
             behalf.  Any further submissions will require the leave of the
             Upper Tribunal.

         6.   Having considered the arguments, and the determination itself,
             I am satisfied that it is appropriate to set the determination
             aside and for the Upper Tribunal  to  remake  it  at  an  oral
             hearing on a date to be fixed.

         Conclusions

         The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law.   I  set  aside  the
         decision.

         The Upper Tribunal to remake the decision on a date to be fixed.

         Anonymity

         The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  Rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005."

 6. Thus the matter was listed for hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

Preliminary Matters

 7. At the hearing, the Appellant was represented by Mr Bradshaw of Counsel
    and the Respondent  was  represented  by  Mr  McVeety,  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  The first substantive hearing took place  on  24th
    May 2013.  At that hearing  there  were  some  difficulties  raised  in
    respect of the interpreter and  that  an  interpreter  in  the  Punjabi
    language had been required by the Appellant's  solicitors  despite  the
    direction given by the Tribunal that a Dari interpreter was  necessary.
    There was no Punjabi interpreter available until the afternoon and thus
    the Upper Tribunal took that opportunity to view a DVD film  concerning
    the position of Sikhs in Afghanistan.  As to the findings of fact to be
    preserved from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  it  was  agreed
    between the parties that the findings of fact made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in respect of the Appellant's nationality should remain.   The
    judge made a finding of fact at paragraph 30 that the Appellant  was  a
    national of Afghanistan for the  reasons  given.   As  noted  by  Judge
    Gleeson, it did not appear to be in dispute that the Appellant and  his
    family members were Sikhs.  Indeed evidence had been produced on behalf
    of the Appellant relating to his father and mother  with  whom  he  had
    recently re-established  contact.   From  the  documentation  they  had
    produced via the Respondent, it  demonstrated  that  they  were  Afghan
    nationals of the Sikh faith who had been granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of their nationality and claimed religion  in  2004
    and were now British citizens.  In the  light  of  that  evidence,  the
    matters originally set out in the refusal letter that dealt with issues
    of identity and nationality were not pursued by Mr McVeety.

 8.   As to other issues, it  was  agreed  between  the  parties  that  the
    Tribunal should hear the evidence of the Appellant and  also  his  wife
    concerning the alleged incidents in Jalalabad which led  him  to  leave
    the United Kingdom. Whilst the  Appellant  had  originally  only  given
    evidence concerning  the  incident  that  included  his  wife,  it  was
    apparent from evidence given by the Appellant that part of the  account
    had not been disclosed which  related  to  his  wife  as  a  result  of
    cultural reasons but she had filed a witness statement concerning those
    matters and thus it was agreed between the parties that the Tribunal in
    those  circumstances  should  consider  the  evidence  and  make  fresh
    findings upon the issue of credibility.



The Appellant's Claim

 9. The basis of the Appellant's claim is set out in his witness statements
    of 18th April 2011, 28th February 2013, 5th July  2013,  his  screening
    interviews and substantive interview.

10. The Appellant was born and brought up in the Rege Shabat Mohammed  Khan
    District of Jalalabad alongside other Sikh families.  His  father  made
    his living from a bicycle shop run  in  the  nearby  Shur  Bazar.   The
    Appellant did not attend school as  a  result  of  the  impact  of  the
    Mujahedeen/Taliban insurgency but stayed at home.  At a later  date  he
    joined his father in the bicycle shop.

11. The Appellant's father suffered incidents  from  the  local  population
    including his  landlord  in  respect  of  incidents  of  extortion  and
    included an allegation of assault.  Thus the family  made  arrangements
    to leave Afghanistan.   The  Appellant's  parents  separated  from  the
    Appellant.  They subsequently arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2004
    (unknown to  the  Appellant).   He  was  taken  by  the  agent  out  of
    Afghanistan but nine months later was taken back to Jalalabad.  At that
    time his parents' house and his father's shop were occupied by Muslims.
     The Appellant did not re-establish  contact  with  his  parents  until
    2011.  They were subsequently  granted  asylum  in  2004  and  are  now
    British citizens.

12. Once in Jalalabad, the Appellant lived at the gurdwara but  then  lived
    within the community  as  a  result  of  his  marriage  to  the  second
    Appellant, Baldeep Kaur.

13. The Appellant with another Sikh named Amrik, who was in the business of
    running a bicycle shop  in  the  centre  of  town  was  joined  by  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant claims  that  both  he  and  Amrik  ran  into
    difficulties as the Muslim bicycle seller operating in  a  neighbouring
    business accused them of under cutting the prices leading to  a  series
    of violent confrontations.  The Appellant claims that he  was  attacked
    on five or six occasions and  the  last  occasion  was  fifteen  months
    before he left Afghanistan.

14. The more serious events occurred related to a Pathan named as  Huzemat.



15. The Appellant also claims that Amrik Singh's house was attacked by four
    or five Pathans, Amrik and his wife were beaten and he decided to leave
    and split the contents with the Appellant.  The Appellant continued  to
    run the business by himself for nine months.

16. In respect of the man named Huzemat, this man and four or five  of  his
    associates came to the shop to collect money from the Appellant.   This
    man and his associates had come  to  the  business  once  a  month  for
    checking their accounts and would ask for money,  approximately  12,000
    Pakistani rupees, every two or three months.  On occasions  they  would
    come and ask for more, 2,000 or 3,000 rupees, and threaten  to  assault
    him if he did not pay.

17. In or about August 2010, Huzemat appeared at the  Appellant's  business
    seeking to extort further sums of money.  He told the Appellant that he
    should give them $35,000, money which the Appellant stated he  did  not
    have.  He was told to get the  money  and  the  next  month  when  they
    returned in September, he gave them the usual amount  but  they  stated
    that they wanted $35,000.  The Appellant was hit across his  face  with
    one of his tools.  The  Appellant  did  not  return  to  work  for  the
    following 25 to 28 days.

18. Three or four days after he returned to work, about a week to ten  days
    before he left Afghanistan, he was on his way back from the temple  and
    to do some shopping when he was stopped by Huzemat.  He was accused  of
    closing the shop and running away  and  he  was  told  that  "there  is
    nowhere in Afghanistan you can run to - I will get my money from  you".
    The Appellant states that Huzemat followed the Appellant  to  his  home
    striking him on his back with a rifle.  Once they arrived at the house,
    the Appellant's wife intervened and  was  hit  by  Huzemat.   As  their
    daughters ran towards their mother, Huzemat picked up one of  them  and
    threw her against the wall and threatened them further that if  he  did
    not get his money he would kidnap his wife and children.  He was  given
    a length of time to get the money.

19. The Appellant states that he found an agent thereafter who in  exchange
    for his business agreed to help them leave Afghanistan.  They  left  on
    13th or 14th November 2010, travelling by  car  to  Peshawar,  Pakistan
    where they stayed for between 45 to 47 days,  they  then  travelled  to
    Lahore and then caught planes to a different country until arriving  in
    the United Kingdom on 18th February 2011.  The Appellant claimed asylum
    on that day.

20. In 2011, the Appellant found out that his parents were  in  the  United
    Kingdom and he re-established contact with them.   His  parents  having
    arrived in 2004 had claimed asylum on the basis of their  religion  and
    experiences in Afghanistan and were granted refugee status and are  now
    British citizens.

The Evidence

21. There were a number of bundles submitted on behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    The original bundle was dated 27th April 2011 and contained a statement
    of the Appellant and copy ID documents for the Appellant, his wife  and
    the two children.  It  also  included  a  large  amount  of  background
    material.  There were further bundles produced.  On 28th February  2013
    a further bundle was submitted containing a further  statement  of  the
    Appellant, copies of British passports  and  news  articles  on  Afghan
    Sikhs.  On 16th May 2013  a  further  bundle  was  submitted  including
    documentation relating to the Appellant's father Gopal Singh  Harjyani,
    copies of status documents and  previous  information  statements,  SEF
    form and interview provided to the Home Office, an expert  report  from
    Roger Ballard dated 8th April 2013.  A further bundle was submitted  on
    21st May 2013 including a chronology, skeleton argument, the UNHCR 2010
    document, the decision of The Queen on the application of Luthra v SSHD
    [2011] EWHC 3629, the Tribunal  decision  in  DSG  and  Others  (Afghan
    Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148  (IAC).   There
    was also provided in addition to a copy of the DVD a document  entitled
    "Script from the DVD" and also a summary of the DVD  entitled  "Mission
    Afghanistan" produced by Pritpal Singh.  The new documentation that was
    sought to be admitted to the Upper Tribunal had been set out in a  Rule
    15(2A) application notice.  There was no dispute  between  the  parties
    that  that  information  was  relevant  and  should  be  admitted   for
    consideration before the Upper Tribunal.

22. In respect of the Respondent,  the  original  Respondent's  bundle  was
    produced.  In addition Mr McVeety relied upon an extract from the  COIR
    Report for Afghanistan dealing with Sikhs and Hindus.

23.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  with  the  assistance  of  the   court
    interpreter and gave evidence in the Dari language. There was  also  an
    interpreter present to translate  in  the  Punjabi  language.   At  the
    hearing before the FtT, the Appellant gave  evidence  in  Dari.   At  a
    hearing in March, the language of the  interpreter  was  clarified  and
    again a  Dari  interpreter  was  requested.   Mr  Jabarooti,  the  Dari
    interpreter, attended on 24th May 2013.  At that hearing the  Appellant
    gave evidence in Dari and there was no  difficulty  identified  by  the
    Appellant or either  party  with  the  Appellant  being  able  to  give
    evidence in the Dari language.  No concerns were raised in  respect  of
    that at any time by Mr Bradshaw or by the Appellant.   Mr  Mumtaz,  the
    Punjabi interpreter, was also present  to  assist  if  there  were  any
    difficulties  using  any  particular   vocabulary.    There   were   no
    difficulties either with the Appellant giving evidence in  the  Punjabi
    language.  At the  hearing  on  11th  July  2013,  Mr  Ali,  the  court
    interpreter, was present and spoke Punjabi and it  was  agreed  between
    the parties that he should continue his evidence in Punjabi.   At  that
    hearing the Tribunal sought the assurance of the Appellant and also his
    Counsel, Mr Bradshaw, that there had  been  no  difficulties  with  the
    evidence given on the last occasion and it was confirmed by Mr Bradshaw
    and the Appellant that there  were  no  issues  raised  concerning  the
    interpretation.  I would further note that there were  no  difficulties
    with  the  Appellant  being  able  to  give  evidence   or   with   the
    interpretation or any concerns raised during the hearing in relation to
    that.

24.  The Appellant in his evidence adopted four witness statements that  he
    had made on 18th April 2011, 20th June 2011, 21st February 2013 and 5th
    July 2013.  He confirmed that he had run a shop with a man by the  name
    of Amrik  whilst  he  lived  in  Afghanistan  and  that  the  Appellant
    continued to run the business after he had  left.   He  confirmed  that
    after he was running it  on  his  own  he  continued  to  have  hostile
    visitors to the shop.  He confirmed that there were  four  to  five  of
    them and one named man called Huzemat.  The Appellant stated that  they
    would come and ask for money and he would give them money  and  did  so
    every month and that between every two to three months they would  come
    asking for 2,000 and 3,000 which he would give them but on one occasion
    they came with a demand of US$35,000 and he said that he did  not  have
    that amount of money.  Their attitude was that they did not  care  even
    if he did not have the money.  He confirmed that  they  would  ask  for
    $12,000 per month.  He confirmed that there was 12,000 paid by way of a
    monthly regular payment and 2,000 or 3,000 was on top of that.  He said
    that when he could not pay they would beat him with chains (the  chains
    that he would tie up the bicycle  with)  and  he  was  hit  across  the
    forehead.  He said that they had threatened that they  would  beat  him
    next time they came which is what they did and they assaulted him.   He
    confirmed that he had claimed asylum on 18th February  2011  which  was
    the same day that he had arrived.  He had left Afghanistan in or  about
    November 2010.

25. In cross-examination he was asked about the demands  of  money  and  he
    confirmed that the 35,000 was in US dollars.  The other  payments  that
    he had referred to, namely 12,000, were Pakistani rupees.   When  asked
    about the 35,000 dollars, the Appellant said that he explained that  it
    was a huge amount and that he could not pay such  a  large  amount  and
    said that that was  when  the  problems  had  started.   He  was  asked
    questions about Huzemat.  He confirmed that he  had  ordinary  clothing
    on, sometimes Asian clothing but did not wear a  uniform.   When  asked
    about whether there were other Sikhs in business in the area,  he  said
    that there were not very many and they were a distance away.   He  said
    that many Sikhs had been scared and had left.  He was questioned  about
    the DVD which showed Jalalabad with a shop run  by  Sikhs  and  he  was
    asked if he had spoken about  his  problems  with  anybody  else.   The
    Appellant said that it was a known fact that people were scared to talk
    about the problems for Sikhs  and  it  was  common  for  other  Afghani
    citizens to come to shops and threaten for money.  He said a couple  of
    times he did report it to the police but he was basically  ignored  and
    nobody would listen to him.  He said that  he  was  "banging  his  head
    against a wall".  He said there was no protection  and  that  it  would
    bring more danger to go to the police because it would be held  against
    a person who made the complaint.  He was asked if  he  moved  to  Kabul
    whether or not he would be found by Huzemat.  The Appellant  said  that
    Afghanistan was not a very big country and that  if  you  came  from  a
    minority background you would be easily recognised and  you  could  not
    hide away.  He said that Huzemat had told him that he  would  find  him
    wherever he was and the  Appellant  said  that  he  believed  him.   He
    confirmed that the interest in him was financial.  As to  how  he  left
    Afghanistan, he confirmed in his evidence that he had given  the  agent
    his shop.  He had had no choice because he could not pay him any  money
    and he had left the shop with the agent including all the stock.

26. He was asked questions about how he found his father in  the  UK.   The
    Appellant said that he had asked a number of people and was advised  to
    go to the community in Southall where there was a temple.  At the  Sikh
    temple he found out some  information  and  became  reunited  with  his
    family.  He confirmed that his father was from Jalalabad and  they  had
    lived together.  They had the same shop and  business.   The  Appellant
    confirmed that after his father had left  in  2004  the  Appellant  had
    returned back to Jalalabad.  The Appellant confirmed that he  had  been
    threatened with violence by Huzemat and that he had  been  beaten  once
    before.  He said that he had been beaten on his body by chains  on  his
    forehead.  When asked to describe how the police  had  dealt  with  him
    when he had made his complaint, he said that when he  had  reported  to
    the police, they would not deal with it and told him that he  ought  to
    "deal with it yourself".  He confirmed that that is the way that  Sikhs
    were treated and the police openly told them that  they  could  not  be
    protected.

27. In cross-examination he was asked further questions by Mr McVeety about
    the incident involving Huzemat.  He was asked about the US$35,000.   He
    confirmed that it was a large  amount  of  money  even  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that Afghanistan was much poorer than the UK.  Against that
    background the Appellant was asked why Huzemat had  asked  for  such  a
    large amount of money when he knew the Appellant could not pay it?  The
    Appellant said that he had visited the shop and had seen the goods  and
    got the impression that he had a lot of money.  The Appellant told  him
    that he was a poor man and could not raise that amount.   He  confirmed
    that his shop was selling bikes and that from that shop the  income  he
    received fed him and his family.  He said  that  his  shop  was  middle
    sized, had a lot of customers and that Huzemat must have thought  there
    would be enough money.  He said there were other shops as well  as  his
    that sold bikes and they were about the same sort  of  size.   He  said
    that he had not told anyone else what had happened to  him  because  no
    one would have listened to him.  He confirmed that he had attended  the
    temple in Jalalabad but did not tell anybody there.  He explained  that
    people had different problems and that they did not tell anyone.

28. The Appellant's father also gave evidence, Gopal  Singh  Harjyani.   He
    confirmed his witness statement and that he  had  left  Afghanistan  in
    2004.  He said that he had not  re-established  contact  with  his  son
    until 2011.  The statement in respect of Mr Harjyani confirmed that  he
    had been granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  result  of  his
    experiences in Afghanistan and now he and his wife had  become  British
    citizens.

29. The Tribunal also heard evidence from  the  Appellant's  wife,  Baldeep
    Kaur.  She adopted her witness statement as her  evidence-in-chief  and
    confirmed that the contents were true.  In  cross-examination  she  was
    asked about the incident that occurred  in  Jalalabad.   She  confirmed
    that when her husband went to the temple  she  was  at  home  with  her
    daughter.  It was put to her that as her  husband  had  previously  had
    threats was it risky for her and her daughter to be alone in the house?
     She said that they had run out of a lot of things and it was necessary
    for him to go out to purchase them and that he had gone via the  temple
    to do that shopping.  She confirmed that she had not seen the  man  who
    had attacked her before and that he had never been to the house before.
     She was asked where she had been hit  with  the  rifle  butt  and  she
    indicated that it was on her back.  She said that she had not  suffered
    any immediate injury but following the attack she had had back pain and
    that she had been taking medication since  that  time.   She  confirmed
    that she had not been subject to sexual assault but that he had  ripped
    her clothes.  She was asked if she knew how  much  money  the  man  was
    asking for?  The witness said that the man had been asking for a lot of
    money but she was not aware of the exact amount because  men  in  their
    culture did not share that type of  information.   In  respect  of  her
    daughter, she confirmed that her daughter's head had been  hit  against
    the wall and that she had some head injuries.   The  witness  was  very
    upset at this stage.  There was no re-examination.

30. There is a full record of oral evidence of the Appellant which  appears
    in the Record of Proceedings.  I shall refer to the relevant  parts  of
    the evidence during  my  analysis  of  the  case.  I  have  heard  both
    advocates by way of summary at the conclusion of the case which I  have
    recorded in my Record of Proceedings.  I confirm that I have considered
    those submissions during  my  analysis  of  the  evidence  and  in  the
    conclusions that I have reached, even if not specifically referred to.

31. I note that I was guided to certain passages in the objective material.
     I confirm that I have read those passages with care, but I  read  them
    in the context of the entire document.  I further confirm that  I  have
    read the whole of the documentation set  out  before  me  in  order  to
    assist me in reaching my conclusions.

The Submissions

32. Mr McVeety made the following oral submissions; it was  submitted  that
    it was accepted that he was an Afghan Sikh but the issue was whether or
    not he had suffered any incidents in Jalalabad  and  if  so,  could  he
    internally relocate to Kabul with his family members.   In  respect  of
    Jalalabad, Mr McVeety referred to the DVD.  He submitted that there was
    a Sikh population in Jalalabad although the numbers are  a  lot  fewer.
    The Appellant's account was that he was subjected to extortion but  the
    amount that was indicated in this  case  of  $35,000  was  a  ludicrous
    amount.  This was an average shop and it was not credible that he would
    be asked for such a large amount.  Whilst the Appellant claims to  have
    reported it to the police he did not tell his fellow Sikhs in the close
    knit community thus that was not a credible action on  the  Appellant's
    behalf.  The DVD did show parts of Jalalabad but the  director  of  the
    programme was returning to look at  problems  and  to  raise  funds  or
    awareness of the issues for Sikhs.  It was a  Sikh  who  was  the  main
    actor in the video.  However the DVD did show Sikhs living  openly  and
    there were shops open and a taxi driver therefore it is possible to  be
    economically viable in Jalalabad.  There was a temple that was  in  use
    and that was maintained.  None of the individuals mentioned persecution
    in Jalalabad but were talking of financial matters.  They had left  due
    to economic reasons.

33. Even if the  Appellant  had  suffered  persecution  in  Jalalabad,  the
    Secretary of State's position was that he could relocate to Kabul.   Mr
    McVeety referred to the background  material  in  the  COIS  report  at
    paragraph 21.36, 21.37 relating to schools, 21.38 to  demonstrate  that
    the family could relocate safely to Kabul city.  In respect of the DVD,
    it showed that people were living at the crematorium site in Kabul  and
    that was supported by the transcript at page 20.  It demonstrated  that
    when a complaint was made the  police  and  the  army  had  intervened.
    Huzemat was a local thug and there was no evidence that  his  influence
    extended to Kabul and he had no connections to the government.

34. As to whether it would be unduly harsh for the family  to  relocate  to
    Kabul, the Appellant would be able to obtain employment.  The  gurdwara
    temple was seen on the DVD and it was  being  repaired  by  a  building
    company run by Muslims.  In  the  DVD,  the  man  who  was  interviewed
    referred to the Sikhs as "Afghans".   The  attitude  demonstrated  that
    they saw each other as fellow Afghans and there was  no  indication  of
    abuse given in the DVD and they were repairing the temple.  As  to  the
    conditions, the DVD was of some assistance here also.  It  demonstrated
    that women were living in a room and it was not at the best quality but
    that did not mean that it was not unduly harsh to expect the family  to
    locate there.  It showed that they had a  carpet,  sofa  and  TV.   The
    information at page 120 of the expert report was  an  exaggeration  and
    did not demonstrate the conditions on the DVD.  At page 121 the  expert
    report did not state where he obtained the information from.  No one in
    the DVD referred to Sikhs as "kaffir" and they were building the temple
    for them.  The Appellant would have to re-establish the  contacts  that
    he had before so that he could import parts for bicycles but  there  is
    nothing to show from the evidence that he could  not  re-establish  his
    business.  Whilst the economy is parlous  in  Afghanistan  it  was  not
    sufficient to demonstrate it would be unduly harsh for  the  family  to
    relocate to Kabul.

35. As to sufficiency of protection, Mr McVeety conceded that he would  not
    get protection in Jalalabad.

36.  The background material, he submitted,  demonstrated  that  there  was
    some societal discrimination but that it was not  as  described  by  Dr
    Ballard.  Whilst the Secretary of State was not submitting  there  were
    no problems for Sikhs but the evidence did not show  that  Sikhs  as  a
    class are being persecuted.  Thus he submitted that it would be open to
    the family to relocate to Kabul.

37. Mr Bradshaw on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  relied  upon  his  skeleton
    argument.  In addition he submitted that  the  Appellant  had  given  a
    credible account of what had happened to him and his family members  in
    Jalalabad.  The account given is consistent with the expert evidence of
    Dr Ballard as to the type of events that took place set out at page  31
    (paragraph 68).  He looked at  the  case  studies  of  seven  Jalalabad
    families and that their decision  to  flee  had  been  precipitated  by
    demands of the type described by the Appellant.  The account  given  by
    the Appellant is entirely consistent with the evidence  in  the  expert
    report.  As to the point raised by Mr McVeety relating to the amount of
    $35,000, it was not such an outrageous amount to put forward because it
    was easy to imagine a scenario when they would accept a  lower  figure.
    The point was that the man was holding power over him and that  it  was
    not to make a realistic demand but to put pressure  upon  him  to  give
    further amounts of money.  In  any  event  there  was  no  evidence  of
    turnover or business to see whether  $35,000  was  a  grossly  inflated
    figure.  He submitted that in respect of the incident that occurred  of
    violence in Jalalabad, there had  been  no  discrepancies  between  the
    witnesses identified in cross-examination and the  account  as  to  the
    assault is consistent with the account given in the  interview  of  the
    Appellant at questions 72 to 75.

38. Thus he submitted that the Appellant's account  as  to  the  events  in
    Jalalabad was credible.

39. As to the point made by Mr McVeety that the DVD did  not  show  Muslims
    calling Sikhs "kaffirs", that  is  not  the  general  attitude  of  the
    population and that Dr Ballard has given good evidence  concerning  the
    general view held about Sikhs in Afghanistan.  As to the shopkeepers in
    Jalalabad, the fact that they were able to trade  there  did  not  mean
    that they were facing the same problems.  He submitted it was dangerous
    to draw conclusions that just because a business was trading that there
    were no problems.  There were limitations to the  DVD  and  the  weight
    that was being attached to it by the Presenting Officer  did  not  take
    into account those limitations  for  example  the  motivation  for  the
    video, what it  was  seeking  to  draw  attention  to,  the  danger  of
    assessment and it is not known what other type of information had  been
    obtained before the DVD was produced.  The DVD, should not be taken  in
    isolation without considering all the other evidence.

40.  As to risk on return to Kabul, the decision of  the  Tribunal  in  DSG
    demonstrated that the numbers  of  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  had  reduced
    dramatically compared to those in the country guidance case of SL.   At
    paragraph 24 it demonstrated glaring differences, 3,700 as  opposed  to
    20,000.  The decision of DSG referred to 1,000  or  2,000.   The  large
    numbers that  have  left  are  significant  and  it  must  follow  that
    something has caused  a  significant  exodus  between  2003  and  2013.
    Whilst the Respondent submits that it is due to economic reasons,  that
    may be part of it because businesses cannot trade due to extortion  and
    thus  for  economic  reasons  may  also  be  persecutory  reasons.   Dr
    Ballard's case studies demonstrate that that is a plausible  reason  as
    to why so many  have  left  alongside  the  general  societal  attitude
    towards Sikhs set out plainly in the background material.  Mr  Bradshaw
    invited the Tribunal to consider the case of Luthra  and  Dr  Ballard's
    report.  In considering whether or not it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    relocate to Kabul the temple would not provide sufficient accommodation
    for the family.  Kabul was described in the DVD as  an  expensive  city
    with most people barely surviving.  The Appellant has no business,  the
    most he could expect was a day labouring but the question for  them  is
    that it is not sufficient for them to afford to  provide  accommodation
    or to feed the family.  In the DVD Ravinder Singh said that even  those
    who were able to find a labouring job had  to  rely  on  the  gurdwara.
    Whatever has been said about the visibility of the living conditions in
    the gurdwara, there is nothing known about  the  availability  of  such
    accommodation and whether it is going to be suitable  where  there  are
    three children including  a  young  child  involved.   Furthermore  the
    gurdwara must have a limit and there is no evidence as to how many they
    could accommodate.  At page 18 of the transcript is  a  description  of
    the accommodation and the living conditions were very poor.   It  would
    be important to consider that type of living accommodation  during  the
    inclement weather conditions, in particular in the winter.  As  to  the
    cremation grounds, there were still confrontations about cremations and
    they were still required to perform them secretly.

41. Mr Bradshaw submitted that it was not possible to  read  anything  into
    the timing of the Appellant's departure.  Those who could leave did  so
    sooner and it supports the gradual fall in numbers that each have their
    own individual reasons for leaving  rather  than  a  mass  exodus.   He
    submitted there had been a change in attitude and  those  of  the  Sikh
    religion were now in a small minority and as a result of the low  level
    of numbers, they are more at risk of the pervading attitude  and  there
    is nothing to suggest that what has led them to leave  in  their  large
    numbers has gone away thus those  who  return  are  more  at  risk  now
    because there are  so  few  amongst  whom  they  can  live.   There  is
    something with the saying "safety in numbers".

42. Mr Bradshaw submitted that it  was  noteworthy  that  the  entire  COIS
    Report originally issued in February had been reissued on 8th May  2013
    solely to add the quote set out at 21.36  stating  "according  to  some
    reports members of the Hindu and  Sikh  communities  continue  to  face
    societal discrimination, harassment and in some cases, violence at  the
    hands of members of other religious groups".   He  submitted  that  the
    addition of the quote was indicative of the growing recognition of  the
    difficulties faced by the Hindi and Sikh communities and  that  it  had
    escalated  to  the  level  of  violence.   This  escalation  takes  the
    situation beyond the severity seen at the time of the country  guidance
    case of SL.  The US State Department Report  refers  to  the  issue  of
    education and that it was systematically aimed at Sikhs thus  therefore
    gives rise to persecutory treatment.  The ability to go to school is of
    relevance in this case.  There are two young  children  and  one  young
    baby and there is also the Section 55 duty  to  consider  their  needs.
    The reference to private schools has to be seen in the light  of  their
    economic position and it would be very unlikely indeed if the Appellant
    would be able to set up a similar business, provide  accommodation  and
    food and also provide education in that context.   It  is  unaffordable
    for most families and it would not be affordable for this Appellant.

43. Looking at the COIS Report, both that and Dr Ballard make reference  to
    the case of Baljit Singh an Afghan Sikh returned to Afghanistan after a
    failed asylum claim in the United Kingdom.  Dr  Ballard's  analysis  is
    set out at paragraphs 104 to 105 and demonstrated at least an inability
    or unwillingness of the state to protect Mr  Singh  from  assaults  and
    forced religious conversion along with a  wish  to  publicly  broadcast
    such an event.  At worst, it demonstrated the targeting  of  an  Afghan
    Sikh immediately on return as he was not considered  Afghan  either  on
    religious grounds or because of his status as a failed asylum seeker.

44. It was noted in AA (Unattended children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00016 (IAC) that the Tribunal did not consider the risks to accompanied
    children were sufficient to engage the need for protection.  However it
    did highlight that some risks remained for accompanied children such as
    landmines and the risk of trafficking.  It is submitted that given  the
    societal discrimination shown to Sikhs it would place Sikh children  at
    particular risk of exploitation and trafficking if they  were  able  to
    leave their homes.  If such individuals are so poorly  treated,  it  is
    submitted little value is likely to be attached to their  lives  making
    them a heightened target for those wishing to recruit.

45. In summary, it was submitted that  the  situation  and  conditions  for
    Sikhs has escalated beyond "difficult  and  frequently  unpleasant"  as
    defined in SL particularly in the light of  the  vulnerability  of  the
    light of the small numbers remaining  in  Afghanistan.   The  treatment
    faced is now a level which is worse than  societal  discrimination  and
    engages the Refugee Convention, Article 3 of  the  ECHR.   The  general
    position applies in Kabul thus the Appellants were entitled to  succeed
    in their appeal.



The Law and the Burden and Standard of Proof

46. In reaching my decision I have borne fully in mind the relevant law and
    Immigration Rules, including the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
    of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and the Handbook on  Procedures  and
    Criteria for  Determining  Refugee  Status  ('The  Handbook')  (Geneva,
    January 2000). By Article 1(a)(2) of the Refugee  Convention  the  term
    "refugee" shall apply to any person who:-

         "Owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons  of
         race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social
         group  or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of   his
         nationality, and is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
         avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having
         a nationality and being outside the country of his former  habitual
         residence is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return
         to it."

47. The provisions of SI [2006] No.2525 "The Refugee or Person in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006"  now  bring
    into United Kingdom domestic law the  Council  of  the  European  Union
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29th April 2004 on 'minimum standards' for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need protection and the
    content of the protection granted, normally referred to in  the  United
    Kingdom as the Qualification Directive.  Commensurate changes were made
    in the Immigration Rules by  means  of  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules also taking effect on 9th October 2006.

48. The determination I have made has approached the issues in this  appeal
    from the perspective of the 2006  Regulations  and  in  particular  has
    applied the  definitions  contained  there,  in  deciding  whether  the
    Appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  We have  also
    applied the amended Immigration Rules.   These  have  permitted  us  to
    consider whether the Appellant is in need of Humanitarian Protection as
    being at risk of serious harm, as defined  in  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules.  Finally, I have gone on to consider whether the Appellant is at
    risk of a violation of his human rights under  the  provisions  of  the
    ECHR.

49. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The standard of  proof  has
    been  defined  as  a  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood',   sometimes
    expressed as 'a reasonable chance' or  a  'serious  possibility'.   The
    question is answered by looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    assessed at the time  of  hearing  the  appeal.   We  regard  the  same
    standard as applying  in  essence  in  human  rights  appeals  although
    sometimes expressed as 'substantial grounds for believing'.    Although
    the 2006 Regulations make no express reference to the standard of proof
    in asylum appeals, there is no suggestion that the Regulations  or  the
    Directions were intended to introduce a change in either the burden  or
    standard of proof.  The amended Rules, however, deal expressly with the
    standard of proof in deciding whether  the  Appellant  is  in  need  of
    Humanitarian Protection.

50. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules defines a person  eligible  for
    Humanitarian Protection, as a person who does not qualify as a  refugee
    but in  respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned, if returned,  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.  It seems to us  that  this  replicates
    the standard of proof familiar in  the  former  jurisprudence  and,  by
    implication, applies the same standard in asylum cases.

51. Accordingly, where below I refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is to be
    understood as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:

      i) whether on return there is a well-founded fear of being  persecuted
         under the Geneva Convention;

     ii) whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing  the
         person would face a real risk of suffering serious harm within  the
         meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules; and

    iii) whether on return there are substantial grounds for believing  that
         the person would face a real risk of being exposed to a  real  risk
         of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

52. In reaching my conclusions as to whether the Appellant will be at  real
    risk  on  return,  I  have  been  further  mindful  that  the   amended
    Immigration Rules contain among other provisions, paragraph 339K  which
    deals with the approach to past persecution and paragraph  339O  headed
    "Internal Relocation".

53. The Appellant places specific reliance on Article 3 of the ECHR.  It is
    for an Appellant  to  show  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that he or she is at real risk of ill-treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR, which prohibits torture, inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment.  The  standard  of  proof  equates  to  that  in  asylum
    appeals.

54. In coming to my determination, following Section 85  (4)  of  the  2002
    Act, I may take into account evidence about any matter  which  I  think
    relevant to the substance of the  decision,  including  evidence  which
    concerns a matter arising after the date of decision.

Assessment of Evidence and Findings of Fact:

55. I must make findings as to the credibility of  the  Appellant  and  the
    claim in the light of the totality of the evidence that is  before  me,
    including the background evidence. The Respondent took  the  view  that
    the Appellant's claim was not credible for the reasons indicated in her
    letter of 17th March 2011. However, it is not in issue now in the light
    of the preserved findings of fact, I should  say,  that  the  principal
    Appellant is a national of Afghanistan and is a Sikh and I so find.

56.  I  have  carefully  considered  all  the  evidence  before  me,   both
    documentary and oral, and I have had  the  opportunity  to  assess  the
    Appellant's evidence which has been the  subject  of  cross-examination
    and in the light of the documents and the country  materials.   Thus  I
    set my findings of fact against that background.

57. As conceded by Mr McVeety, he does not rely on any credibility  matters
    relating to identity or mode of  entry  into  the  United  Kingdom,  or
    nationality in the light of the evidence provided from the  Appellant's
    family members which has been  produced  subsequently  to  the  refusal
    letter.

58. The Appellant's claim is that he and  his  family  members  resided  in
    Jalalabad, which is situated between Kabul and Peshawar.   The  history
    of this area is as set out in detail in the report of Mr Roger  Ballard
    (page 95) and it is said to be the next  largest  Sikh  colony  located
    outside the capital.  The history demonstrates  Sikh  presence  in  the
    city has diminished as a result of insurgency (Taliban) and that  as  a
    religious minority they have found themselves subject to discrimination
    and violence and demands for money in return for protection,  known  as
    "jiziya".

59. I have considered the factual claim made by the Appellant in the  light
    of the background material, the expert evidence and the documentary and
    oral evidence given before the Tribunal.  In doing  so,  I  accept  the
    Appellant's account of the earlier history in respect of his family and
    business dealings.  The Appellant's  father  made  his  living  from  a
    bicycle shop which he ran in the Shur Bazar and  the  Appellant  joined
    his father to work there.  The problems that his father had with  local
    Pathans in the area and in particular his landlord, are set out in  the
    witness statement, screening interview and substantive  interview  that
    took place in 2004.  The Appellant's father was a victim of violence in
    Jalalabad and the witness statement and interview sets out a picture of
    him being subjected to demands for money.  The situation  in  Jalalabad
    was such that the shop was forcibly taken from him and the family  left
    Afghanistan.

60. It is  plain  from  the  documentation  that  has  now  been  produced,
    subsequently  after  the  First-tier   Tribunal   hearing,   that   the
    Appellant's father and mother arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  5th
    February 2004.  They made a claim for asylum based on their persecution
    in  Afghanistan  as  members  of  the  Sikh   community.    They   were
    subsequently granted refugee status and are now British citizens.

61. The history demonstrates that the Appellant did not fare as well as his
    parents and whilst they were able to leave  Afghanistan  the  Appellant
    was taken back to Jalalabad by the agent.  He lived at the gurdwara  on
    a temporary basis and was later to marry the second Appellant,  Baldeep
    Kaur.

62. I accept the history given by the Appellant, which is supported by  the
    independent evidence given by his father  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2004 as set out in the documents that  he  provided  to  the
    Respondent.   The  account  given  by  the  Appellant  subsequently  is
    entirely consistent with the account given by his parents in 2004 which
    was given before the Appellant had even entered the United Kingdom.  He
    did not have the opportunity to re-establish contact with  his  parents
    until 2011 not knowing that they were in the  UK  or  where  they  were
    until that date when they were traced.

63. Thus I accept the  account  given  concerning  the  historical  factual
    circumstances which led to the Appellant's family leaving in  2004  and
    also the events that they say occurred in  Jalalabad  as  a  result  of
    persecutory treatment at the hands of Muslims in the area.

64. As to the events thereafter, the Appellant  claims  to  have  been  the
    victim of extortion at the hands of members of the local population and
    in particular, a man identified as Huzemat, culminating  in  an  attack
    upon the Appellant, his wife and daughter.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    account given as to the events in Jalalabad is reasonably likely to  be
    true.  The account as described in his evidence, both  documentary  and
    oral, is wholly consistent with the treatment he  had  endured  earlier
    when his parents were living in  Jalalabad  which  led  to  them  being
    granted refugee status.  It is also consistent with background material
    placed  before  this  Tribunal.   In  this  respect,   I   have   given
    consideration and weight to the report of Dr Roger Ballard.  He has not
    appeared before the Tribunal to give oral evidence and thus his  report
    has  not  been  the  subject  of  cross-examination.   Nonetheless  the
    contents of the report do not appear  to  be  inconsistent  in  general
    terms with the background material in the COIS  Report  concerning  the
    history  and  background  relating  to  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  and  in
    particular in Jalalabad.

65. At paragraph 68 of the report, the expert refers to seven families from
    Jalalabad (see Appendix 2).  From those case  histories,  he  considers
    that their decisions to leave Jalalabad were precipitated as  a  result
    of predatory demands in  respect  of  their  property.   That  type  of
    conduct routinely included  demands  for  "protection  money",  failing
    which the predators would simply remove goods  from  the  shop  without
    payment, physical assaults  including  beatings,  removal  of  turbans,
    threats to cut off hair and beards, kidnap  for  ransom,  during  which
    attempts are frequently made to  enforce  conversion,  armed  break-ins
    into the privacy of the Appellant's houses (as opposed to their  shops)
    accompanied by threats to women and children if  protection  money  was
    not paid and escalating levels of violence,  including  the  kidnap  of
    women and girls.

66. The description of those incidents  is  consistent  with  the  evidence
    given by the Appellant concerning  the  experiences  that  he  and  his
    family members had in Jalalabad before they left.  The  description  of
    the physical assault and demands for money and  the  threats  made  are
    consistent with the experiences of other Sikh families  in  that  area.
    It is also consistent  with  the  earlier  behaviour  suffered  by  his
    parents.  It is also noted from those families  and  their  experiences
    that they were not able to gain  any  significant  kind  of  protection
    either from the police or the courts as a result of those  experiences.



67. The main point raised by Mr McVeety relates to the size  of  the  money
    that the Appellant was being asked to provide.  He submits that the sum
    of US$35,000 was a ludicrous amount to be asked for and that it was not
    credible that anyone would ask for such a sum from  the  Appellant,  in
    the light of the fact that this would be a large sum even in the United
    Kingdom.

68. The Appellant's evidence was that prior to being asked for the  sum  of
    US$35,000, he had been paying  regular  sums  on  a  monthly  basis  in
    Pakistani rupees.  The figures given in the evidence would not seem  to
    be overly substantial in the light of  his  circumstances.   I  do  not
    consider that the fact that the man identified  as  Huzemat  asked  for
    such an inflated sum demonstrates that the event did not happen.  As Mr
    Bradshaw submits, it is possible  to  envisage  a  scenario  where  the
    person wielding power and having already obtained sums of  money,  asks
    for a sum the Appellant could not possibly  provide  to  exert  further
    pressure upon the Appellant to provide larger sums of money.  The  fact
    that the sum of US$35,000 would be a large amount of  money  given  the
    circumstances in Afghanistan in 2010, I  do  not  think  that  that  in
    itself demonstrates that  he  was  not  asked  for  such  a  sum.   The
    Appellant volunteered the amount of money and if he were simply seeking
    to give an amount that was credible, he could have given a much smaller
    amount.  The Appellant has always been consistent concerning the figure
    and I do not find that the fact that it was such a large  amount  meant
    that the threat was not made by Huzemat.

69. I have also  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant  and  his  wife,  both  of  whom  gave  consistent   evidence
    concerning the physical assaults made upon them and upon their daughter
    by Huzemat.  As Mr  Bradshaw  submitted,  no  discrepancies  have  been
    identified in their evidence concerning those events.

70. Having considered the evidence, I accept the Appellant's account as  to
    the events that occurred in Jalalabad and find that the  Appellant  was
    originally targeted when running a business with  Amrik  and  was  also
    later subjected to financial demands at the hands of Huzemat.   I  also
    find the Appellant was assaulted by him, that he had been  hit  on  his
    back with a rifle and the Appellant's wife was also  assaulted  as  was
    their daughter.  The Appellant's wife continues  to  suffer  from  back
    pain as a result of that incident.

71. The evidence as to the background of Huzemat has not been described  by
    the Appellant with any certainty.  Whilst he described the man  Huzemat
    as threatening to find him and  that  nowhere  "he  could  run  to"  in
    Afghanistan would be safe, there is no cogent evidence of  his  profile
    or standing to demonstrate that he has any links with the government or
    held any position of power or influence beyond Jalalabad.

72. Mr McVeety accepted  that  if  the  Appellant's  account  was  credible
    concerning Jalalabad, that the evidence would demonstrate that there is
    not a reasonable likelihood of a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    family in Jalalabad.

73. Thus the issue as both Advocates have submitted,  is  one  of  internal
    relocation to Kabul.

74. Thus I have found that the  Appellants  have  been  subjected  to  past
    persecution whilst in Afghanistan.  The issue now relates  to  internal
    relocation.





75. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive reads as follows:-

         "Article 8

         Internal Protection

         1.   As part of the assessment of the application for international
             protection, Member States may determine that an  applicant  is
             not in need of international protection if in a  part  of  the
             country of origin there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm  and  the
             applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of
             the country.

         2.   In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  is  in
             accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at  the  time
             of taking the decision on the application have regard  to  the
             general circumstances prevailing in that part of  the  country
             and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.

         3.   Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin."

76. Paragraph 339O of the Immigration Rules sets out as follows:-

         "339O.   Internal relocation

                (i)    The Secretary of State will not make:

                    (a)    a grant of asylum if in the part of  the  country
                        of origin a person would not  have  a  well-founded
                        fear  of  being  persecuted,  and  the  person  can
                        reasonably be expected to stay in that part of  the
                        country; or

                    (b)    a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of
                        the country of return a person  would  not  face  a
                        real risk of suffering serious harm, and the person
                        can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of
                        the country.

                (ii)   In examining whether a part of the country of  origin
                    or country of return meets the requirements in  (i)  the
                    Secretary of State when making his decision  on  whether
                    to grant asylum or humanitarian  protection,  will  have
                    regard to the general circumstances prevailing  in  that
                    part of the country and to the personal circumstances of
                    the person.

                (iii)  (i) applies notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
                    return to the country of origin or country of return."

    As it can be seen the paragraph refers  to  a  different  part  of  the
    country where that person would not have a well-founded fear  of  being
    persecuted and the person can reasonably be expected to  stay  in  that
    part of the country.  In  making  that  assessment  sub-paragraph  (ii)
    directs the decision maker to have regard to the general  circumstances
    prevailing  in  that  part  of  the  country  and   to   the   personal
    circumstances of the person.

    In Jasim v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 342 Sedley LJ said:-

         "16. The possibility of internal relocation is relevant to  refugee
             and human rights claims because it may demonstrate that a fear
             of persecution or harm though  warranted  by  the  applicant's
             experience in his place of  origin,  is  not  well-founded  in
             relation to other parts of the  state  whose  duty  it  is  to
             protect him.  But while the two issues - fear and relocation -
             go ultimately to the single question of safety, they cannot be
             decided in the  same  breath.   Once  the  judge  of  fact  is
             satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  a  justified   fear   of
             persecution or harm if returned to his home  area,  the  claim
             will ordinarily be made out unless the judge is satisfied that
             he can nevertheless be safely returned to another part of  his
             country of origin.  Provided the second issue has been flagged
             up, there may be  no  formal  burden  of  proof  on  the  Home
             Secretary (see GH [2004] UKIAT 00248); but this does not  mean
             that the judge of fact can reject  an  otherwise  well-founded
             claim  unless  the  evidence  satisfies  him   that   internal
             relocation is a safe and reasonable option.

         17.   It  is  necessary  to  stress  both  adjectives  -  safe  and
             reasonable.  It is well established that relocation to a  safe
             area is not an answer to a claim  if  it  is  unreasonable  to
             expect the applicant to settle there.  There may be no work or
             housing.   He  may  not  speak   the   language.    Similarly,
             relocation to an area may be  perfectly  reasonable  by  these
             standards but unsafe, for  example  because  of  the  risk  of
             continued official harassment or - as in this case -  revenge-
             seeking."

77. Thus if a person is at risk  in  his  home  area,  internal  relocation
    should be considered as a potential means of affording him  protection.
    The decision of the House of Lords in AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 related
    to three Appellants all of whom were in their  30s  and  were  Sudanese
    nationals.  The judicial committee considered the position  of  members
    of black African tribes who formerly  lived  in  Darfur.   Two  of  the
    Appellants were subsistence farmers.

78. It is clear from the opinion of  Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill  that  the
    enquiry has  to  be  directed  to  the  situation  of  each  particular
    applicant whose age, gender, experience, health, skills and family ties
    may all be relevant in the enquiry.   It  is  said  that  there  is  no
    warrant for excluding  or  giving  priority  to  consideration  of  the
    applicant's way of life in the place of persecution or for excluding or
    giving priority to consideration of conditions generally prevailing  in
    the home country.  Instead there has  to  be  a  consideration  of  all
    circumstances of the case.  That conclusion  is  to  be  found  between
    paragraphs 12 and 14 of his opinion.

79. The scope of the consideration was also dealt with by Baroness Hale  in
    paragraph  20  of  her  opinion.   In  referring  to  Lord  Bingham  of
    Cornhill's opinion in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5, Baroness Hale recorded this
    passage from Lord Bingham's thinking in the earlier appeal:

         "The decision maker taking account of  all  relevant  circumstances
         pertaining to the claimant and his country of  origin  must  decide
         whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
         whether it will be unduly harsh to expect him to do so."

80. In approaching that task Baroness Hale also drew upon a UNHCR  document
    which also considered that the task was a holistic exercise  where  the
    decision maker looks at the individual personal circumstances including
    past  persecution  or  the  fear  of  it,  psychological   and   health
    conditions, family and social situations and survival  capacities.   In
    setting out those categories there was not meant to be  any  limitation
    on the scope of what must be considered.

   81. The Tribunal has been provided with a copy of the UNHCR eligibility
    guidelines for assessing the international protection needs of asylum
   seekers from Afghanistan (dated 17th December 2010). I enquired of both
    advocates as to whether there was an updated UNHCR document but both
   advocates informed the Tribunal that the only one available was the one
                in the Appellant's bundle and set out above.

 82.   The Tribunal has been directed to the relevant pages.  This states as
                                  follows:-

         "Whether an IFA/IRA is 'reasonable' must be determined on a case-by-
         case basis taking fully into account the security, human rights and
         humanitarian environment in the prospective area of  relocation  at
         the time of the decision.  To this effect, the  following  elements
         need to be taken into account:

         (i)  the availability of traditional support  mechanisms,  such  as
             relatives and friends able to host the displaced individual;

         (ii)  the  availability  of  basic  infrastructure  and  access  to
             essential  services,  such  as  sanitation,   healthcare   and
             education;

         (iii)     ability  to  sustain  themselves,  including   livelihood
             opportunities;

         (iv) the criminality rate and resultant insecurity, particularly in
             urban areas; as well as

         (v)   the  scale  of  displacement  in  the  area  of   prospective
             relocation.

83. Whilst the report is dated 2010, it seems to me that those matters  are
    general guidance and are still relevant factors to consider.

84. Mr McVeety on behalf of the Respondent submits that in general terms it
    would not be unduly harsh to return to Kabul as a place identified as a
    place for internal relocation for the family members.

85.   I should say something about the background material  that  had  been
    placed  before  this  Tribunal.   The  Appellant  has  produced  a  DVD
    published in 2013 produced by Mr Pritpal Singh, an Afghan Sikh who left
    Afghanistan a substantial time ago.  There are no details concerning Mr
    Singh's background or circumstances  and  the  transcript  of  the  DVD
    appears to refer  to  him  having  left  "two  decades  ago"  and  then
    returning to Afghanistan for the DVD.

86. There has been little background material submitted on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State to this Tribunal.  It consisted of a  short  extract
    from the COIS Report relating to the position of Sikhs  and  Hindus  in
    Afghanistan and the 2011 US Department Report  for  Religious  Freedom.
    However Mr McVeety has placed much emphasis on the DVD which he submits
    shows a different picture to that given by Dr Ballard.  He submits that
    the DVD shows the cremation sites and the interviewee referring to  the
    police intervening, he places weight  upon  a  Muslim  interviewee  who
    refers to Sikhs as "ordinary Afghans" and thus is contrary to the  view
    established in the report of  Dr  Ballard  when  he  refers  to  active
    hostility to Sikhs as "kaffirs" and thirdly, that the DVD of the inside
    of the gurdwara shows  good  living  conditions  and  are  not  like  a
    "ghetto" or  a  "refugee  camp"  as  opined  by  Dr  Ballard.   In  his
    submissions, he submitted  that  he  accepted  that  the  documentation
    demonstrated societal discrimination against Sikhs  but  that  was  the
    extent of the problems that they faced.

87. Both myself and the Advocates have had the opportunity to view the  DVD
    and a transcript has been prepared.   There  is  no  dispute  that  the
    transcript is an accurate representation of what  the  DVD  has  shown.
    Having considered its contents and having viewed the  DVD,  I  consider
    that the DVD itself as a piece of evidence has considerable limitations
    and the weight to attach to it is lessened in my view as  a  result  of
    those limitations.   There  is  no  information  given  concerning  the
    profile and background or circumstances of Pritpal Singh.  There is  no
    information concerning his  own  background.   Similarly  there  is  no
    evidence before the Tribunal as to why the programme was  commissioned,
    by whom and what it was setting out to demonstrate or its motivation or
    what it was seeking to draw attention to.  Those matters are not known.
     I consider that there is a danger of ascribing too much weight to such
    a DVD in the absence of any evidential background to the DVD.  The fact
    that no one who was interviewed had made reference to  any  threats  or
    attacks upon Sikhs  in  Kabul  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  such
    attacks, which have been  credibly  referred  to  in  other  background
    evidence, do not occur.  There may be a  number  of  reasons  why  Sikh
    residents in Kabul may not wish to give an account on camera concerning
    their mistreatment for obvious reasons.  Similarly, it is not known  if
    Pritpal Singh intended to  make  a  programme  to  show  that  kind  of
    treatment towards the Sikh community.  Mr McVeety placed reliance  upon
    part of the video clip whereby a Muslim in Kabul did not speak of Sikhs
    in a derogatory manner and the inference sought by Mr McVeety  was  the
    conclusion that Dr Ballard had reached in his report where he  referred
    to the Sikhs being known as "kaffirs" by the general Muslim  population
    was not made out.  I do not consider that such an inference can be made
    on that evidence.  I think it highly unlikely that someone being filmed
    would give a hostile account in that way.  Furthermore,  even  if  that
    was a belief held by that particular interviewee, it does not mean that
    the population in general share that individual's views.

88.   For those reasons, the DVD in my judgment should have  little  weight
    attached to it given  the  problems  and  limitations  identified.   If
    further evidence was to be available to answer some of those questions,
    I may have taken a different view of the  DVD  and  the  weight  to  be
    attached to it, but from the present evidence  before  the  Tribunal  I
    consider that the  DVD  is  to  be  of  limited  evidential  value  and
    assistance.

89. It is not disputed by Mr McVeety that  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  are  the
    subject of societal discrimination and that this is amply  demonstrated
    by the background material in the COIS Report  of  February  2013  upon
    which he relies.  Furthermore, he did not seek to rely on  the  country
    guidance decision  of  SL  and  Others  (Returning  Sikhs  and  Hindus)
    Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137 nor did  he  make  reference  to  the
    contents of SL in his submissions in the light of the decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in DSG and Others  (Afghan  Sikhs:  departure  from  CG)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148 (IAC) and the number of Sikhs remaining  in
    Afghanistan.

90. The decision in SL (as  cited)  noted  that  there  were  approximately
    20,000 Sikhs in Afghanistan and thus the evidence did not  support  the
    risk of persecution general  to  the  entire  community  but  that  the
    conclusion was that they  were  victims  of  random  and  opportunistic
    attacks.  In the decision of DSG (as cited), the Tribunal found that it
    was open to the judge in the light of the "glaring difference"  in  the
    figures (3,700 as opposed to 20,000)  to  consider  that  the  Tribunal
    figures in SL were significantly wrong and that  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing before them that remained the case.   They  made  reference  to
    what was said by Collins J in Luthra and what was said in the report of
    Dr Giustozzi which was a report specifically prepared for that  appeal.
    The judge also took into account what was  said  by  Dr  Ballard.   The
    Tribunal at paragraph 24 also thought that it was relevant  that  there
    were positive credibility findings in relation to past  persecution  in
    Afghanistan.  It is of relevance in this appeal that the  authority  of
    Luthra, a report by Dr Ballard in respect of this particular  Appellant
    and positive credibility findings in respect  of  past  persecution  in
    Afghanistan also apply to this Appellant's case.

91. The Tribunal at paragraph 25 made it clear that in their judgment,  the
    judge was entitled to depart from the country guidance in the case  and
    that whilst inevitably, the remaining number of  Sikhs  and  Hindus  in
    Afghanistan must be to some extent a matter of speculation, it is:

         "clear if one looks at the evidence as whole in such  documents  as
         Dr Ballard's report,  Dr  Giustozzi's  report,  the  earlier  UNHCR
         report and the more recent UNHCR report of July 2011 handed  up  by
         Mr Bazini that the remaining numbers are in the region of 1,000  or
         2,000.  Indeed the Operational Guidance Note  from  Afghanistan  of
         April 2002 states at paragraph 3.9.2 that there  are  an  estimated
         2,200 Sikhs and Hindus remaining in  Afghanistan.   This,  together
         with the evidence set out in Dr Giustozzi and Dr Ballard's reports,
         clearly justified the judge in departing from the existing  country
         guidance".

92. The implications of this was made clear at paragraph  26  that  country
    guidance  retains  its  status  until  overturned  or  replaced  by   a
    subsequent country guidance decision.  However, country guidance is not
    set in stone.  The evidence before the Tribunal in  DSG  is  strikingly
    similar to that in the current appeal.  I have had the  opportunity  of
    considering an expert report by Dr Roger Ballard prepared  specifically
    for this case dated 8th April 2013.  Appendix 1 is a general  study  of
    the position of Sikhs in Afghanistan  and  this  was  the  same  report
    before the Tribunal in DSG (see paragraph 6).

93. The evidence concerning the size of  the  current  Sikh  population  is
    still a matter of  speculation  and  this  Tribunal  cannot  provide  a
    precise figure.  The Tribunal in DSG found that the number of Sikhs  in
    Afghanistan was likely between 1,000 and 2,000 and  was  thus  markedly
    less than the 20,000 as set out in  the  decision  of  SL.   The  UNHCR
    Report referred to in that case as at July 2011  gave  the  figure  for
    1,000 Sikhs remaining and that the view of the general authorities  was
    that Sikhs and Hindus face an "acutely difficult" position economically
    and socially (see  paragraph  7).   The  2011  International  Religious
    Freedom Report (prepared by the US State Department) referred to  2,000
    Sikhs in Afghanistan and also refers to "the population shrank  in  the
    past year compared to the year before".  The same report refers to "non-
    Muslim  minority  groups,  particularly  Christians,  Hindus  and  Sikh
    groups, continued to be the targets of persecution and discrimination".
    Thus the precise figure  remains  a  matter  of  speculation  but  that
    evidence gives some account of the vast reduction in numbers.

94.    Whatever  the  figures  are  for  the  present  Sikh  population  in
    Afghanistan,  the  approximate  figures   demonstrate   a   significant
    reduction in the number of Sikh families residing  in  Afghanistan.   I
    have considered the reasons for such  a  significant  change  from  the
    evidence before me.  Mr McVeety on behalf  of  the  Respondent  submits
    that the reasons are wholly economic.  He relies on the COIS report  at
    paragraph 21.36 where it refers to  Sikhs  facing  discrimination  when
    seeking government jobs and later, "since the fall of the Taliban  some
    members have returned, others have left Kabul due to economic  hardship
    and discrimination".

95. I have also considered the evidence in the report of  Dr  Ballard.   In
    doing so, I conclude that the emphasis on economic reasons  to  be  too
    simplistic an explanation for large  and  significant  numbers  leaving
    Afghanistan.  In the three case studies  he  describes  (including  the
    case of Baljit Singh also referred to in the COIS Report)  and  two  of
    those returns were made to Kabul, the  other  relates  to  a  situation
    where harassment and threats of  kidnap  were  raised.  If  those  case
    studies are an accurate  representation,  the  reasons  why  Sikhs  are
    leaving are not just due to economic reasons but because they have been
    the subject of persecution and violence at  the  hands  of  non  -state
    actors and against the background of the authorities and the police not
    being able to offer sufficiency of protection.  This is supported by Dr
    Ballard at paragraph 94 of his report where he states,  when  referring
    to protection:-

         "There is  little  sign  that  they  did  so  with  any  degree  of
         enthusiasm.  Most stayed on for as long as they  could,  continuing
         to each other for mutual support.  But as  their  numbers  steadily
         declined, and as the harassment, insults, exploitation and assaults
         to  which  they  found  themselves  exposed  became  steadily  more
         intense, so one by  one  almost  every  family  has  by  now  found
         themselves confronted by the straws which broke each camel's  back,
         one by one an ever increasing number of families began to  conclude
         that they had no alternative but to  conduct  fast  sale  of  their
         assets to seek refuge overseas."

96. It seems to me that the number of families leaving has a  relevance  to
    the  situation  of  security  and  risk.   With   fewer   members   the
    vulnerability to those who remain increases.  Sikhs form a  distinctive
    social group with religious, linguistic and  cultural  terms  and  this
    stands out amongst the majority population.  As the presence  of  Sikhs
    become lessened, it follows that there is a real risk  that  those  who
    would wish to seek and cause them harm will be able to do so  and  will
    do so with impunity without there being protection for them.

97. The OGN dated June 2012  at  paragraph  3.9.2  states  that  non-Muslim
    minorities such as  Sikhs,  Hindus  and  Christians  continue  to  face
    societal discrimination and harassment and in some cases violence.   It
    was said that it was not systematic but that the government did nothing
    to  improve  conditions.   As  to  other   background   material   that
    demonstrates risk to Sikhs and their general security, the COIS  Report
    originally issued in February 2013 has been reissued on  8th  May  2013
    solely to add this quote at 21.36:-

         "The  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing  International
         Protection Needs of Asylum Seekers from Afghanistan, December  2010
         noted, 'According to some reports, members of the  Hindu  and  Sikh
         communities continue to face  societal  discrimination,  harassment
         and in some cases, violence at the hands of the  members  of  other
         religious groups'."

98. It is difficult to speculate why such a quote has  been  added  to  the
    reissued May 2013 report when it was not in the original  report  dated
    February 2013.  Is this because there is  growing  recognition  of  the
    difficulties faced by Sikhs and Hindus as a result of an escalation  in
    violence?  The evidence is not clear but at  its  highest  it  suggests
    that the situation has changed substantially from the country  guidance
    case of SL and that violence has been used against Sikhs.

99.   As to the sufficiency of protection,  Dr  Ballard  notes  that  where
    persecution  has  happened  against  the  Sikh  population  it  is  not
    deliberately perpetrated by the state but by non  -state  actors  whose
    activities the authorities are  unable  or  unwilling  to  provide  the
    victims with sufficiency of protection.  The report makes reference  to
    the limited capabilities of the Afghan  National  Police  referring  to
    evidence of extortion by police officers (page 39) and that the  Afghan
    National Police units have been populated by rebadged  Mujahedeen  "who
    had just changed their clothes".  At paragraph 87,  relating  to  Kabul
    itself, it is stated that although nominally under the control  of  the
    Afghan security  forces,  the  high  concentration  of  government  and
    internal institutions creates a target rich environment.  Reference  is
    made at paragraph 88 to the Taliban who have regained  control  of  the
    large part of the countryside but had  begun  to  act  with  increasing
    impunity within Kabul itself and despite the ISAF's huge expenditure on
    training up the Afghan National Army and the  Afghan  National  Police,
    their capacity to offer members  of  local  minority  groups  who  find
    themselves targeted by local insurgents is close to zero, especially in
    the case of the Afghan National Police.  Dr Ballard's view is that  the
    authorities are not able to provide  a  sufficiency  of  protection  to
    those who are the most vulnerable to the predatory  activities  of  non
    state actors.  In this case he is referring to those who seek to extort
    money, to  threaten,  use  violence  or  kidnap  members  of  the  Sikh
    population.  The description at paragraph 88 by Dr Ballard relating  to
    sufficiency of protection appears to be consistent with the quote  from
    the OGN that the government had done nothing to improve conditions.

100. The case of Baljit Singh is referred to in both the COIS Report  relied
    upon by the Respondent and by  Dr  Ballard.   He  was  an  Afghan  Sikh
    returned to Afghanistan after a  failed  asylum  claim  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The analysis of Dr Ballard is set out at  paragraphs  104  to
    105 of his report.  In the COIS Report it is referred to  at  paragraph
    21.41 citing the Guardian newspaper report.   It  is  clear  from  that
    report in the COIS Report that Mr Singh was deported from  the  UK  and
    was spotted by Afghan Government officials as soon as  he  stepped  off
    the aeroplane marked out by his distinctive Sikh turban.  He was  taken
    aside for questioning, put in prison for eighteen months  during  which
    time he never received a charge sheet, let alone a conviction.  He  was
    told informally that his crime was falsely claiming to be  Afghan.   He
    refers to being verbally and physically abused in prison and  that  his
    turban had been kicked; that which marked him out as  a  Sikh.   It  is
    dangerous to draw conclusions from the evidence of one  person  but  if
    that account is  true,  it  gives  some  indication  of  the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection for those who are  highly  visible  religious
    minorities such as Sikhs.

101.   When considering whether  internal  relocation  is  reasonable,  this
    must be determined on a case by case  basis  taking  into  account  the
    security, human rights and humanitarian environment in the  prospective
    area of relocation at the time of the decision.  In this respect I have
    taken into account the availability of traditional  support  mechanisms
    such as relatives and friends able to host the Appellants.  There is no
    dispute before the Tribunal that the traditional  extended  family  and
    community structures in Afghanistan society continues to constitute the
    main protection and coping mechanisms, particularly in areas where  the
    infrastructure is under pressure.  Afghans rely on the  structures  and
    links for their safety  and  economic  survival,  including  access  to
    accommodation and an adequate level of subsistence.  In urban  centres,
    for example Kabul, the IDP population and economic  migration  has  put
    increased pressure on the labour market and resources.  When applied to
    the facts of this appeal,  there  is  unchallenged  evidence  that  the
    Appellant and his family have no remaining  relatives  in  Afghanistan.
    The Appellant's parents left Jalalabad, their home city, as a result of
    persecution arising from their religious background  and  were  granted
    refugee status in the United Kingdom in 2004.   They  are  now  British
    citizens.  It  is  not  suggested  that  there  are  any  other  family
    relatives in Kabul who would be able to provide any form of  assistance
    should the family seek to relocate.  Thus they are not in the  position
    of returnees with a family support network.

102.    In  this  context,  I  have  considered  the  competing  submissions
    concerning possible accommodation for the family.  Mr  McVeety  submits
    that the family could obtain accommodation, help  and  assistance  from
    the gurdwara in Kabul.  He submits that the DVD shows the circumstances
    in which people live and that there would be  room  available  for  the
    family should they wish to access it.  The evidence from  Dr  Ballard's
    report at paragraph 120 is that whilst the  gurdwara  would  provide  a
    temporary safe haven for locally based Sikhs and Hindus who have had to
    leave their homes, as well as those who have returned  to  Afghanistan,
    taking up residence  in  a  compound  does  not  provide  a  meaningful
    prospect for  the  future.   He  describes  the  gurdwara  compound  as
    something being "turned into something lying halfway between  a  ghetto
    and a refugee camp whose occupants rely on the charity of the remaining
    members of the community  to  provide  them  with  food,  clothing  and
    shelter".  On the DVD the gurdwara in Shur Bazar was filmed.  It is set
    out at the transcript at page 17.  The interviewee stated that she  did
    not have a house and that she had no relatives.  She confirmed that she
    had lived in  the  room  and  it  was  poorly  constructed  with  light
    material.  The interviewer said:-

         "Look at the house, its roof is built with feeble  and  uninsulated
         material.  Kabul, Afghanistan, has cold  and  harsh  winters,  snow
         will start to fall within two or three weeks.  This woman  together
         with her husband and four children live in a small confined  space.
         You can see yourself the living conditions they live in."

103. The description given by Dr Ballard as it being  somewhere  between  "a
    ghetto and a refugee camp" may be an overly descriptive phrase but what
    the DVD shows of that particular gurdwara is that  the  conditions  are
    extremely poor and whilst it showed a  carpet  and  a  television,  the
    occupants made it clear that this was unsuitable accommodation but  was
    all that was available.  Whatever  has  been  said  about  the  visible
    living conditions, little evidence is known about the  availability  of
    such accommodation.  This is a family of five, with a child who is  now
    1 year of age and female twins aged 6.  The gurdwara must offer  finite
    resources and there is no evidence before the Tribunal as to  how  such
    accommodation could be accessed, what is in fact available for families
    in the circumstances of these particular Appellants.

104.   In respect  of  education,  the  2011  International  Freedom  Report
    demonstrates that many of the Sikhs and Hindu communities do  not  send
    their children to public school because of  reported  abuse,  harassing
    and bullying by other students.  It refers to in previous years  Hindus
    and Sikhs sending their children  to  private  schools  but  that  many
    schools have closed down since  the  country's  deteriorating  economic
    circumstances and that the private schools  are  now  unaffordable  for
    most families.  Given the circumstances in which they  left  Jalalabad,
    it is likely that they would  not  wish  to  subject  the  children  to
    further abuse and harassment and thus would not send their children  to
    public school.  The family would not have any  resources  available  to
    them to use a private system.

105.   I have also considered whether  or  not  they  have  the  ability  to
    sustain themselves including any livelihood opportunities.  Sikhs as an
    ethnic group tend to be the trading/shop owning class.  That  is  amply
    demonstrated  by  the  family's  historic  employment  concerning   the
    Appellant's parents and this Appellant himself.   In  the  findings  of
    fact made earlier in this determination, it was  as  a  result  of  the
    occupation as a shop owner trading in bicycles that  led  him  and  his
    family members to become the victims of persecutory treatment that  led
    them to leave Jalalabad in the first place.  The report of  Dr  Ballard
    makes it  clear  that  there  is  little  prospect  of  this  Appellant
    obtaining employment.  He refers to the need to  rent  a  shop  and  to
    rebuild a relationship with suppliers then attract customers  but  also
    coping with established bicycle merchants in the immediate locality who
    are likely to be Muslim and that  it  is  likely  that  he  would  face
    exploitation against that background (see paragraph 121 of the report).
     It would be difficult if not impossible in my view for this  Appellant
    against the background that he has stated to rent a  shop  and  rebuild
    his relationship with suppliers upon return.  It is not said on  behalf
    of the Respondent how he would be able to rebuild a  relationship  with
    suppliers in a wholly different area and little consideration has  been
    given to the position of the Muslim majority  who  are  not  likely  to
    provide assistance to this Appellant given his religion as a Sikh.

106.   The reference at paragraph 3.9.3 to the United States  Commission  on
    International Religious Freedom Report from 2011 stating "the situation
    of Afghanistan small communities of Hindus and Sikhs has improved since
    the fall of the Taliban" appears to be in the context of the ability to
    practise faith in places of public worship only.  It does not appear to
    address the situation in relation to attitudes  and  actions  of  those
    within society committing acts of  intimidation  and  violence  against
    members of those faiths.  To that extent that  evidence  is  stating  a
    generality rather than to give any specific evidence as to risk.  It is
    also in this context that it is said that the Sikh community  are  able
    to practise their religion publicly and are able to  perform  cremation
    rites.  Mr McVeety relies upon the COIS Report at paragraph 21.38 where
    it is recorded that Hindus and Sikhs complained of not  being  able  to
    cremate the remains of their dead in accordance with the  customs,  due
    to interference by those who live near  the  cremation  sites.   It  is
    recorded that the government did not protect Sikhs' rights to carry out
    cremations but however a Sikh senator requested the intervention of the
    Ministry of Interior to provide protection and  escort  to  Hindus  and
    Sikhs in the event of cremation within their  communities.   Thus  they
    were able to cremate their remains.  The fact that they  were  able  to
    carry out that part of their religious heritage does not in my judgment
    suggest an improvement  as  a  whole  for  the  position  of  Sikhs  in
    Afghanistan given the material that I have referred to earlier.  Indeed
    the 2012 US CIRF Report which  highlighted  the  apparent  improvements
    since the fall of the Taliban also  added  that  the  communities  face
    discrimination and violence.

107.   Therefore drawing that evidence together, I find  that  the  evidence
    demonstrates that the  Sikh  community  is  the  subject  not  only  of
    societal discrimination but also being subject  to  violence,  threats,
    harassment and also the threats of kidnap (see  Dr  Ballard's  report).
    Afghan Sikhs are particularly susceptible to  persecution  given  their
    particular status as Afghan Sikhs and  thus  taking  into  account  all
    those factors I  have  reached  the  conclusion  when  considering  the
    particular circumstances of this Appellant and his family members  that
    it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate  to
    Kabul.  I have taken into account  the  situation  of  this  particular
    Appellant, whose age, gender, experience, skills and  family  ties  are
    relevant, in deciding whether it is reasonable to expect the  Appellant
    and his family members to relocate.  As noted in the case of DSG,  each
    case must be considered on its own individual  basis  and  on  its  own
    individual facts.  This decision does not necessarily mean  that  every
    Afghan Sikh returning to Afghanistan will not be able  to  relocate  to
    Kabul or  any  other  identified  area.   Much  depends  on  their  own
    particular circumstances.

108.   Having considered the evidence produced for  this  particular  appeal
    in relation to this particular Appellant and his  family  members,  who
    have given a  credible  account  of  having  being  subjected  to  past
    persecution on account of his religion and ethnicity in Afghanistan,  I
    have  reached  the  conclusion  that  internal  relocation  is  not   a
    reasonable possibility  and that return for this family would be unduly
    harsh looking at the evidence and assessing it in the round and in  its
    totality.

Decision

109. The decision of the original Tribunal involved the making of  an  error
    on a point of law.  The appeal is remade as follows:-

    The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and on Article 3 grounds.






Signed                              Date 30 August 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


