
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: AA/04797/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                        |   Determination Promulgated|
|On 12 November 2015                          |   On 18 November 2015      |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                                     Ma
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr T Gaisford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
      against the decision of the respondent dated 10  March  2015  refusing
      his claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
      Kingdom.  The  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Anstis   dismissed   the
      appellant's  appeal  in  a  determination  dated  4  September   2015.
      Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert
      on  28  September  2015  saying  that  there  has  been  an   arguable
      administrative error of law by the Judge proceeding with the appeal in
      the absence of the appellant.



   2. Thus the appeal came before me.









The findings of the First-tier Tribunal

3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal for  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection.



4. At paragraph 3 of the determination the Judge stated "the  appellant  did
   not attend and was not represented at this hearing. No appellant's bundle
   or witness statements have been filed. On 3 June  2015,  the  appellant's
   representatives made an application to adjourn the hearing listed for  17
   August. This application was refused  on  3  August  2015  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Plumtree.". The Judge having satisfied  herself  that  the
   parties had been notified of the hearing and in the interests of  justice
   proceeded to hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant.



The grounds of appeal




5. The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  are  in  summary  as  follows.  The
   appellant and his legal representatives were unaware that the hearing was
   due to take place on 17 August 2015 and believed that a new hearing  date
   would be scheduled. "The tribunal is informed that in  a  telephone  call
   with  Tribunal  staff  on  3   August   2015,   the   appellant's   legal
   representatives were informed that the notice of  the  new  hearing  date
   together with the  Asylum  Prehearing  Review  Form  and  the  Tribunal's
   directions  were  to  be  sent  by  the  Tribunal  to   the   appellant's
   representatives on or after 3 August 2015 and before the hearing date  of
   17 August 2015".



6. "It was confirmed that the above correspondences were to  be  sent  after
   the  prehearing   review.   The   Tribunal   is   informed   that   these
   correspondences were  never  received  by  the  appellant  or  his  legal
   representatives." The legal representatives only received notice that the
   hearing had gone ahead on 17 August 2015 after receiving  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's determination on 7 September 2015.



7. The Judge therefore fell into  error  by  finding  that  the  appellant's
   representatives were aware that the hearing  was  to  take  place  on  17
   August 2015 when they were not so aware. The appellant held a  legitimate
   expectation that the hearing dated 17 August 2015 was to be adjourned and
   that a notice of hearing was to be sent to his legal representatives,  as
   confirmed by the Tribunal staff on 3 August 2015.  It  would  be  in  the
   interests of natural justice for this appeal to be reheard by the  First-
   tier Tribunal.



The hearing


8. At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties as to whether  there
   has been an error of law.   On  behalf  of  the  appellant  Mr  Gainsford
   submitted that the appellant was not aware of  what  was  going  on.  The
   application for  an  adjournment  was  made  in  June  2015  because  the
   appellant wanted a  certain  barrister  to  represent  him  and  when  he
   discovered that the barrister would not be available for  that  date,  an
   adjournment was requested from the Tribunal. The solicitors relied on the
   information given to them by the Tribunal on the telephone  on  3  August
   2015. The solicitors acted in good faith. I must consider  the  interests
   of justice for this appellant. The appellant is a vulnerable  person  and
   it is important that he has a fair  hearing.  The  Judge  struggled  with
   reference to Article 8 because she said in her determination that she has
   no information as to how Article 8 is engaged or to be applied. The fact-
   finding has not been done and therefore the determination is not safe.



9. Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent relied on the Rule 24  response.  He
   submitted that the solicitors knew that the hearing date  was  17  August
   2015 and made no effort to find out whether the adjournment  request  had
   been successful. The central matrix of the case was not in  dispute.  The
   appellant's mental health issues were known before the hearing  date  was
   set. The appellant can apply for Article 8 if he feels that has not  been
   considered.



Decision on Error of Law



10. The appellant submits that his representatives made an  application  for
   the appeal which was set down to  be  heard  on  17  August  2015  to  be
   adjourned.  The  appellant  also  asserts   that   he   and   his   legal
   representative did not receive a notification that the  appeal  would  go
   ahead on 17 August 2015 because they did not receive an Asylum Prehearing
   Review Form or directions made by the Tribunal.



11. It would appear that after making an  application  for  an  adjournment,
   the appellant and his representatives proceeded on the  basis  that  they
   had been granted the adjournment. There is no credible  evidence  of  any
   effort made by  the  solicitors  to  find  out  whether  the  adjournment
   application had been granted. The hearing was set down for 17 August 2015
   and that is the day that the hearing took place. It was incumbent on  the
   appellant  and  his  legal  representatives  to  find  out  whether   the
   adjournment application was successful. They did not. The  appellant  and
   his legal representatives cannot assume that if they make an  application
   for an adjournment, it is an inevitability that it will be granted.



12. At paragraph 5 of the grounds of appeal it  is  stated  that  the  first
   time the solicitors realised that the appeal had gone ahead on 17  August
   2015 was when they received the First-tier Tribunal's determination on  7
   September 2015. The solicitors rely on a communication  by  a  member  of
   staff of the Tribunal on the telephone on 3 August 2015 that the Tribunal
   will notify them about the new hearing date. That would mean that as of 3
   June 2015 when they made their application and 3 August  2015,  they  did
   nothing to find out whether their application had been successful. It  is
   the duty of the solicitors to find out whether there adjournment  request
   was successful and not rely on a verbal communication from the Tribunal.



13. Be that as it may, in the interests of justice, the appellant should  be
   given an opportunity to provide evidence as to the risk on return to Iraq
   for the appellant. The appellant is a vulnerable individual  due  to  his
   age and mental condition. He should not be penalised for his  solicitor's
   oversight and lack of due diligence.



14.  The  Judge  noted  in  her  determination  that   the   appellant   has
   grandchildren in this country but she has no information from  which  you
   can conclude that their best interests would  require  the  appellant  to
   remain in the United Kingdom, nor does she have any information as to how
   it is said that Article 8 applies to the appellant's situation. Therefore
   the appellant's evidence was  necessary  for  the  Tribunal  to  come  to
   sustainable conclusions.



15. There are also matters in respect of the appellant's  claim  for  asylum
   and humanitarian protection where the Judge notes that she does not  have
   evidence. Iin light of the guidance in the country guidance  case  of  HM
   and others (article 15 (c) CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC) where  it  is  said
   that  "each  case  must  be  carefully  considered  with  regard  to  the
   particular profile of the claimant". The appellant's oral as well as  any
   documentary evidence would assist the Tribunal  to  come  to  conclusions
   after a full evaluation of the appellant's personal circumstances.



16. The determination in itself has not been criticised and nor can  it  be.
   The Judge made sustainable findings on the evidence that was  before  her
   but justice demands that the  appellant's  evidence  is  also  considered
   given the possible severity of the consequences to the appellant  if  the
   right decision is not made.



17. I find that there is a material error of law  in  the  determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect of procedural fairness  and  the
   Judge's decision is set aside. I direct that the appeal be placed  before
   the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Anstis.

.






DECISION


Appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing



Signed by


Mrs S Chana
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                                        11th  day
of November 2015





