
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04408/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 29 May 2013                                |On 28 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                     MFA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rassool, of counsel, instructed by Switalskis
Solicitors,
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st March 1982.

2.   The appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  upon  a  student  visa
    granted on 19th October 2011 and claimed asylum  on  20th  March  2012.
    The respondent in a detailed reasons for refusal dated 18th April  2012
    rejected that application  and  gave  directions  for  the  appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pugh  on  3rd  July  2012.   The
    appellant was not found to be credible as  to  his  claim  and  in  the
    alternative, if credible, would not sustain any risk upon  return  such
    as to engage the Convention.

4.   Grounds of appeal were submitted  contending  that  the  judge  was  in
    error in the approach taken.  Leave to appeal was granted  in  relation
    to that matter on 1st November 2012.

5.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant of leave.

6.   In summary it is the case for the appellant that he  has  been  in  the
    army for many years as an IT specialist.  In that capacity he has  been
    approached repeatedly  by  the  Taliban  for  information.   Though  he
    mentioned his concerns to senior officers they  seemed  indifferent  to
    his plight.  The appellant contends that there came an  occasion  where
    the Taliban sought to blow him up.  He fears return on that account.

7.   Given the indifference of his superiors and the threats that were  made
    against him, there came a time when the appellant sought to  leave  the
    army.  That leave was refused and he has in effect  deserted  from  the
    army and he fears therefore punishment from the army upon return.

8.   In terms of his difficulties with the Taliban, those has been  set  out
    in some detail by  the  judge  in  the  determination  particularly  at
    paragraphs 14 to 29.

9.   The appellant said  he  joined  the  army  in  December  2001  and  his
    computer experience was discovered.   His  main  task  was  to  prepare
    PowerPoint presentations for briefings by senior ranking officers.   He
    worked for the United Nations, returning to Pakistan in 2005.   It  was
    upon his posting to Mangoa that his problems began.   When  working  at
    that time with the movement of convoys the Taliban found out about that
    matter and they contacted him in 2006.  In 2007 the calls  became  more
    specific.  A meeting was suggested.  In August  2007  the  tone  became
    more threatening, enquiries being made of his whereabouts  in  December
    2007 by two women apparently selling cloth.

10.  The threats seemingly ceased when the appellant married and got  a  new
    telephone but started again in 2010  when  he  was  posted  to  Meltam.
    There were many threatening calls starting in March 2011 lasting  until
    July of that year.  The Taliban were still wanting data from him.

11.  Matters seemingly  culminated  in  February  2011  when  the  appellant
    caught a rickshaw which placed him in the vicinity of a bomb blast when
    he was injured.  It is the case of the  appellant  that  the  telephone
    calls continued in Gujarat.  He continued to report the  threats  after
    the appellant left the army but the threats seemingly continued.

12.  Reliance was placed upon the expert report of Dr Gill Daryn dated  15th
    June 2012.  My attention was drawn to paragraph 16 of that report which
    speaks of the  fact  that  the  Pakistan  Taliban  continuously  employ
    methods such as espionage and recruitments of collaborators against the
    Pakistani army as well as numerous infiltration attempts.

13.    The  expert  concludes  in  paragraph  21  of  the  report  that  the
    appellant's claim that he was repeatedly contacted  and  threatened  by
    the Taliban was plausible.

14.  It is clear from paragraph 34 of the determination that the  judge  has
    in mind that particular  report,  but  nevertheless  concludes,  for  a
    number of reasons, that the appellant's account of his involvement with
    the Taliban lacks credibility.

15.  In fairness to the appellant the judge notes that he had  a  successful
    army career, being promoted to Lance-Niak in 2009.  This is  equivalent
    to Lance Corporal.  It was recognised  in  paragraph  33  that  if  the
    employment was  as  described  there  may  be  some  substance  in  the
    contention by the appellant that he would be attractive to the Taliban.

16.  However, the judge did not accept as being credible that  the  Taliban,
    being  the  organisation  of  violence  and  intolerance,  would   have
    threatened the appellant over such a long period without  having  taken
    more drastic action.  The Judge did not  find  it  credible  that  they
    would have spent some five  years  trying  to  recruit  the  appellant,
    showing a patience for which they were not well known.   Those  matters
    were raised in paragraph 50 and 51 of the determination.

17.  The Judge went  on  to  consider  the  relatively  lowly  rank  of  the
    appellant and questioned whether  indeed  he  genuinely  had  such  key
    material.

18.  In any event  the  judge  did  not  find  it  credible  that,  had  the
    appellant been of the importance to the army security which he  claims,
    his repeated complaints to his senior officers about the approaches  of
    the Taliban would not have been taken seriously.  Those matters are set
    out in paragraphs 47 to 49.

19.  The judge considered the explosion, and though  in  not  in  any  sense
    disbelieving the appellant that he was caught up in it and injured  did
    not  find,  looking  at  the  matter  as  a  whole,  that  it  was   an
    assassination attempt specifically directed to the appellant.

20.  For those reasons alone or in combination the judge did  not  find  the
    account of the appellant's continuous harassment by the Taliban to be a
    credible one in all the circumstances.

21.  In  any  event,  the  appellant  no  longer  had  any  access  to  such
    information and would no longer be of any interest to  the  Taliban  on
    that account.

22.  Mr Rassool seeks to suggest that the Judge did not pay  due  regard  to
    the expert report.  It seems  to  me  quite  the  reverse.   The  judge
    clearly had in mind what was said, but in the practical application  of
    the facts did not agree with the conclusion to be drawn.

23.   The particular facts have been carefully  analysed  situation  in  the
    determination, and I do not find any error of approach by the judge  in
    that  respect.   It  has  been  emphasised  on  many   occasions   that
    credibility should be viewed holistically, looking at all matters  from
    different angles and taking into account various factors.  It seems  to
    me that that is precisely what the judge has done in the  circumstances
    of this case.

24.  The next issue relates to  the  claimed  desertion  by  the  appellant.
    Evidence that is relied upon  by  the  appellant  in  support  of  that
    contention was firstly his military card issued in 2002.   He  contends
    that if he had retired from the army he would  have  been  required  to
    have handed that back.

25.  The second document being that set out in Annex I to  the  respondent's
    bundle, namely the letter which the appellant claims that he  presented
    to his commanding officer dated 17th February 2011  wishing  to  retire
    from the army.  A copy of the original of that letter is produced  with
    it crossed cancelled.  The appellant contends that it was the  attitude
    of his superior officer merely to deny that application.

26.  The letter itself was reacquired from the army files by a friend.

27.   The  judge  paid  careful  regard  to  that  letter,  particularly  at
    paragraph 53 to 56 of the determination.  It was noted that  it  was  a
    letter in the Urdu  language  but  had  "cancel"  written  upon  it  in
    English.  The judge comments that perhaps a more appropriate word would
    have been "refused".

28.  The judge noted the issue of the letter and of the card.

29.  The judge noted the manner of the appellant's departure  upon  his  own
    passport and did not consider that it was credible that  the  appellant
    could have departed upon that passport and obtained a student visa  had
    he been somebody who had been regarded  as  having  deserted  from  the
    army.

30.  It is perhaps of significance in the circumstances  of  the  case  that
    the letter is dated 17th February 2011.  The appellant was supposed  to
    return to the army in April 2011 but did not do so  and  there  came  a
    time when he was sought by the police who went to his property to  find
    him because he had not returned to the army.  Seemingly,  according  to
    the appellant as noted in paragraph 28 of the determination, an FIR was
    issued in connection with that matter.

31.  No FIR has been presented nor any document  relating  to  the  interest
    purportedly shown in the appellant by  the  authorities  following  his
    desertion.

32.  The point which Mr Kingham makes in the course of  his  submissions  to
    me is that there is no material  from  the  army,  whether  by  way  of
    stoppage of pay, letter or correspondence seeking him subsequent to his
    departure or indeed before.

33.  Mr Rassool, who represents the  appellant,  invited  me  to  find  that
    given the two documents that were in existence the benefit of the doubt
    should have been given to the appellant in the claim  which  he  makes.
    It is clear that he had been in the army for a long time and there must
    have been some reason for him not to have continued in it.

34.  Although the skeleton argument as submitted  by  Mr  Rassool  seeks  to
    deal with the Taliban as a distinct entity from that of  desertion,  as
    Mr Kingham indicates both are to some extent interrelated.

35.  If, in fact, there was no credible evidence that the appellant was  the
    subject of repeated threats from the Taliban,  then clearly the  reason
    which he gives for his desertion would  not  have  been  substantiated.
    If the appellant had the expertise of such importance within  the  army
    it is  surprising,  Mr  Kingham  submits,  that  there  is  no  further
    documentation to show any interest by  the  army  in  him  and  in  his
    absence.

36.  There is some substance to that matter because of course the  appellant
    did not leave Pakistan  until  October  2011,  many  months  after  his
    claimed desertion.  It is surprising in those circumstances that  there
    were no letters from the army written to him requesting him  to  return
    or any recent documents showing military service .

37.  The judge therefore came to the conclusion that the appellant  was  not
    a deserter.  In the alternative, however, the question  was  considered
    whether in those circumstances he would face persecution or prosecution
    were he to return.  That is a matter that has been  considered  by  the
    judge at paragraph 63 onwards.  In that connection the judge had regard
    to the evidence in the expert  report  that  under  the  penal  code  a
    deserter could be imprisoned for two years and/or pay a fine.

38.  Mr Rassool seeks to rely upon the penal code which seems  to  speak  of
    capital punishment for desertion, although  that  would  seem  more  to
    relate to desertion on  active  duty.   It  was  not  a  matter  raised
    specifically by the expert.

39.  Reliance is placed upon the treatment of certain deserters but, as  was
    noted by the judge specifically in paragraph 70 of  the  determination,
    they related to high ranking officers rather than to  the  position  of
    the appellant.

40.  Looking at the matter as a whole I find that the approach taken by  the
    Tribunal judge was entirely  proper  in  all  the  circumstances.   The
    nature of the appellant's claim has been considered from  a  number  of
    perspectives and findings properly open to be made have been made.  Due
    account has been given to the expert report.  I find that the  decision
    of the judge has been arrived at carefully and with full  consideration
    to the facts.  In essence the grounds of appeal amount to  little  more
    than an attempt to reargue the merits of the appeal.

41.  Mr Rassool seeks to indicate that further  is likely to  be  presented.
    That may or may not be the case, but I have to focus upon the  analysis
    of the case as was conducted by the judge at the hearing.   If  further
    material evidence has come to light  which  alters  the  case  for  the
    appellant then no doubt an application for a fresh hearing can be made.



42.  However, for the purposes of this matter I do not find there to be  any
    material error of law in the approach  taken  by  the  judge  to  these
    issues.

43.  In the circumstances the decision shall stand, namely that  the  asylum
    appeal is dismissed, that in relation  to  humanitarian  protection  is
    dismissed and that in respect of human rights is also dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

