

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04948/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 11 December 2013                           |On 5 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              MR SAEED ALIZADEH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mensah dismissed this  appeal  in  which
   the appellant claimed to have a well-founded fear of persecution in  Iran
   on the basis of his conversion from Islam to Christianity.  Permission to
   appeal was granted and there was a hearing on 30  September  2013  before
   Judge Aitken in the Upper Tribunal.  On 23 October  2013  following  this
   hearing Judge Aitken issued a corrected version of his decision on  error
   of law.  In terms of this decision there was  to  be  a  further  hearing
   before the Upper Tribunal for the  purpose  of  re-making  the  decision.
   This hearing took place before me on 11 December 2013.


Error of law

2) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the  appellant's
   conversion  to  Christianity  was  genuine  and  this  finding  was   not
   overturned by the Upper Tribunal.  The issue before  the  Upper  Tribunal
   was whether the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had  properly  assessed
   risk on return.  The appellant had put entries on  Facebook  relating  to
   his alleged conversion.  On the risk which might arise from  this,  Judge
   Aitken expressed the following conclusions in his decision of 23  October
   2013:

    "9.    Here the First-tier Tribunal Judge acknowledged the position  as
           to examination  of  risk  on  return  at  paragraph  39  of  the
           determination and went on in paragraph 39  and  40  to  indicate
           that there was insufficient evidence to show  that  the  Iranian
           authorities had the capacity or will to  search  for  everything
           written on Facebook were they not firstly  in  possession  of  a
           name which had stirred their interest.   That  may  be  so,  but
           there was evidence before the Tribunal on that  occasion  within
           the Home Office Operational Guidance Note on Iran  at  paragraph
           3.6.8 that the authorities  did  conduct  Facebook  searches  on
           people who were returned to Iran, and required  them  to  reveal
           their passwords so that private  pages  could  be  checked.   An
           assessment is required of the dangers arising  out  of  that  in
           this case, dealing also with Mr  Dewison's  point  that  all  is
           required is a simple erasure before arrival, or as it is put  in
           the Middle East Report Online at page  187  of  the  appellant's
           bundle "in bound travellers will de-activate their account."


       10. The parties were unable to deal with these points before me  and
           the decision will have to be remade by the Upper Tribunal  after
           a further hearing limited to the issue of  the  risk  on  return
           arising out of Facebook.


       11.  Ms  Brakaj  sought  leave  to  re-open  the  question  of   the
           appellant's conversion, since he has now  been  in  the  country
           longer and his position is  inevitably  somewhat  different,  in
           addition a matter for which he was previously  criticised,  that
           of his religious leader not being called has now  been  remedied
           and the pastor of his church is willing to give evidence,  there
           was however no bar to him giving evidence on the last  occasion.
           I must refuse that application, there is no error of law  within
           the decision as regards the findings relating to  the  sincerity
           of his conversion.  If there has been a change of  circumstances
           the appellant must make a further application."

Evidence

3) For the resumed hearing, the appellant submitted a supplementary  witness
   statement dated 3 December  2013  addressing  his  use  of  his  Facebook
   account.  The appellant sought to give further evidence  at  the  hearing
   before me in relation to this matter.  He adopted his  witness  statement
   and was cross-examined.

4) In cross-examination it  was  pointed  out  to  the  appellant  that  his
   Facebook account could  be  de-activated  or  shut  down  by  way  of  an
   application to  Facebook.   The  appellant  acknowledged  that  this  was
   possible.  He acknowledged that he was not aware of any technical  reason
   why this could not be done.  The appellant was asked if he would do  this
   before he returned to Iran.  The appellant replied  that  it  was  not  a
   question of de-activating his account but of de-activating himself.   The
   use of Facebook was a way of communicating with many people and it was an
   important job for a Christian person to  invite  people  to  share  their
   faith.  The appellant confirmed that  he  used  Facebook  to  spread  his
   faith.  He confirmed that he was still in touch with his family in  Iran.
   He maintained contact through a friend.  He had not spoken to his  family
   recently but he had spoken to his friend.  His father was not allowed  to
   work and his brother was not allowed to go to university because  of  the
   problems he had caused them.

5) The appellant  was  asked  if  it  was  his  position  that  the  Iranian
   authorities  were  aware  of  his  Facebook  activities.   The  appellant
   indicated that anyone in Iran could access his  Facebook  account.   This
   would cause problems for his family but not  for  him  in  the  UK.   The
   appellant referred to a teaching of Jesus that if someone preferred their
   parents over him then they were not a part of him.  He confirmed that  it
   was more important to him to continue his  Facebook  activities  than  to
   safeguard his family's safety.

6) The  appellant  was  asked  if  there  was  a  specific  reason  why  the
   authorities would know about  his  Facebook  activities.   The  appellant
   replied that he was not sure.   He  referred  to  the  possibility  of  a
   Facebook "friend" giving the authorities his details.  He referred to the
   existence of Facebook accounts  which  appeared  to  have  been  made  by
   Christians but were in fact fake in order to find people like him.

7) The appellant was asked if his family had been told  about  his  Facebook
   activities.  When the appellant asked for a further  explanation  he  was
   asked if, when his father and brother were detained as  he  had  alleged,
   they were told the reasons for their detention.   The  appellant  replied
   that they were told it was because of him.  He was asked what  they  were
   specifically told about him.  The appellant replied that they  were  told
   he was going to church in Iran and spreading the faith.  A Holy book  was
   found in the family home.  As a result his father could not get a job and
   his brother could not go to university and this might be because  of  the
   appellant's Facebook account.

8) The appellant was asked if his Facebook account had  been  blocked.   The
   appellant replied that he could access the internet only in the  library.
   There were 2 or 3 occasions on which he had tried to open the account and
   it would not open or it opened without  any  details  or  information  or
   without all the friends listed.  The next day  everything  was  fine  and
   working perfectly.

9) In re-examination it was put to the appellant that he  had  678  Facebook
   friends.  He was asked how many he had invited to be friends and how many
   had invited him.  The appellant replied that he did not know.  Everyday 4
   or 5 people added him to their Facebook account.  Sometimes this  was  in
   "posts" that come up or a photograph  or  something  about  Christianity.
   His friends' friends might put these out and he would then add the person
   because of that post.  The appellant referred to a list of  his  Facebook
   friends in the documentary evidence.   Mr  Mangion,  intervened  at  this
   point to say that not all of these friends were in Iran.  Ms Brakaj asked
   the appellant to confirm that he found requests every time he  logged  on
   and the appellant did so.  Ms Brakaj asked him if he was unable  to  tell
   whether these were fake accounts or whether he knew the  people  and  the
   appellant confirmed that he was unable to tell.  He was asked if he  made
   any checks.  He said he took a look at the request and sometimes accepted
   it without looking further.  The appellant was asked how he  found  these
   posts.  He said they appeared on his page when he logged in.

Submissions

10) In his  submission  for  the  respondent  Mr  Mangion  relied  upon  the
   respondent's reasons for refusals letter and the  findings  made  by  the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, who found that the appellant was not  a
   genuine convert, and made a number of other findings  at  paragraphs  18,
   24, 26, 28 and 31 of the determination.  The appellant had the option  of
   de-activating or deleting completely his account provided he  was  not  a
   genuine convert.  As he was not, he would not be protected by  HJ  (Iran)
   [2010] UKSC 31.

11) Mr Mangion asked whether the authorities in Iran would be aware  of  the
   appellant's situation.  If the appellant's claim to be a convert was  not
   credible then there was no reason why the authorities would look  at  his
   activities and no reason why he would come to their  attention.   It  was
   suggested that the authorities were monitoring the Facebook  account  but
   there were many thousands of Facebook accounts and they were not able  to
   monitor them all.  Mr Mangion referred to the case of  BA  (Demonstrators
   in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 and to Freedom  House
   reports of 2011, 2012 and 2013 on "Freedom on the  Net".   There  was  no
   mention in the 2013 report  of  anyone  being  targeted  exclusively  for
   religious activities.  The report for 2013 referred to desecrating  Islam
   through offences related to pornography.  Prosecutions  were  related  to
   political activities and there was  a  cross-over  between  politics  and
   religion but no reference  to  anyone  targeted  exclusively  because  of
   having converted.  It was necessary to insult Islam or the  Ayatollah  to
   experience difficulties.  The government in Iran had access  to  Facebook
   and if the appellant's page had come  to  their  attention  it  could  be
   blocked.  The fact that this had not happened showed that the authorities
   were not interested in his account, which was one  of  thousands.   There
   was a suggestion of  a  more  lenient  attitude  since  the  Presidential
   elections but it was too early to say where this was going.  There was  a
   country guideline case on Facebook before  the  Upper  Tribunal  but  the
   decision was not expected to be promulgated until March.  Until  then  BA
   (Iran) should be followed.

12) For the appellant, Ms Brakaj submitted that the first issue was  whether
   the Iranian authorities were aware of the Facebook account.  The Judge of
   the First-tier Tribunal had asked  whether  the  authorities  would  have
   searched for the appellant's name.  It was not necessary for them  to  be
   aware of the appellant's name, however.   The  appellant  daily  receives
   requests from people he does not know asking to join his page.   He  adds
   them as friends without filtering them.   This  is  an  open  page.   The
   appellant was also a  member  of  groups  and  could  be  linked  through
   organisations such as the Israeli group or the Elim  Pentecostal  Church.
   Reference to these groups were to be found in the  documentary  evidence.
   It was not a case of the authorities just  looking  for  the  appellant's
   name but of individuals locating the appellant because of  their  beliefs
   and approaching him on Facebook.  He had such a large number of  Facebook
   friends.  He was identifiable from the Facebook page.  If the authorities
   were aware of his activities the information could be printed off even if
   the appellant's account was deleted.  For instance, where  the  appellant
   had expressed a liking for a group this might be printed  off  without  a
   power to delete.

13) Mr Mangion intervened that  it  was  not  unusual  to  have  a  thousand
   friends or more on Facebook.  Friends were accepted by clicking.

14) Ms Brakaj referred to the Freedom House report  of  2013,  at  page  16,
   which stated that the Iranian authorities follow overseas  online  posts.
   The authorities were interested in apostasy and would be interested in  a
   Christian who was challenging the authorities.  The authorities could  be
   aware of a site without blocking it and this did not mean that  they  had
   no interest in it.  The appellant was openly making posts among the Farsi
   community and among those located in Iran.   The  appellant's  activities
   included proselytising.

15) Ms Brakaj referred to country information on a crackdown on dissent  and
   the ill-treatment of  Christians,  as  well  as  a  crackdown  on  "cyber
   struggles".  There was surveillance of Facebook and there was  a  serious
   possibility and a real risk  that  the  authorities  were  aware  of  the
   appellant's activities.  As far as the authorities  were  concerned,  for
   the appellant to follow Jesus was an act of  defiance.   The  appellant's
   material was not just being liked on his own page but  was  also  be  re-
   posted.  This would then appear on the site of a friend.   Parts  of  the
   appellant's Facebook site appeared on other sites if other  people  liked
   his post.  There were lots of  friends  on  other  sites  which  put  the
   appellant at risk.

16) Ms Brakaj referred to the  appellant's  evidence  regarding  his  faith.
   She referred to the case of  Danian  [2000]  Imm  AR  96.   Even  if  the
   appellant was not believed, what would his situation be if his  site  was
   not taken  down  at  the  point  of  removal?   The  country  information
   suggested that passwords and login details would be requested  on  return
   and this would  give  rise  to  a  risk  to  the  appellant.   Ms  Brakaj
   acknowledged that, given the terms of the resumed hearing, she could  not
   argue that the appellant would refuse  to  take  down  his  site  on  the
   grounds of faith but it would need a specific request from the  appellant
   to permanently delete the material.  If the account was not  removed  and
   the appellant was asked for his login details then he was placed at risk.
    The authorities did not need to hack into the account to access it as it
   was an open account where no password was required.

Discussion

17) Ms Brakaj's reference to  Danian  was  apposite  to  this  appeal.   The
   question for me is not whether  the  Facebook  pages  maintained  by  the
   appellant reflect his genuine views or not but whether they would  expose
   him to a real risk of persecution on return to Iran.  This is a matter to
   be decided in accordance with the country information before me.

18)  Mr  Mangion's  strongest  point  was  that  the  authorities  were  not
   interested in those whose sole activity was converting to Christianity or
   promoting the Christian faith.  In order for the authorities to  take  an
   adverse interest in a person it was  necessary  to  have  some  political
   involvement or some other aspect to their activities, such  as  uploading
   pornography.  In support of this proposition Mr  Mangion  relied  on  the
   Freedom House report of 2013 at page  15.   This  material  refers  to  a
   number of named individuals, four of whom have been  sentenced  to  death
   and one of whom died in custody.  In other words, these individuals  have
   been exposed to  the  most  extreme  sanctions  imposed  by  the  Iranian
   authorities.  One of them was prosecuted  on  charges  of  insulting  and
   desecrating Islam because a software programme he had designed  was  used
   without his knowledge to upload pornography.  This is an extreme  example
   of persecution directed against computer use.  The  point  is  also  made
   that numerous bloggers are in prison in Iran and serving prison terms  of
   up to 20 years.  An increasing number of bloggers  had  been  threatened,
   arrested, tortured, kept in solitary confinement and denied medical  care
   without being tried or convicted.

19) As Ms Brakaj pointed out, the same report states that  Iranians  outside
   Iran were also intimidated for their online activities.  One faced  heavy
   criticism for a song which was  described  as  blasphemous  and  apostasy
   sentences were issued against him.  The father of an Iranian  student  in
   the Netherlands was arrested because of  his  son's  satirical  posts  on
   Facebook.  The son was threatened that if he did not return to  Iran  his
   father would be executed.  There was a significant  rise  in  reports  of
   individuals arrested for their activities  on  Facebook.   Four  internet
   users in Sirjan were arrested in October 2012 because of  their  supposed
   use of computers for anti-government  activities  and  the  insulting  of
   officials on Facebook.  Despite international legal  restrictions  placed
   on the selling of surveillance equipment to the Iranian government, there
   have been numerous media reports that Chinese and some western  companies
   were  providing  the  Iranian  authorities  with  technology  to  monitor
   citizens' digital activities.  Reports by Reuters  and  the  Wall  Street
   Journal found that two Chinese firms were key providers with surveillance
   technology to Iran's government, although  both  companies  denied  this.
   Numerous Facebook accounts of Iranian users which were deemed to  be  un-
   Islamic were hacked and defaced with a statement  from  Iran's  judiciary
   saying "By judicial order, the owner of this page has been  placed  under
   investigation."  It is said that Iran  has  significantly  increased  its
   hacking capabilities in recent years.

20) I was referred by both parties to the current country guideline case  of
   BA Iran.  This starts with the premise that given the  large  numbers  of
   those  who  demonstrate  here,  and  the  publicity  which  demonstrators
   receive, for example, on Facebook, combined with  the  inability  of  the
   Iranian government to monitor all returnees who  have  been  involved  in
   demonstrations here, regard must be had to the level  of  involvement  of
   the  individual  here  as  well  as  any  political  activity  which  the
   individual might have been involved in  Iran  before  seeking  asylum  in
   Britain.  In relation to sur place activity, it was necessary to look  at
   the type of demonstration  and  the  role  of  the  person's  involvement
   together with  the  extent  of  their  participation  and  the  publicity
   attracted.  It was also necessary to look at the risk  of  identification
   and the regime's capacity to identify individuals.  Consideration  should
   be given to factors which would trigger an inquiry or  action  on  return
   such as  a  significant  profile  or  an  immigration  history.   It  was
   necessary then to consider what the consequences of identification  would
   be and whether the person identified would face a risk on return  if  the
   border post was able to match them with the information already held.

21) On the facts found by the First-tier Tribunal this appellant was not  of
   interest to the authorities before he left Iran.  In addition, the  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that the appellant left Iran
   illegally, although it does not appear to be disputed that the  appellant
   entered the UK illegally.  Accordingly, the outcome of the appeal depends
   on whether there is a  real  risk  to  the  appellant  arising  from  his
   activities on Facebook in promoting  Christianity  and  Christian  themed
   material.

22) As was pointed out at the hearing before me, the appellant has  made  no
   attempt to conceal his identity on Facebook or to screen  the  people  he
   has befriended.  Therefore if the Iranian authorities have  any  interest
   in his Facebook activities, his identity will be known to the authorities
   and they will be able to identify him as  the  holder  of  this  Facebook
   account either on return or following his return.   From  this  point  of
   view it seems of little significance whether the appellant  would  delete
   or de-activate his account before returning to Iran.  The question  which
   must be considered is, if there is a real risk that that the  authorities
   are already aware of this site, would they have an  adverse  interest  in
   him because of it.

23) Mr Mangion addressed this point.   He  submitted  that  the  authorities
   would  have  no  interest  in  religious  views  without  any   political
   involvement or  other  illegal  activity,  such  as  uploading  offensive
   material.  I am not sure, however, that I can take such a  sanguine  view
   of this matter as Mr Mangion.  The Home Office OGN dated 30 October 2012,
   which was before me, states at paragraph 3.8.4 that while  the  law  does
   not explicitly stipulate the death penalty for the offence  of  apostasy,
   courts have administered such punishment based on their interpretation of
   religious  fatwas.   The  constitution  officially  recognises  religious
   minorities,  including  Christians,  but  Christians  are  permitted   to
   practice  under  the  constitution  as  long  as  their  members  do  not
   proselytise.  In practice, however, the right to  practise  religion  was
   denied.  During 2011 the government's respect for and protection  of  the
   right to religious freedom continued to deteriorate.   It  is  stated  at
   paragraph 3.8.8 that the government actively denied Christians freedom of
   religion.  Christians, particularly evangelicals,  experienced  increased
   harassment and surveillance during the year.  The government enforced its
   prohibition on proselytising by  closely  monitoring  the  activities  of
   evangelical  Christians,  discouraging  Muslims  from   entering   church
   premises,  closing  churches  and  arresting  Christian  converts.    The
   following paragraph of the OGN refers to least 300 arrests of  Christians
   having been reported during 2011.  Some of  these  were  released  almost
   immediately while others were held in a secret location without access to
   lawyers.  There  were  numerous  incidents  during  the  year  of  Muslim
   converts  to  Christianity  facing  arrest  and  sentencing.    A   named
   individual was sentenced to death in October 2011 after  being  convicted
   of apostasy.  It appears that at a retrial he was acquitted  of  apostasy
   but sentenced to three years in prison on a charge of "propaganda against
   the regime".  As he had already served this period he was released.

24) The same report at paragraph 3.8.5 draws a distinction between  offences
   committed in a public space and those things done in the private  sphere.
   Activities that are at odds with Islam  and  take  place  in  public  are
   punished, while things that take  place  in  private,  such  as  drinking
   alcohol, illegal films, books and music as well as religious practises or
   illicit sexual affairs, will to  a  larger  extent  be  tolerated.   This
   raises an issue arising in an earlier country guideline case, that of  FS
   and others (Iran - Christian Converts) Iran CG [2004] UKIAT  00303.   The
   Iranian authorities may have little interest in an  individual's  private
   beliefs, even if the person has converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity,
   provided they do not attempt publicly to convert others.

25) The idea of what it means to proselytise or to preach has  changed  with
   advances in technology.  Where once a preacher might have stood in a park
   or on a street corner, a preacher can now use  the  internet  and  social
   media, as this appellant has been doing.  There is no  doubt  as  to  the
   nature of the material on his Facebook  page,  printouts  of  which  were
   before me, and to the fact that access is entirely unrestricted.

26) This appeal is concerned with the assessment of risk  to  the  appellant
   on return to Iran.  The appellant does not have to be a  genuine  convert
   to Christianity for the authorities to take an adverse interest  in  him.
   He does not have to have proselytized by traditional  means  within  Iran
   for them to take an adverse interest in  him.   It  would  be  enough  to
   establish a real risk were he to be regarded as a convert to Christianity
   who has used his Facebook page to  promote  Christianity  among  Iranians
   both within and outwith Iran.  On the basis of BA, the authorities  might
   not recognise the appellant on his return to Iran.  His  identity  is  no
   secret, however, and he could be located by the authorities at  any  time
   after he had returned to the country.  The risk  is  not  just  on  entry
   alone but also subsequently.  Even if the appellant were  to  de-activate
   his account before return, the authorities may already  have  details  of
   his activities and, in any event, he has made  posts  on  other  Facebook
   pages relating to his Christian faith.  If the appellant is  of  interest
   to the authorities, it is too late for him  to  attempt  to  conceal  his
   activities.

27)  Having  regard  to  the  public  nature  of  the  appellant's  Facebook
   activities, his significant number of friends (many of whom are not known
   to him) and the activities of the Iranian authorities in monitoring cyber
   space, I consider that there is a real  risk  that  the  authorities  are
   aware of the appellant's Facebook page.  Having regard  to  the  explicit
   Christian material posted on it, much of which is in  Farsi,  I  consider
   there is a real risk that the authorities would consider this material to
   be not only un-Islamic but also to be offensive, in part because it is in
   the public sphere.  Judging from their names,  many  of  the  appellant's
   Facebook friends are Iranian.  Some of them give  locations  within  Iran
   but some of them do not specify a location.   As  the  appellant  himself
   commented, he does not  know  whether  these  Facebook  friends  are  all
   genuine  or  whether  they  include  individuals  who  would  report  his
   activities to the authorities.

28) The standard of risk  I  am  examining  is  less  than  the  balance  of
   probabilities.  It might be difficult for the appellant to prove that  it
   is more probable than not that the Iranian  authorities  have  identified
   his site and would take action against him on return because of  it.   On
   the basis of the documentary evidence before me, however,  including  the
   Facebook material and the country information, I am satisfied there is  a
   real risk that this is the case and accordingly the appeal  will  succeed
   on the basis that the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in
   Iran by reason of religion.

Conclusions

29) As already found by Judge Aitken, the making  of  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error on a point of  law
   and has been set aside so far as risk on return is concerned.

30) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

31) Although Judge Aitken made an order for anonymity I consider that  there
   is no need to renew this or continue it as the  information  relating  to
   the appellant's activities is already in the public domain.

Fee Award        Note: This is not part of the determination

As recorded by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, no fee  has  been  paid
or is payable.



Signed                                             Date


Judge of the Upper Tribunal


