
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04808/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th May 2014                                |On 2nd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                mr Ahmed Ali
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pretzel, Counsel instructed by Harris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morgan
    by which in a determination  promulgated  on  13th  September  2013  he
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 9th May 2013 to refuse him asylum on  the  grounds  of  his
    homosexuality and to remove him to Pakistan.

 2. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  although
    homosexual and being  returned  to  a  country  where  homosexuals  are
    persecuted would live discreetly to avoid societal pressure rather than
    persecution and so in any event avoid any real risk of persecution.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that  there  was  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  the  Appellant  would  live
    discreetly in Pakistan because of his fear of persecution, and that the
    Judge had failed to take the evidence into account. The  grounds  refer
    specifically to the evidence of the Appellant's  witness  statement  at
    paragraphs 18, 20, 23, 27  and  28.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King,  on
    assessing the grounds, found that it was arguable that  the  judge  had
    overlooked that evidence and  identified as being problematic  in  that
    regard, paragraphs  17  and  18  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination.

 4. I have had regard to the decision and the evidence.  I  find  that  the
    judge has failed to explain how he has  treated  the  evidence  of  the
    reasons for discretion and how, in the  light  of  that  evidence,  the
    questions posed in the context of the case HJ (Iran) are answered.  The
    evidence goes to the very core of  the  issues  to  be  decided,  I  am
    satisfied that the omissions in  reasoning  must  be  characterised  as
    material so that it requires that the decision be set aside.

 5. The parties' representatives were both in agreement today that  in  the
    event of my making such a finding I am in  a  position  to  remake  the
    decision without hearing further evidence.

 6. Mr Nath submits that the Appellant would be able to live discreetly  in
    Pakistan as a homosexual as he does here and refers me to paragraphs 18
    to 22 of the reasons for refusal letter of May 2013  and  submits  that
    the contents of those paragraphs, which includes anecdotal evidence  of
    a gay journalist  who  describes  little  difficulty  in  living  as  a
    homosexual in Lahore, a city in Pakistan,  so  long  as  discretion  is
    observed.  However, I find that  the  position  of  this  Appellant  is
    somewhat different.  The Appellant's witness statement evidence  is  to
    the point that he has made efforts to conceal his sexuality amongst the
    Pakistani community here in order to avoid upsetting social  mores  and
    to avoid ostracism. Mr Nath says that that is evidence  that  would  be
    his chosen position untrammelled by  issues  of  persecution.  However,
    that is only part of the picture.  The unchallenged  witness  statement
    particularised in the grounds at 18, 24, 26, 27  and  28  is  that  the
    Appellant in other contexts is  an  openly  gay  man  who  has  been  a
    practising homosexual for  many  years,  and  who,  in  his  words  has
    "obvious homosexual mannerisms", and who is actively engaged in the gay
    scene in the United Kingdom.  In effect he  has  compartmentalised  his
    life here. I am satisfied on the  basis  of  his  unchallenged  witness
    evidence that, all things being equal, he would continue to act  openly
    and engage with the gay scene as he  does  here,  i.e.  with  a  public
    context, but that on a return to Pakistan he would not do so because of
    his fear that the risks of persecution if  he  were  "caught"  are  too
    high, including a possible risk to his life.

 7. I am satisfied that the country background  evidence  set  out  in  the
    Appellant's bundle including from the COI Report  of  2013  shows  that
    there is objective evidence which supports the  Appellant's  subjective
    fears.

 8. I have  considered  the  case  of  HJ  (Iran)  and  found  particularly
    instructive paragraph 82 which in its latter part guides me as follows:

         "If, on the other hand, the  Tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted.  Such a person has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution.  To reject his application on the ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution."

 9. I also note  paragraph 62 of  the  judgment  which  in  its  last  part
    states:

         "It follows that  the  question  can  be  further  refined:  is  an
         applicant  to  be  regarded  as  a  refugee  for  purposes  of  the
         Convention in circumstances where the reality is that, if  he  were
         returned to his country of nationality, in addition  to  any  other
         reasons for behaving discreetly, he would have to behave discreetly
         in order to avoid persecution because of being gay?"

10. I am satisfied on his evidence that this Appellant would feel compelled
    to live discreetly, in part at least to avoid persecution.

11. I am satisfied from the country evidence to which I have been  referred
    that a homosexual such as this Appellant,  who  would  on  return  feel
    compelled to behave discreetly in order to avoid persecution because of
    being gay,  is entitled to international protection.

12. For all the reasons that I have set out above  the  Appellant's  appeal
    succeeds on Asylum and Articles 2 and  3  grounds,  and  I  remake  the
    decision, allowing his appeal.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by an error of law
    such that I set it aside and remake it, allowing the Appellant's appeal
    on international protection grounds.


Signed                              Date 25.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

