
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04622/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 November 2014                         |On 20 November 2014        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                              MR ISMAIL ALTEPE
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Ms M Sirikanda a solicitor from Duncan Lewis &
    Co
    For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey and a Kurd.  He  was  born  on  17
    December 1984. He has appealed against the respondent's decision  of  8
    May 2012 to give directions for his removal  to  Turkey  following  the
    refusal of asylum.


 2. The appellant claimed to  fear  persecution  from  the  authorities  in
    Turkey. He said that he was Kurdish and Alevi born and  brought  up  in
    Dersin Providence. His mother tongue was Kurdish Zazaki (or Zaza).  The
    area was predominantly Kurdish where people  had  suffered  persecution
    from the Turkish authorities over many decades. The PKK were active and
    there was pressure on people to support or  join  them.  The  appellant
    said that his family had always supported pro-Kurdish  legal  political
    parties. They were accused of  being  separatists  and  relatives  were
    arrested detained and tortured.


 3. The appellant said that he became actively involved with the youth wing
    of HADEP and then DEHAP. In the  November  2002  general  elections  he
    acted as an observer. He carried out his  compulsory  military  service
    between May 2004 and September 2005 during  which  he  was  ill-treated
    because of his ethnicity.


 4. The appellant claimed that in November 2005 he  was  part  of  a  group
    which set off to attend a protest demonstration in  Dersin.  They  were
    stopped by the police and beaten up. He received a heavy  blow  to  his
    face which broke his chin. He was taken to  the  security  headquarters
    fingerprinted and detained. He was beaten up, tortured and  accused  of
    involvement with the PKK. After two days he was  released,  he  thought
    because of lack of evidence. He then moved to Istanbul where he  worked
    in his uncle's restaurant as a chef.


 5. The appellant said that his second period of detention was  during  the
    2007 general elections. He played  an  active  role  for  the  DTP  and
    carried out canvassing. He acted as an observer at  a  polling  station
    and was attacked by "fascists" who punched, kicked and stabbed  him  in
    the hip. The police arrested him and took him to security  headquarters
    where he was held for two days, abused, beaten  and  tortured.  He  was
    then released.


 6. After this the appellant left Turkey  and  worked  on  a  ship  between
    August 2007 and November 2009. Returning to Istanbul in  December  2009
    he resumed his politically related activities, this time  for  the  BDP
    and campaigned for them. In January 2012 his home was raided and he was
    arrested, detained and taken to security headquarters. He  was  beaten,
    asked about his previous detention and why he had been away  from  home
    for a long time. He was accused of involvement with  the  PKK  and  the
    KCK. They threatened to kill him. He was tortured and asked to identify
    people from photographs. He was told that if he did  not  cooperate  he
    would be killed. He was knocked unconscious. After further torture  the
    appellant said that he had no strength to  resist  any  longer  and  he
    agreed to gather information and act as an informer. He was released on
    16 January 2012 on condition that he returned in a month.


 7. The appellant said that he went into hiding,  staying  with  a  distant
    relative in another part of Istanbul. Soon after he discovered that the
    police had been to his house looking for him. An agent  was  found  and
    paid to take the appellant out of Turkey.


 8. The appellant arrived in the UK on 21 March 2012, made  an  appointment
    with the Home Office on 23 March 2012 and claimed asylum  on  30  April
    2012. He said that after he left Turkey, in about January  or  February
    2014, the authorities raided both his family  home  and  his  brother's
    home in Istanbul. They said that he had been seen taking part in recent
    riots. There was a further raid on his brother's home  in  Istanbul  in
    November 2013 when the police threatened the appellant's  brother  that
    if the appellant did not surrender himself they  would  come  back  for
    him.


 9. After he claimed asylum the appellant had two interviews. Following the
    respondent's refusal the appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by
    First-Tier Tribunal Judge Fox  ("the  FTTJ")  on  12  June  2012.  Both
    parties were represented and the  appellant  gave  evidence.  The  FTTJ
    dismissed the appeal on Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection and
    human rights  grounds.  The  appellant  applied  for  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal, arguing that  he  should  have  been  granted  an
    adjournment to enable him to obtain a medical report from  the  Medical
    Foundation. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss heard the  appeal  against
    the determination of the FTTJ on 26 October  2012.  He  concluded  that
    there was no error of law and upheld the decision of the FTTJ.


10. The appellant applied to the Upper Tribunal but was refused  permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal. He renewed  the  application  to  the
    Court of Appeal which was refused on the  papers.  The  appellant  then
    made an oral application to the  Court  of  Appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted. Subsequently, the parties  agreed  a  Statement  of
    Reasons and, on 27 January 2014, the appeal was allowed to  the  extent
    that it was remitted to the Upper Tribunal.


11. Following a hearing on 26 February 2014 and in his decision promulgated
    on 27 March 2014 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  found  that  the  FTTJ
    should  have  granted  an   adjournment.   He   concluded   that   that
    determination was flawed because of an error of law and  directed  that
    the appeal should be reheard with no findings of  credibility  or  fact
    preserved.


12. The appeal was allocated to me but had to be adjourned on two occasions
    because of the lack  of  an  interpreter  speaking  the  preferred  and
    required language. That language  was  said  to  be  Zaza  but  it  has
    subsequently emerged that the language is called Zazaki and  those  who
    speak it are Zaza. It is, I am told, a Kurdish dialect spoken by  Kurds
    in parts of Turkey.


13. At the hearing before me 6 November 2014 a Zazaki speaking  interpreter
    was provided. In reply to my questions she told me that Zazaki was  her
    mother tongue but she also spoke fluent Turkish. At  the  beginning  of
    the hearing the interpreter spoke to the appellant  in  Zazaki  and  he
    said that he would use a mixture of Zazaki and Turkish, which was  what
    he most comfortable with.  Each  of  them  confirmed  that  they  could
    understand the other in this way. At the end of his  evidence  I  asked
    the appellant who said that he had understood the interpreter  and  had
    encountered no difficulties. He said that he had mostly used Zazaki.


14. Later in the afternoon of the hearing,  after  the  appellant  and  his
    solicitor had left and whilst I was  hearing  another  appeal  with  Mr
    Jarvis as  the  Presenting  Officer  I  was  handed  a  note  from  the
    interpreter. This read; "Dear Sir. I writing  regarding  Ismail  Altepe
    AA/04622/2012 - started at 10.10 am. This  morning.  When  I  began  to
    speak with the client he said four sentences in  Zazaki  and  asked  me
    which city I come from. He is from Tunceli city and I am from Mus city,
    then he said we can mix the languages. I just wanted  to  clarify  that
    all the questions in conversation  took  place  after  was  in  Turkish
    language. When you asked the client, which language he used,  he  said,
    "Zazaki" and I interpreted as what he said. As I didn't know,  legally,
    what my position was, whether to interpret as it is or correct  him!  I
    asked about this to the Clerk she recommended to write a note to you. I
    am  waiting  outside  as  I  don't  know  whether  you   need   further
    explanation. I just wanted to let you know as I  am  not  sure  whether
    this is relevant or not and I thought this is right thing to do." After
    receiving this I spoke with the interpreter in the hearing room and  in
    the presence of Mr Jarvis and thanked her for her  note.  She  told  me
    that as far as she was concerned she and the appellant understood  each
    other perfectly. I gave a copy of her note to Mr Jarvis  and  indicated
    that I would send another to the appellant's representatives.


15. I have the appellants bundle submitted with the solicitors' letter of 8
    April 2014, a supplementary bundle handed in today and  Ms  Sirikanda's
    skeleton argument.  Mr  Jarvis  relied  on  the  respondent's  skeleton
    argument dated 28 July 2014 with paragraph 27 to 30 deleted.


16. Mr Jarvis  made  an  important  concession;  that  if  I  accepted  the
    appellant's account of events in its entirety then he would be at  risk
    on return to Turkey and would have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    for a Convention reason.


17. The appellant gave evidence, and was cross examined and re-examined  at
    length. His evidence is set out in my record  of  proceedings.  At  the
    beginning  of  the  hearing  the  appellant  was  accompanied   by   an
    interpreter arranged by his solicitors who, I was told,  spoke  Turkish
    but not Zazaki. He departed before the appellant gave his evidence.


18. During the course of his cross examination the appellant said  that  he
    had received a letter from his brother in Turkey telling  him  about  a
    raid on the brother's home because the  authorities  were  looking  for
    him. Asked where the letter was and whether he could produce it he said
    that he had given it to his solicitors.  At  this  point  Ms  Sirikanda
    produced a copy of  a  letter  from  the  appellant's  brother  with  a
    translation and what appeared to be a copy of a DHL delivery  manifest.
    She accepted that these had not been served on the  respondent  or  the
    Tribunal. Mr Jarvis objected to the production of  these  documents  at
    this late stage. I adjourned for a short while to enable  Ms  Sirikanda
    to take instructions from the solicitor responsible for the conduct  of
    the case. On her return she informed me that the translation  had  been
    commissioned by her firm some time before 21 June 2014.  The  documents
    had not been disclosed because  counsel  had  advised  that  they  were
    likely to be  regarded  as  self-serving  and  would  not  advance  the
    appellant's case. However, these three  documents  were  disclosed  now
    because it was thought that failing  to  do  so  after  they  had  been
    referred to by the appellant would cause greater harm.  I  allowed  the
    documents to be admitted in evidence. Subsequently, the appellant  said
    that he had received about six letters from his brother and  had  given
    two of them to his solicitors. I note that only  one  letter  from  the
    brother has been produced. There was no application to  put  any  other
    letter in evidence.


19. Mr Jarvis relied on the  refusal  letter  dated  8  May  2012  and  the
    skeleton  argument.  He  submitted  that  the  appeal  turned  on   the
    credibility of the appellant. He had not put to the appellant  all  the
    points raised in the refusal letter but asked me to consider  these  in
    the round together  with  the  explanations  which  the  appellant  had
    provided in his witness statements and oral  evidence.  None  of  these
    explanations were accepted.


20. In relation to the medical evidence and at the  hearing  before  Deputy
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Juss  those  representing  the  appellant   had
    submitted that his recollection of facts was impaired by the  blows  he
    had received to  his  head.  The  medical  evidence  from  the  Medical
    Foundation touched on this at paragraph 88  but  did  not  support  the
    submission. The evidence did not show that the appellant's  memory  was
    impaired in any way. Furthermore,  the  opinion  that  his  scars  were
    consistent or highly consistent with the  manner  in  which  they  were
    claimed to have been inflicted was not  at  the  top  of  the  Istanbul
    Protocol scale. Whilst the medical evidence tended to confirm  that  he
    had suffered these injuries it  did  not  necessarily  corroborate  the
    claimed cause of  them.  Some  of  the  injuries  he  claimed  to  have
    suffered, for example being dragged upstairs whilst handcuffed,  should
    have left him with more scars


21. I was asked to find  that  the  letter  from  the  appellant's  brother
    produced only at  the  hearing  did  not  corroborate  the  appellant's
    account of events. The appellant's evidence as to  what  happened  when
    and when he received the letters was confused and unclear. I was  asked
    to place no weight on this letter.


22. The appellant had claimed to have an adverse political profile  by  the
    time he arrived in Istanbul which begged the  question  as  to  why  he
    would have registered his presence with the mukhtar. He had produced no
    corroborative evidence from  anyone  in  Turkey  as  to  his  claim  to
    political activities there. There was no corroboration of  his  claimed
    attendance at protest rallies in the UK although he said  that  he  had
    attended at least one. Whilst he had  previously  referred  to  claimed
    difficulties with interpretation, this was not borne out by the  record
    of his interview or the questions as to  whether  there  had  been  any
    difficulties. He said that  he  had  not  been  fingerprinted  but  his
    evidence was that he had been fingerprinted in Turkey. I was  asked  to
    find that the appellant was not credible and to dismiss the appeal.


23. Ms Sirikanda relied on her skeleton argument  and  submitted  that  the
    medical evidence provided  strong  corroboration  for  the  appellant's
    account of  events.  Mr  Jarvis  was  speculating  as  to  whether  the
    appellant should have more scars. The medical evidence  had  considered
    other possible causation.  The  medical  report  also  dealt  with  the
    question of the appellant's mental health. I was invited to  find  that
    the appellant was credible and,  to  the  appropriate  lower  standard,
    accept his account of events.


24. She argued that  the  appellant's  account  had  been  consistent  with
    reported country conditions and very detailed. I was asked to read  the
    interview record as a whole. The fact  that  the  appellant  had  moved
    elsewhere within Istanbul was no indication that he  would  not  be  at
    risk because he had been "in hiding". It was more likely that he  would
    be able to hide in a huge city like Istanbul rather than travelling  to
    another city or area where he would arrive, stand out as a stranger and
    need  to  register.  He  had  given  good  reasons  for   not   seeking
    corroborative evidence from political associates in Turkey. It did  not
    undermine his credibility that he registered when he first  arrived  in
    Istanbul.


25. Whilst it was accepted that there was no corroborative evidence of  the
    appellant having taken part in demonstrations in  this  country  I  was
    asked to view this with his  evidence  as  a  whole  and  to  find  him
    credible. Much of the attack on his credibility turned on the  question
    of when his brother's house was raided after the appellant left Turkey.
    In reply to my question, Ms Sirikanda said the appellant's position was
    that there had been two raids on the appellant's  brother's  home.  The
    appellant would still be at risk even if the raids had not taken place.
    The authorities in Turkey would be able to access their  records  about
    him. These would reveal, amongst other things, that his release in 2012
    was conditional and that he had breached the conditions of his release.
    He had provided a satisfactory explanation as to the difference between
    the PKK and the KCK.


26. Ms Sirikanda submitted that the appellant would still have problems  in
    his home area. This was Dersin, not Istanbul. I was asked  to  look  at
    the evidence in the round and to allow the appeal on Refugee Convention
    grounds.


27. I reserved my determination.


28. The respondent accepted that the appellant was who he claimed to be and
    that he was Turkish. I find that the appellant is  a  Turkish  national
    born on 17 December 1984. His  ability  to  speak  Zazaki  as  well  as
    Turkish is a strong indication that he  is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and
    comes from Dersin  province  where  that  language/dialect  is  spoken.
    Nevertheless, he lived for many years in areas  where  the  predominant
    language would have been Turkish and he is likely to have used this  on
    an everyday basis. I find that the appellant is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
    and comes from Dersin province.


29. As to the appellant's account of events in Turkey,  there  are  factors
    which militate both for and against his  credibility.  His  account  is
    largely consistent with reported conditions and events in Turkey.


30. The Medical Foundation is a respected organisation  whose  reports  are
    usually  given  considerable  weight.  The  report  on  the  appellant,
    prepared by Dr Kamlana, complies with all the legal requirements for  a
    medical report a case such as this. It records the appellant's  account
    of events, his scars and other signs of injuries. These are set out  in
    detail. The appellant did not claim that all the scars  he  bears  were
    the consequences of torture or serious ill-treatment at  the  hands  of
    the authorities in Turkey. The doctor's opinion is that the appellant's
    scars are either consistent with or highly consistent with the  way  in
    which the appellant claimed they were caused. The Istanbul Protocol set
    out by the doctor in Appendix D records the five levels of attribution;
    "not consistent", "consistent with", "highly consistent", "typical  of"
    and "diagnostic of". The levels used by the doctor are  in  the  middle
    range; "consistent with" which means the lesion could have been  caused
    by the trauma described but is non-specific and there  are  many  other
    possible causes and "highly consistent" which  means  that  the  lesion
    could have been caused by the trauma described, and there are few other
    possible causes. The doctor's overall conclusion is that taken together
    the scars are highly consistent with their attribution and  the  number
    of scars coming within these categories diminishes  the  likelihood  of
    their resulting from other causes.


31. In the absence of cross examination on the point I consider Mr  Jarvis'
    submission that some of the ill-treatment which the  appellant  claimed
    to have suffered  should  have  resulted  in  further  scarring  to  be
    speculative.


32. The medical report records that the appellant has been  diagnosed  with
    clinical depression by his GP, has been prescribed antidepressants  and
    has periods of absentmindedness. Although  currently  at  low  risk  of
    suicide it is thought that he is likely to become a moderate/high  risk
    should his asylum claim be rejected. At paragraph 88 the  doctor  said;
    "Finally, it should  be  noted  that  traumatic  experience  can  be  a
    clinical factor in explaining occasional discrepancies on the  part  of
    the client in the naming  of  political  groups  in  his  Statement  of
    Evidence interview. Mr Altepe further states in his Personal  Statement
    that the SEF interview was over a very long  day  where  he  could  not
    concentrate"


33. This is not the clearest of  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's  mental
    ability but provides some support for the claim  that  his  ability  to
    recall events and give evidence may be impaired by what has happened to
    him.


34. In the refusal letter dated 8 May 2012 sets out, between paragraphs  23
    and 45, detailed reasons, mainly inconsistencies,  as  to  why  it  was
    concluded that he was not a credible  witness  his  account  of  events
    should not be believed. The appellant addressed most of  these  reasons
    in the first of his witness statements in  the  bundle  before  me.  Mr
    Jarvis does not accept these explanations.


35. Over the years the "legitimate" Kurdish  political  parties  in  Turkey
    have changed their names, usually when one became  illegal  or  it  was
    thought that this was likely to happen. I  accept  that  HADEP,  DEHAP,
    DTH, DTP and BDP are continuations or reincarnations of the same  or  a
    similar political party or a combination  of  parties.  I  accept  that
    those involved with them might continue to refer to  the  party  by  an
    earlier name, rather than the current one. I give more  weight  to  the
    fact that the appellant was able to name the leaders of  two  political
    parties rather than the fact that he got them the wrong way round.


36. It is unfortunate that if the appellant thought that what he was saying
    during his interview was not being interpreted properly  there  was  no
    reference to this in the usual questions  as  to  the  conduct  of  the
    interview. The force of his complaint is diminished as a result.


37. There is an inconsistency between the appellant's  explanations  as  to
    the difference between the PKK and the KCK,  whether  the  KCK  is  the
    urban and/or the youth wing of the PKK, but it is correct to  say  that
    they are interrelated. The appellant was able  to  give  some  accurate
    answers to questions about  HADEP  and  successor  parties.  I  do  not
    consider that there is any material inconsistency between the appellant
    stating that he had been stabbed in the  hip  as  against  the  medical
    evidence that it was in the buttock. Shown the diagram as to the  place
    of the scar the appellant said that he would refer to this as the hip.


38. I do not find  it  implausible  that  the  appellant  would  leave  his
    brother's home and go and stay with a distant relative in another  part
    of Istanbul. Istanbul is very large  city  where  he  could  well  have
    considered it safer to hide rather than going to another urban or rural
    area where he might stand out as a new arrival and need to register.


39. The appellant's evidence as to whether the authorities had  raided  his
    brother's home in Istanbul after he  left  Turkey  became  increasingly
    confused during his oral evidence. It was not helped by the fact  that,
    understandably and in reply to a direct question in cross  examination,
    he referred to two letters from his brother which he had given  to  his
    solicitors, whereupon it became apparent that  those  letters  had  not
    been disclosed even though the solicitors had had at least one of  them
    translated. I admitted in evidence than one letter which was  produced,
    with the translation and the accompanying manifest/delivery sheet  from
    DHL. The other letter was not produced. The  reference  in  the  letter
    that was produced to the funeral of a Kurdish woman who had been killed
    in Paris tends to indicate that any raid would have taken  place  after
    about January or February 2014. I have been shown a photo copy but  not
    the original letter.


40. The appellant's claim seems to be that there  were  two  raids  on  his
    brother's home in Istanbul in November 2013  and  January  or  February
    2014 together with another raid on the family home. The  appellant  was
    not able to give the date of either  of  them  in  his  oral  evidence,
    although in his witness statement he said  that  one  of  them  was  in
    November 2014.


41. I would have expected the appellant to have provided some corroborative
    evidence of his claim to have been involved in a protest rally in  this
    country although the weight  to  be  given  to  the  lack  of  this  is
    diminished because  he  does  not  claim  to  be  at  risk  because  of
    activities in this country.


42. I give greater weight to  the  fact  that  there  is  no  corroborative
    evidence from the appellant's brother or any other member of the family
    in Turkey and no corroborative evidence  from  any  colleague  or  more
    senior member of the political parties with which  he  claims  to  have
    been involved in Turkey. I am not persuaded that all of those who might
    have assisted are in prison and my attention has not been drawn to  any
    country evidence which might support the contention that  nobody  would
    want to help him because of opprobrium attached to the fact that he has
    fled the country.


43. I have considered all the evidence in the round.  On  the  one  hand  I
    weigh all the factors set out in the refusal letter and in  Mr  Jarvis'
    submissions  which  continue  to  militate  against   the   appellant's
    credibility including those which I have not specifically addressed. On
    the other I weigh those  in  his  favour,  in  particular  the  medical
    evidence. I consider the question of whether he is or is  not  credible
    to be finely balanced. However, bearing in  mind  that  the  burden  of
    proof falls on the appellant and applying the appropriate  standard  of
    proof which is that  of  a  reasonable  likelihood,  I  find  that  the
    appellant is credible and  I  accept  his  account  of  events  in  all
    material respects.


44. In the light of Mr Jarvis' concession as to risk  on  return  in  these
    circumstances I find that the appellant has established that he faces a
    real risk of persecution were he now to  return  to  Turkey.  The  risk
    would be for  a  Convention  reason,  namely  his  perceived  political
    opinions. He would be at risk in Istanbul or his original home area. He
    is likely to have a record, to be identified either on return or within
    the country if he was able to get past the point of arrival.  He  would
    be at risk anywhere in Turkey.


45. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and I can  see  no
    good reason to do so.


46. The previous decisions in this appeal have been set aside. I remake the
    decision and allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.






    .............................................
    Signed        Date 8 November 2014


    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


