
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04718/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast Laganside                    |Determination Sent           |
|On  3 July 2013                               |On 9 August 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                xia xia weng
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent: Ms M. O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 16 November  1983.  She
       is said to have arrived illegally in the UK on 2  August  2003  when
       she applied for asylum. She was refused leave  to  enter  but  given
       temporary admission. She failed to report  and  was  classed  as  an
       absconder. A decision was made on 22 March 2010 to refuse her  leave
       to enter after the refusal of her asylum claim.

    2. Her appeal against that decision was dismissed by Immigration  Judge
       Farrelly, the appeal having taken place on 5 May 2010. Permission to
       appeal having been granted, the appeal came  before  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Deans on 19 January 2011. He set aside  the  decision  of  the
       Immigration Judge  because  he  identified  errors  of  law  in  the
       determination. The relevant  part  of  Judge  Deans'  'Decision  and
       Directions' states as follows:

              "1. The previous determination of the Tribunal has  been  set
                  aside on the following grounds:- (i) the Immigration Judge
                  did not make proper findings of  fact  on  the  issues  in
                  dispute  and  did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for   his
                  decision; and, more  specifically,  (ii)  the  Immigration
                  Judge did not adequately consider the effect on the family
                  and private life of the appellant and  her  child  of  the
                  child being treated as an  unregistered  child  in  China.
                  There is to be a further hearing for the  purpose  of  re-
                  making the decision, subject to these directions."

    3. The appeal then came before me for the re-making  of  the  decision.
       However, at that hearing the appellant did not  appear.  On  2  July
       2013 the appellant's former solicitors wrote to the Tribunal by fax,
       stating that they had not had contact with the appellant since about
       October 2012. The letter  goes  on  to  state  that  the  appeal  is
       therefore "academic and should not come before the court".  However,
       given that the solicitors do not  appear  to  have  the  appellant's
       instructions, I do not consider that the letter can be taken as  the
       appellant's authority for the appeal to be withdrawn.

    4. The appellant was written to by the Tribunal by letter dated  7  May
       2013 at the address given to the Tribunal. This is the address given
       on the  original  notice  of  appeal  and  on  the  application  for
       reconsideration of the appeal. It is also the address at  which  the
       appellant was notified of the hearing before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Deans in January 2011. There is no indication from the Tribunal file
       that the appellant has notified a change of address to the Tribunal,
       or to her solicitors for that matter.

    5. Ms O'Brien  informed  me  that  the  Home  Office  has  treated  the
       appellant as an absconder since March 2013,  she  having  failed  to
       report on three occasions.

    6. I decided to proceed with the hearing, having considered rule 38  of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. I  am  satisfied
       that reasonable steps had been taken notify  the  appellant  of  the
       date, time and place of the hearing and that it was in the interests
       of justice to proceed with  the  hearing.  The  appellant  had  been
       written to by the Tribunal at the address given by  her  or  on  her
       behalf, notifying her of the hearing. Her solicitors  had  tried  to
       contact her. It was encumbent on the appellant to keep in touch with
       her solicitors and/or the Tribunal,  particularly  bearing  in  mind
       that she would have been aware that she had an appeal outstanding.

The appellant's claim

    7. In summary, the appellant claims that she is from  Fujian  province.
       Because of her poor circumstances in China, arrangements  were  made
       with a 'Snakehead' for her to leave the country. She was  given  the
       choice of either working as a prostitute, which would mean she would
       be free in six months, or as  a  housekeeper  for  the  prostitutes,
       which would mean that it would take her two  years  before  she  was
       free. She chose the latter. She was first taken  to  Africa,  moving
       between various countries before finally,  after  several  attempts,
       being successful in leaving for England.

    8. She did not report to the immigration authorities after being  given
       temporary admission because she was taken away by the Snakehead, for
       whom she worked for a little  over  two  years.  She  was  freed  at
       Christmas in 2005 or 2006.

    9. She has a partner who, it seems, is also from  China.  They  have  a
       daughter born on 15 January 2008. In China  her  daughter  would  be
       discriminated against. They would  be  fined  because  her  and  her
       partner were not married and had had a child.

   10. The appellant suffers from haemophilia which requires medication and
       hospital check-ups. She also suffers from Hepatitis B.

   11. Her adoptive parents are dead and her brother would not allow her to
       live in the family home. She would be homeless  on  return  and  she
       would not be able to get a job.

My assessment

   12. Credibility issues are raised in the refusal letter  concerning  the
       appellant's claim to have been the  victim  of  trafficking  and  of
       having been taken to 'Africa' before coming to the UK. The appellant
       has not given evidence before  me  to  answer  those  concerns.  The
       effect of that is that, aside from her  witness  statement  and  the
       oral evidence she gave before the First-tier Tribunal, there  is  no
       other evidence from her to contradict or explain the matters  raised
       in the refusal letter.

   13. Having said that, I do not consider that there is much merit in  the
       suggestion in the refusal  letter  that  the  appellant  could  have
       claimed asylum in Africa. It  is  not  clear  from  the  appellant's
       account what countries  she  claims  to  have  been  in.  Similarly,
       although it is said that she would not have continually  been  given
       her passport back or that  she  would  only  have  been  subject  to
       detention without further action for  repeated  attempts  to  leave,
       without more evidence of the countries in which she claims  to  have
       been, I do not consider that those are matters that adversely affect
       her credibility either.

   14. However, she was granted temporary admission  when  she  arrived  in
       August 2003 but she failed to report as  required.  The  explanation
       she gave in her asylum interview is that she was taken away  by  the
       Snakehead. Whilst that may on the face of it provide an  explanation
       for her having failed to report, the refusal letter points out  that
       she claims that she was finally released in 2005  or  2006  yet  she
       still did not come forward to the authorities here. It seems that it
       was not until after being arrested in 2008, at  the  earliest,  that
       she made, or pursued, her claim for asylum.

   15. Her case was referred to the Competent Authority to consider whether
       there were reasonable grounds to believe that she was  a  victim  of
       trafficking. The result was that it was concluded that there were no
       such reasonable  grounds.  There  was  a  judicial  review  of  that
       decision but, as revealed by the judgment from  the  High  Court  in
       Northern Ireland sent to me after the hearing, the  judicial  review
       challenge failed.

   16. In the screening and asylum interviews  the  appellant  referred  to
       what she says were her difficult economic circumstances in China and
       her poor  prospects.  The  refusal  letter  suggests  that  this  is
       evidence that her motivation for coming  to  the  UK  was  economic.
       Whilst that could be consistent with her  claim  to  have  been  the
       victim of trafficking, it  does  not  reveal  a  reason  within  the
       Refugee Convention to be granted international protection. The claim
       that she was the victim of trafficking is open to question  for  the
       reasons already referred to.

   17. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that the appellant  is  the
       victim of trafficking or that she has established any risk on return
       in terms of her relationship to those who may have made arrangements
       for her to come to the UK.

   18. Upper Tribunal Judge Deans' error of law decision did not  rule  out
       the possibility that such credibility findings as are  not  affected
       by the error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
       could be preserved.  In  this  context  I  note  that  at  [62]  the
       Immigration Judge accepted that  the  appellant  had  established  a
       private  life  in  the  UK,  albeit  that  that  private  life   was
       established in circumstances where she  had  no  lawful  immigration
       status. At [63] he noted the appellant's claim that she has a  blood
       disorder, albeit that there was no medical evidence. Judge  Farrelly
       appears to have accepted that aspect of her claim however, referring
       to her then regular hospital visits.

   19. From [55] onwards he also appears to have accepted that  she  has  a
       daughter in the UK. The judge heard evidence from the person said to
       be her partner.

   20. On the basis of those positive findings I accept that the  appellant
       has a blood disorder which is said to be haemophilia. In her witness
       statement dated 28 April 2010 she gave details of her consultant  at
       the time and the hospital that she attended. However,  there  is  no
       medical evidence before me  and  no  up-to-date  evidence  from  the
       appellant on this issue such as would support any Article 3 claim.

   21. Her daughter is said to have been born on  15  January  2008.  I  am
       satisfied that she does  have  a  daughter.  It  seems,  again  from
       evidence provided after the hearing  by  the  respondent,  that  the
       appellant's partner left the UK voluntarily. The CID printout is not
       very clear but it is possible to discern  that  the  details  on  it
       match those given by the appellant in the screening interview as  to
       her partner.

   22. The question arises as to  whether  the  appellant  is  at  risk  of
       persecution on account of having had a daughter  when  not  married,
       albeit that her daughter was born in the UK. The risk of persecution
       can, in appropriate circumstances, arise by extension in  the  sense
       that the treatment of a person's child could amount  to  persecution
       of the parent.

   23. In her witness statement at [12] the appellant stated that  she  and
       her partner got married in the UK in a  Chinese  ceremony  but  that
       they are not married in law. That evidence  in  my  view  is  not  a
       sufficient basis from which to conclude that she would be viewed  by
       the Chinese authorities as  unmarried,  and  that  consequently  her
       daughter would be considered to have been illegitimate.  It  is  for
       her to put forward evidence of the ceremony and evidence as  to  how
       it would be viewed in China.

   24. Nevertheless, I have considered what the position would be  for  the
       appellant and her daughter if it was  decided  that  the  child  was
       "unauthorised", to use the term in AX (family planning scheme) China
       CG [2012] UKUT 97 (IAC). Ms O'Brien referred  me  to  that  decision
       which was promulgated on 16 April 2012. With  reference  to  various
       paragraphs it was submitted that it deals with the question  of  the
       appellant's and her child's circumstances on return and that on  the
       basis of that decision the appeal should be dismissed.

   25. It is apparent from the guidance  in  AX  that  the  Chinese  family
       planning  scheme  expects  childbirth  to  occur  within   marriage.
       Paragraph 66 refers to particular  Regulations  in  Fujian  province
       relating to unauthorised births. At [99] there is reference  to  the
       evidence of Dr Sheehan relating to the position  of  single  mothers
       who are returned to China having left illegally or having  lived  or
       worked illegally abroad. The individual would not be entitled  to  a
       passport for between six months to three  years  and  would  be  the
       subject  of  rumours  and  gossip  and  would  find  life  extremely
       difficult on her own.

   26. In relation to that last issue, the appellant has not established in
       evidence what her circumstances would be on return. I note what  she
       claims about her poor circumstances there when she left, but she has
       not given evidence before me that could have been  tested.  She  has
       not given evidence, for example, in relation to whether she is still
       in a relationship with her partner, the father  of  her  child,  and
       whether they would be living together in China.

   27. At [185] the Upper Tribunal concluded that in general there was  not
       a risk of forcible sterilisation.

   28. Between [186]-[190] the  position  of  "Foreign-born  children"  was
       considered. The  consequence  of  having  an  "unauthorised  birth",
       within or outside China, are social and  financial.  Breach  of  the
       family planning policy is not a criminal offence but a civil matter.
       After payment of 50% of the Social  Upbringing  Charge  ("SUC")  the
       balance of any SUC may be paid over three years. There is  statutory
       protection against destitution for those who cannot pay. The rate of
       the SUC is not likely to be beyond the means of a  couple  who  have
       lived abroad for many years.  "There  is  very  little  evidence  of
       parents being disproportionately penalised when they return to China
       with foreign-born children." It  was  concluded  that  couples  with
       foreign-born children above the permitted  number  for  that  couple
       would not be at risk of persecution.

   29. Of course, this appellant, on her account, is  an  unmarried  mother
       rather than a married woman with more than the permitted  number  of
       children. Nevertheless. It appears from AX that her child  would  be
       regarded as an unauthorised birth. Putting aside the fact  that  the
       appellant has not established what her circumstances on return would
       be in terms of whether she would be with her  partner  or  what  her
       wider family circumstances would be, the  current  country  guidance
       does not establish that the  appellant  or  her  daughter  would  be
       subject to treatment amounting to persecution  (or  Article  3  ill-
       treatment) on return.

   30. So far as Article 8 is concerned, I accept  that  in  the  time  the
       appellant has been here she will have established  a  private  life,
       although there is little evidence of the extent of it.  The  current
       evidence does not  indicate  that  she  has  family  life  with  her
       partner, although it is reasonable to conclude that  she  still  has
       her daughter with her.

   31. The decision to remove her would amount to an interference with  her
       private life. On the reasonable assumption that her  daughter  would
       be returning with her, there  would  be  no  interference  with  her
       family life with her daughter.

   32. The interference with her private life  will  have  consequences  of
       such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of  Article  8,
       applying the second principle in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.   It  is  a
       decision that is nevertheless in accordance with the law and pursues
       a legitimate aim: the economic well being of the  country  expressed
       through the maintenance of an effective immigration control.

   33. As to proportionality, I consider first the best  interests  of  the
       appellant's daughter, that being a primary consideration. She is now
       aged five. There is no evidence as to her circumstances, in terms of
       education or relationships outside that with her mother. There is no
       evidence as to her relationship with  her  father.  A  child's  best
       interests would usually be to live with both  parents  in  a  stable
       family  environment.  On  the  limited  evidence  before  me,  I  am
       satisfied that the appellant's  daughter's  best  interests  are  to
       remain with her mother, and that those best interests would  not  be
       compromised by the appellant and her being removed together. It  has
       not been demonstrated that  the  child's  best  interests  would  be
       adversely affected in any way were she to return to  China,  whether
       because  of  her  potentially  being  an  "unauthorised"  child   or
       otherwise.

   34. There is no other evidence before me which would indicate  that  the
       appellant's removal would amount to a disproportionate  interference
       with her private life. There is no medical evidence in  relation  to
       her haemophilia and no evidence from the  appellant  as  to  how  it
       affects her. She  has  not  established  that  she  would  not  have
       appropriate treatment for that condition on return.

   35. She entered the UK illegally and has remained  illegally.   Although
       she has been here  since  August  2003,  there  is  nothing  in  the
       evidence to indicate that her removal would be disproportionate.

   36. In summary, I am not satisfied that the  appellant  has  established
       that she has a well founded fear of persecution on return to  China,
       or that there would be a breach  of  her  or  her  daughter's  human
       rights in any respect. I am equally not satisfied that the appellant
       is entitled to humanitarian protection.

Decision

   37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision is set aside.  I  re-make  the
       decision,  dismissing  the  appeal  on  asylum,  human  rights   and
       humanitarian protection grounds.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 6/08/13
