







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04336/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 10 March 2016                     |on 15 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    U. S.
                            anonymity order made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Olley, Counsel (instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I continue the anonymity direction made. This direction is to remain in
    place unless and until this Tribunal or  any  other  appropriate  court
    directs otherwise. As  such,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the respondent or  any  member  of  his
    family. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  amount  to  a
    contempt of Court.

 2. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and  to  the
    respondent as "the claimant."

 3. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge C Greasley allowing the claimant's appeal
    on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds [68-70].

 4. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  found
    that the grounds constituted "an arguable material error of law."

 5. I set out below in some detail the claims made by the claimant and  the
    evidence produced at his appeal hearing.

 6. The claimant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on [ ] 1979. He  departed
    Sri Lanka in January 2008 and arrived in the UK on 19 January 2008.  He
    had been granted a work permit valid until January 2013.  In  September
    2009 the Home Office received a notice of premature "end of  employment
    form" confirming that the claimant had ceased  to  be  employed  on  31
    December 2007. His leave as a work permit holder was  curtailed  on  17
    September 2009 without any right of appeal.

 7. The appellant subsequently claimed asylum.  A screening  interview  was
    conducted on 4 December 2012.  He was detained on 26 February 2015.

 8. An asylum interview was booked for 10  March  2015  but  he  failed  to
    attend and did not give any  reason  for  his  non-attendance.  He  was
    subsequently released from detention.

 9. The Judge noted that he claimed that he was at risk of  persecution  on
    account of his political opinion. His problems began in November  2006.
    He claimed to have been with the Tamil Tigers. He also claimed that  he
    was trained  by  the  LTTE.  He  was  arrested  by  the  army  and  his
    fingerprints and photograph were taken [13].

10. There was a psychiatric report  produced  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 27 July 2014. The claimant  asserted  that  he  was  beaten  with
    wooden sticks, wires and plastic pipes during detention. He was  kicked
    on his testes and held upside  down.  He  was  covered  in  petrol  and
    claimed to have been burned with a hot metal rod and cigarettes. He had
    scars as a result. He also claimed that he was sexually  abused  by  an
    officer on three occasions. He escaped from detention  after  an  uncle
    arranged payment to obtain a work permit for him, after which  he  came
    to the UK [13].

11. The Judge also had before him a psychiatric report from Dr Saleh Dhumad
    in which he stated that an uncle paid a bribe to the authorities  as  a
    result of which he was released on reporting conditions in  July  2007.
    The claimant asserted that his brother was also with the LTTE  and  had
    also been arrested, beaten and subsequently escaped. That  brother  has
    subsequently been granted asylum in France [14].

12. The claimant further claimed that on 12 November 2012, his  father  was
    arrested and beaten "due to the  appellant's  activities."  He  claimed
    that the army had visited the family  home  looking  for  him  and  his
    brother and had arrested his sister.  She  was  released  on  reporting
    conditions. His father was also released  under  fortnightly  reporting
    conditions [15].

13. The claimant did not know  whether  or  not  there  was  a  warrant  in
    existence for his arrest. He claimed that his father passed away on  13
    January 2014 and since then his mother had received messages  from  the
    police 'demanding her presence with regard  to  the  claimant  and  his
    brother's activities abroad' [15].

14. The claimant claimed that he had a brother and sister in  the  UK  with
    whom he had  lived  and  who  supported  him.  He  was  suffering  from
    depression for the past six months but  did  not  take  any  medication
    [16].

15. Whilst accepting his identity and nationality, the secretary  of  state
    did not accept that he had been involved with the LTTE and that he  had
    experienced the  problems  claimed.  He  failed  to  attend  an  asylum
    interview on 10 March 2015  without  explanation.  He  also  failed  to
    submit a witness statement  regarding  his  claim  for  asylum  by  the
    deadline  on  11  March  2015.  Those  actions  damaged   his   overall
    credibility. His claims were rejected. [18]

16. The psychiatric report  dated  27  July  2014  was  considered  by  the
    secretary of state. The symptoms of depression could have  been  caused
    by a number of different or  alternative  causes  which  had  not  been
    considered in the  report.  Further,  the  claimed  events  occurred  a
    significant time before the report  was  produced,  namely  some  seven
    years earlier. No medical or legal reports that the author had prepared
    in other cases had been cited [19].

17. The claimant asserted that he had visible scars.  He  had  provided  no
    supporting evidence and these scars could have been caused in a  number
    of ways [20]. The respondent also considered  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of claimants, etc.) Act 2004. He did  not  claim
    asylum after arrival but only four years  later.   His  behaviour  fell
    within section 8(5) [20]

18. Although the psychiatric report had referred to  suicidal  thoughts  by
    the claimant, the respondent considered the decision in v SSJ HD (2005)
    and (2009) [23].  It  was  concluded  that  his  claimed  fear  of  ill
    treatment  was  not  well  founded.  He  had  not  been  subjected   to
    significant traumatic events in Sri Lanka. There  were  also  effective
    mechanisms in place to treat any possible risk of suicide [23].

19. The Judge recorded that at the appeal hearing the claimant adopted  his
    statement dated 7 September 2015. The Judge has set out the  claimant's
    case at [25-29]. He referred to his early education in  Sri  Lanka  and
    his undertaking of LTTE training for  a  period  of  60  days.  It  was
    eventually agreed that he could work as a messenger and coordinator for
    the LTTE [26]. He also worked with the political wing of  the  LTTE  in
    Jaffna. He was arrested after a bomb blast in Colombo in 2007.  He  was
    suspected of involvement. He was detained, interrogated  and  assaulted
    [28]. He was beaten with  hands,  batons,  sticks,  plastic  pipes  and
    wires. He was slapped and kicked in his testicles. His face was covered
    with a petrol bag and he was burned with metal rods and cigarettes.  He
    was sexually harassed and raped, and hung upside down [28].

20. On release in September 2007 following payment of a bribe, he initially
    fulfilled reporting requirements but was advised that it was no  longer
    safe for him to remain in Sri Lanka. He managed to procure a valid visa
    via an agent. He was advised  not  to  claim  asylum  on  arrival.  The
    authorities still visited  his  parents'  home  and  threatened  family
    members. He had been involved with  diaspora  activities  organised  by
    various Tamil groups in the UK. His mother received a police message in
    early 2014 demanding that she present herself at the police station  in
    relation to his and his brother's activities abroad [29].

21.  He  did  not  attend  the  asylum  interview;  he  was  not  receiving
    appropriate medication at the time [29].

22. The Judge considered a letter  dated  4  September  2015  from  his  GP
    stating that he has been registered with  the  practice  since  January
    2015. His main problem  was  post  traumatic  stress  disorder  causing
    severe anxiety and  depression  [30].  The  claimant  attributed  these
    symptoms to his torture in Sri Lanka. The claims made by  the  claimant
    as to how he was tortured were set out and noted by the Judge at  [30].
    He  was  receiving  help  from  a  counsellor  as  well  as   receiving
    medication. Documents relating  to  his  brother's  detention  and  his
    younger brother's French ID status document was  produced.  Further,  a
    copy of his father's obituary notice was produced [31].

23. The Judge had regard to an expert medical report compiled by Mr  Martin
    dated 14 August 2015. He has extensive experience  in  general  surgery
    including fractures  and  plastic  surgery,  including  wounds,  burns,
    fractures and soft tissue injuries. He has  provided  over  800  medico
    legal reports over the years. A number of photographs were taken of the
    claimant which were appended to his report. He  took  a  brief  history
    from the claimant consistent  with  the  information  provided  to  the
    immigration authorities [32].

24. Mr Martin identified all round scars, elongated  and  pigmented  scars.
    There were also several criss-cross linear scars on the whole  left  of
    the back between 8 and 14 centimetres long. There were several traverse
    linear scars on his upper limbs from the anterior aspect of both elbows
    and forearms. There was also an atrophic scar on the anterior aspect of
    the left ankle [33].

25. The assertion by the claimant that the scars were caused by  his  being
    burned with a hot cigarette in 2007 were found to be highly  consistent
    with the claimed causation. Dermatological conditions were unlikely  to
    result in similar scars. Those scars which he claimed  were  caused  by
    being burned with a hot iron rod and hot wires  during  detention  were
    typical of injuries caused by a narrow hot  instrument  or  surface  as
    described. A skin disease as the cause was ruled out. Accidental injury
    was extremely unlikely, as was self harm in view of the position of the
    scars.

26. Accordingly, causation by a third  party  was  the  most  likely  cause
    although  it  is  scientifically  impossible  to   differentiate   self
    infliction of injuries by proxy from injuries caused by torture [34].

27. The scars which he claimed were caused by ligatures  used  to  tie  his
    arms and elbows were not referable to stain or skin disease,  nor  were
    they likely to have been caused  by  accidental  injuries.  As  to  the
    atrophic scar to the lower leg the claimant stated had been  caused  by
    accidental injury when training, which  was  consistent  with  such  an
    injury [35].

28. The Judge had regard to the evidence regarding the age of the scars  by
    visual inspection which is not a precise science. They were mature  and
    consistent with injuries that occurred approximately seven  years  ago.
    His scars on his back were typical  of  the  events  described  by  the
    claimant, namely that he had been intentionally burned.  The  remaining
    scars were less specific but did not show any inconsistencies with  the
    description of events claimed by the claimant.

29. Mr Martin had regard to the Istanbul Protocol relating to the issue  of
    causation [35].  His overall expert opinion was that most of the  scars
    were typical of intentionally caused injuries, more likely to have been
    caused by a third party as described by the claimant.

30. The Judge also had regard to the psychiatric report from Dr Dhumad. The
    claimant was interviewed and provided a history.   Medical  GP  records
    had been maxe available to Dr Dhumad [37].

31. Dr Dhumad noted that the claimant's condition had deteriorated since he
    was last seen in June 2014. He found him to be severely depressed  with
    PTSD symptoms. His diagnosis was severe. He had claimed  experience  of
    torture and harassment of his parents. He did  not  receive  medication
    for almost three weeks from the date of his detention  on  26  February
    2015 until a medical review. Stopping medication in those circumstances
    led to the serious deterioration in mental health and a high  level  of
    distress. He remained unwell and was unfit to attend the interview.  He
    was unfit for detention and there was an  ongoing  risk  assessment  in
    relation to suicidal ideation [38].

32. The Judge noted evidence produced from  the  International  Centre  for
    Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide. A  letter  was  written  to  UK
    Immigration Authorities stating that the claimant had exposed  the  Sri
    Lankan government "as being genocidal  and  that  he  was  a  potential
    witness and may be asked to provide evidence in person against the  Sri
    Lankan authorities" [43]. In the event of his deportation to Sri  Lanka
    he was more likely to be tortured.  The  Judge  was  also  referred  to
    'credible evidence' produced in his bundle of the claimant attending  a
    protest in the UK outside the US Embassy on  25  February  2015.  There
    were several pages of photocopied photos depicting the  claimant,  'who
    was identifiable' [43].

33. In the Judge's 'findings of credibility and fact', he  stated  that  he
    had considered the evidence in its totality. He has sought to focus  on
    the core and centrepiece of the claim and the  evidence  in  the  round
    [48].

34. He noted "... that it is a duty of  a  an  Immigration  Judge  to  give
    reasons for a decision and that this does not entail a  requirement  to
    deal expressly with every point, but to demonstrate  that  a  duty  has
    been discharged to ensure that the parties to  a  decision   understand
    why one has won, and the other has lost" [50].

35. In allowing the appeal he  found  that  the  claimant  had  provided  a
    credible account of having been involved in  LTTE  training  and  anti-
    state protests.  He  provided  credible  evidence  of  his  arrest  and
    detention. He had been beaten with a number of weapons 'in terns of the
    circumstances he explained in his statement'. There was  also  credible
    psychiatric evidence that as a  result  he  was  the  subject  of  post
    traumatic stress disorder, flashbacks,  insomnia  and  general  anxiety
    [53].

36. He had regard to the medical reports of  Dr  Kogulanathan,  and  expert
    medical reports  from  Mr  Martin  which  he  found  to  be  clear  and
    comprehensive. The latter had properly engaged with his  assessment  by
    reference to the Istanbul Protocol [54].  He  found  the  scars  to  be
    overall highly consistent  with  the  circumstances  claimed  and  were
    typical of having been intentionally caused injuries [55].

37. He then found that when considered cumulatively and in the  round,  the
    claimant had shown to the lower standard following the decision  in  GJ
    and Others (Post Civil War: Returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  319
    (IAC) that he fell into a current category of persons at real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return, namely  those  who  are  or  are
    perceived to be a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single
    state because they are, or are perceived to  have  had,  a  significant
    role in relation to post conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora
    and/or their renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka. The Judge has set
    out the country guidance from that case in full [56].

38. In arriving at his conclusion, he found that his LTTE role in Sri Lanka
    had been to pursue separatist policies for Tamils  and  to  destabilise
    the Sri Lankan government generally. He had trained with the  LTTE  and
    pursued their aims. He cannot  internally relocate. He is  also  likely
    to appear on a 'stop list' or 'watch list' [58].

39. The claimant had been the subject of physical and mental  torture;   he
    found that he is at risk of persecution on return based  upon  previous
    political activity and will be of direct interest to the authorities in
    Sri Lanka [59].

40. Mr Whitwell relied on and adopted the grounds of appeal. The Judge  had
    failed to give adequate reasons for findings on  material  matters.  In
    finding at [52] that the claimant is a genuine refugee and that he  has
    provided a credible account that he was involved in the  LTTE  training
    and anti-state protests, no reasons  were  provided  to  support  those
    findings. The finding constitutes a bare statement that he is credible.



41. Further, at [53] the Judge accepted that  there  is  credible  evidence
    that he had been arrested and detained and beaten in the  circumstances
    and with weapons which he explained in his statement. That  is  also  a
    'bare statement' without adequate reasons.

42. They do not satisfy the requirements to give  reasons  as  set  out  in
    authorities including MK (duty to give  reasons)  Pakistan  UKUT  00641
    (IAC). That is particularly the position as  he  failed  to  attend  an
    asylum interview.

43. Nor did the Judge provide reasons why he found the medical evidence  to
    be highly consistent with the circumstances claimed. The  claimant  did
    not attend his asylum interview and it is "unknown" as to what evidence
    provided by the claimant is consistent with his account - ground 1(e).

44. Nor is it known what risk category the claimant fits  into  '...or  why
    they do on the facts of his account as no reasons were provided by  the
    Immigration Judge'. Nor had reasons been provided as to why  he  should
    succeed on the basis of his suicide risk.

45. Moreover, the Judge failed to treat the medical evidence as part of the
    overall evidence to be considered in the round - Mbinga [2005] EWCA Civ
    367. He has taken medical evidence as  determinative  evidence  in  the
    claimant's case rather than considering it in the  round.  Nor  has  he
    correctly applied the six state test in Mbinga [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

46. The Judge had failed to take into account the delay in  his  claim  and
    the fact that he failed to attend his asylum interview,  all  of  which
    were issues raised in the reasons for refusal letter.

47. In making his  submissions  Mr  Whitwell  referred  to  the  individual
    paragraphs in the Judge's determination which I  have  accordingly  set
    out above in some detail.

48. On behalf of the claimant,  Ms  Olley,  who  represented  the  claimant
    before the First-tier Judge, submitted that if the secretary  of  state
    "did not push points" they cannot be blamed on the claimant.

49. As this is a reasons challenge, the decision must be read as  a  whole.
    The appellant's claim  was  accepted.  There  is  no  cogent  point  of
    challenge put forward 'to upset and defeat  the  decision'.  The  claim
    that the Judge simply accepted that he is a genuine refugee and that he
    had provided a credible account which lacked proper  reasoning  ignores
    the fact that the Judge had  set  out  the  facts  and  the  supporting
    evidence, emphasising that he had considered the evidence in the round.



50. With regard to the claimant's claim that  he  had  been  detained,  the
    Judge had before him the claimant's witness statement which set out  in
    great detail the background to that claim including his LTTE  political
    wing activities promoting the ideology.

51. The Judge also had before him the report of Dr  Dhumad  who  noted  his
    claims of having been tortured. He has provided two reports. There  are
    also extensive notes from his GP.

52. Dr Dhumad interviewed the claimant on  24  June  2014  and  prepared  a
    report as set out from pages 97  and  following.  He  also  prepared  a
    second report dated 19 March 2015. From that report the  claimant  gave
    him a personal history. He also set out his symptoms, having  contended
    that he was tortured and raped by the Sri Lankan authorities  in  2007.
    He noted that the claimant's mental health had deteriorated.

53. She submitted that the Judge had  thus  considered  these  reports  and
    taken them into account at  [54].   The  finding  that  the  claimant's
    account is credible is supported by those reports and in particular the
    injuries he suffered.

54. Ms Olley referred to the report of Mr Martin.  The  Judge  referred  to
    this in great detail at [32-36]. Mr Martin has set out  in  detail  the
    basis for his opinion and prognosis at page 58 of the  bundle.  He  had
    regard to his claim of having sustained injuries during  his  detention
    in 2007 and during training with the LTTE. He also had  regard  to  the
    fact that the scars had occurred many years before.

55. She submitted that the s.8 submission is dealt with in  the  claimant's
    witness statement. At its highest, and in taking matters in the  round,
    the claimant has explained why he did not make a claim for seven years.
    That was because he was scared that he would be sent back to Sri Lanka.
    However, there was credible evidence of torture and even though this is
    a matter that could detract from his credibility, it  does  not  follow
    that he would not be at risk.

56. With regard to the risk factors identified in GJ, supra, she  submitted
    that he has been active in the UK. The stop list is not  published.  He
    has also been involved with the ICPPG organisation. At paragraph 11  of
    his witness statement he referred to the Sri Lankan army  which  warned
    all NGOs perceived to be the "LTTE's  front  arm".  He  joined  "Action
    Faim", an NGO, which received threats from the army. In August 2006, 17
    staff members were shot and killed by the Sri Lanka  army.  He  was  an
    organising committee member and was on the front. There was  a  protest
    rally which included picketing and  protests,  which  were  filmed  and
    photographed by the army.

57.  She  accordingly  submitted  that  this  was  not  "a  valid   reasons
    challenge".

58. Nor was the decision in J v SSHD relied on by the Judge in  respect  of
    an Article 8 consideration relevant. This did  not  form  part  of  the
    Judge's assessment as to risk on return.

59. In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that 'he would have to extrapolate' the
    basis upon which the Judge accepted the credibility of  the  claim.  In
    this respect he would have to go to his witness statement as well as to
    the other evidence. There would be "an awful lot of joining up to do".

    Assessment

60. There is undoubted force in Mr Whitwell's submission  that  the  First-
    tier Judge in  this  appeal  should  have  set  out  more  clearly  and
    coherently the reasons why he came to his decision, particularly in the
    light of an  assertion  by  the  secretary  of  state  challenging  the
    credibility of a claimant's account.

61. In  MK,  supra,  the  Tribunal  noted  that  it  is  axiomatic  that  a
    determination should disclose clearly  the  reasons  for  a  Tribunal's
    decision.  If  a  Tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,
    incredible  or  unreliable  or  a  document  to  be  worth  no   weight
    whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in  the  determination  for  such
    findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
    was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely
    to satisfy the requirements to give reasons.

62. The First-tier Judge, who has considerable experience, has set out  the
    claimant's claim in some detail. He has had regard to both his and  the
    secretary of state's bundles of evidence, "together with the  objective
    evidence" [6].

63. It was noted at the outset that the claimant was not able to give  oral
    evidence due to mental health issues highlighted in the report from  Dr
    Dhumad dated 19 March 2015. The claimant however did adopt his  witness
    statement  of  9  September  as  accurate  and  truthful.   The  appeal
    accordingly proceeded by way of submissions [6].

64. The Judge has had regard to that witness  statement,  as  well  as  the
    psychiatric reports and the findings relating to his  injuries,  namely
    his scars.

65. The evidence of the claimant in his statement dated  7  September  2015
    was set out in some detail by the Judge at [25-31].

66. When it came to making findings of  credibility  and  fact,  the  Judge
    stated at the outset  that  he  had  considered  the  evidence  in  its
    totality. He has also sought to focus upon the core and centre piece of
    the claim, looking at the  evidence  in  the  round,  and  taking  into
    account all relevant circumstances [48]. He also expressly  noted  that
    it is the duty of a Judge to give reasons for a decision, but that this
    does not entail a requirement to deal expressly with every point but to
    demonstrate that the duty has been discharged so as to ensure that  the
    parties understand why one has won and the other has lost.

67. A substantial bundle of evidence was produced on behalf of the claimant
    at the hearing. This included two psychiatric reports,  one  relatively
    recent in relation to the date of the hearing, and  a  report  from  Mr
    Martin, whose qualifications and expertise were accepted by the  Judge.
    Mr Martin has given  evidence  in  hundreds  of  similar  matters.  His
    qualification to give opinion evidence had never been challenged.

68. Accordingly, as submitted by Ms Olley, the Judge did not simply  accept
    the credibility of the claimant based on his  own  assertions.  He  had
    regard, as stated, to the evidence as a whole, which included  detailed
    reports given by these experts.

69. When interviewed by these experts the claimant had  set  out  the  core
    accounts of his history prior to coming to the  UK.  Moreover,  he  had
    been treated for a considerable period by his GP.

70. On 27 December 2012, there was a mental health assessment in  which  it
    was noted that he has a poor sleep pattern; is thinking a lot and feels
    a little low. He cannot get back to sleep after 2am. It was also  noted
    that when examined on 27  December  2012,  he  did  not  appear  to  be
    knowledgeable about the asylum process and  was  fumbling  a  bit  when
    explaining his situation. He also reported to those  doctors   multiple
    distinct scars on his back,  which  he  attributed  to  burns  that  he
    sustained. He also referred to detention and torture in  Sri  Lanka  in
    2007 (page 21 of the bundle).

71. Mr Martin's report has described in detail the position of  each  wound
    relied on. He has complied with the Istanbul Protocol and has  set  out
    in some detail his findings regarding the scars on the claimant's back,
    the upper and lower limbs. The most likely cause regarding scars 2  and
    3 was the claim that they were caused by burns with a hot rod  and  hot
    wires during his detention in 2007. It was noted  that  there  are  not
    presenting facts making it more than a  remote  possibility  that  SIBP
    cannot be discarded. He has considered alternative causes but has ruled
    them out for proper reasons given at page 59 of the bundle.

72. Mr  Martin  has  followed  the  "recommendations"  referred  to  in  KV
    (Scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC).

73. The findings in relation to the scars on his back were typical  of  the
    events described by him of being intentionally burned. The rest of  the
    scars are less specific but did not show any inconsistencies  with  the
    description of the events by  the  claimant  (page  60).   Overall  his
    expert opinion was that most of the scars are typical of  intentionally
    caused injuries and were likely to have been caused by a third party as
    described by the claimant.

74. He also had regard at p. 60 of the bundle, to the fact that  the  scars
    are matured, which  he  found  to  be  consistent  with  injuries  that
    occurred "approximately several years ago".

75. It is evident that in arriving at his findings, the Judge has also  had
    regard to the report of Dr Dhumad, a consultant  psychiatrist.  He  too
    followed the principles set out in the Istanbul Protocol. He was  asked
    to provide a detailed assessment of the mental health of the claimant.

76. He had access to the relevant  documentation,  including  an  interview
    with the claimant for two hours at  Harmondsworth  IRC  where  a  Tamil
    interpreter was present. He has set out the personal history  given  to
    him at paragraph  6  of  his  report.  He  set  out  his  mental  state
    examination at paragraph 16 and concluded that there are  a  number  of
    psychological  stressors  that  have  contributed  to  his  depression,
    including the traumatic experience of torture, the  harassment  of  his
    parents and their death as well as the  ongoing  fear  of  deportation.
    There is no doubt that the experience of torture  has  complicated  his
    life. His symptoms appear to have always been  present  but  fluctuated
    and worsened at times of stress. This is consistent with the nature and
    cause of the illness.

77. He found that the nature of his symptoms and his emotional distress  is
    typical of PTSD as psychological reaction to traumatic experience  such
    as torture. It is very unlikely to be caused by other experiences other
    than torture.

78. He remains unwell and unfit to attend an interview. His  PTSD  symptoms
    have  deteriorated  dramatically   during   his   detention   and   his
    concentration  is  very  poor.  He  would  not  be  mentally  able   to
    participate in a court hearing in any meaningful  way  and  his  mental
    health will very likely worsen if he is cross examined.

79. In accepting that there is credible  evidence  that  the  claimant  was
    arrested and  detained,  the  Judge  properly  relied  on  the  witness
    statement of the claimant as well  as  the  expert  reports  that  were
    produced. It was agreed as a preliminary matter that the  claimant  was
    not able to give oral evidence  on  account  of  mental  health  issues
    highlighted in Dr Dhumad's report dated 19 March 2015.

80. In concluding that the  claimant's  account  was  credible,  the  Judge
    accordingly had regard not only to the claimant's own assertions but to
    the findings in the reports from the experts, including the significant
    evidence relating to his scarring which remained unchallenged.

81. The evidence of his scarring  as  well  as  evidence  relating  to  his
    psychological  or  psychiatric  condition,  namely  PTSD,   constituted
    significant evidence tending to corroborate the claimant's  assertions.
    He had set out his account to the authors of the reports. His  symptoms
    of depression were noted in the GP's notes.

82. The Judge noted that the presenting officer asked him to  consider  s.8
    issues in relation to credibility given his failure to claim asylum for
    several years.  Although he did  not  explicitly  deal  with  s.8,  the
    claimant dealt with that issue in his witness statement which the Judge
    did consider.

83. He had been instructed by his agent not to claim asylum when he arrived
    in the UK in January 2008 as that would jeopardise  his  work.  He  was
    told that he would be assisted to extend his visa after it expired.  He
    was warned that if he tried to claim asylum, "we would be sent back  to
    Sri Lanka as asylum claims were no longer accepted."

84.  Although  the  Judge  should  have  considered  the  s.8  issues,   he
    nevertheless stated that he had considered the matters  in  the  round.
    Moreover, the fact that  the  claimant  failed  to  claim  asylum  much
    earlier did not mean that his credibility was  adversely  affected.  He
    still presented evidence relating to his mental  state  and  the  scars
    that he claimed to have suffered following torture in Sri  Lanka  which
    together with his own assertions were considered in the round.

85. Moreover, the Judge had regard to his diaspora activities which he  was
    involved in whilst in the UK. He had regard to the evidence from  ICPPG
    in terms of the letter written to  the  immigration  authorities  which
    stated that the claimant had exposed the Sri Lankan government of being
    genocidal and that he was a potential  witness  and  may  be  asked  to
    provide evidence in person against the Sri  Lankan  authorities.  There
    were also photographs depicting the claimant at the protest outside the
    US embassy in February 2015.  He was 'identifiable' from them.

86. In summary, the  Judge  relied  on  credible  evidence  supporting  the
    claimant's claim that he had been arrested, detained and beaten up with
    a number of weapons.

87. Although the Judge might have set out in greater detail the basis  upon
    which he found the claimant's account to be credible, there was a  body
    of  substantial  evidence  available,  including  the  claimant's   own
    statement, sustaining his findings. Even though  there  might  be  some
    'joining up to do', the findings were based on a consideration  of  the
    evidence as a whole and are sustainable.  They are  neither  irrational
    or perverse.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.

    Anonymity order made.




    Signed   Date 11 April 2016
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
