
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number:  AA/04739/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 27th November 2014                         |On 2nd December 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harries

                                   Between

                          MISS RAMIYA PATHMAKUMARAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr C Lane, Counsel
For the Respondent:   Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Details of the Appellant and Proceedings

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 4th May 1993.  She  was
    refused asylum by the respondent  in  2009  but  was  granted  3  years
    discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 4th  November
    2010 because of her status as a minor. In February 2013  the  appellant
    submitted an application for further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom which was refused by the respondent on 24th June 2014.


 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent in a hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan
    (the Judge) at Sheldon Court, Birmingham,  on  12th  August  2014.  The
    Judge dismissed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  on  asylum
    grounds,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  grounds  in   a
    determination promulgated on 11th September 2014.  Permission to appeal
    against the Judge's decision was granted  on  29th  September  2014  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin because it was found to  be  arguable
    that the Judge failed to make a proper consideration of the appellant's
    age when assessing her credibility;  all  grounds  were  considered  to
    disclose arguable errors of law and were left open.

 3. The matter accordingly came before me for an initial hearing to  decide
    whether the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law and if so whether the decision
    should be set aside and remade.


Submissions


 4. Mr Lane addressed me for the appellant at  the  hearing  in  accordance
    with his skeleton argument dated 25th September  2014  as  follows.  He
    submitted that the Judge failed to make any proper  assessment  of  the
    appellant's age when assessing credibility, in particular in  paragraph
    14 of her  determination  which  deals  with  the  issue  in  a  wholly
    inadequate way. In paragraph 14 the Judge stated that:


         "The inconsistencies and discrepancies in the appellant's claim,  I
         find, are so fundamental that they  damage  her  credibility  as  a
         whole. I make allowance for the fact that when the appellant  first
         came to the United Kingdom she was only 14 years  of  age,  however
         that  does  not  explain  the   fundamental   inconsistencies   and
         discrepancies in her account which go to the core of her claim."


 5. Relying on the case of JA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  450  Mr
    Lane submitted that the Judge should have considered in more detail the
    appellant's age at the date of the screening interview  and  the  Child
    Assessment; insufficient account was taken of the traumatic  nature  of
    events being revisited by the  appellant.  The  Judge  had  relied  too
    heavily on matters in  the  screening  interview  at  which  there  was
    apparently no appropriate adult present.  The screening  interview  had
    been conducted contrary to Home  Office  Guidance  that  the  screening
    interview is not the place to explore the asylum claim.


 6. Mr Lane submitted that the Judge had erred in  her  reliance  upon  the
    content of the  Child  Assessment  which  was  an  assessment  for  the
    purposes of securing the well-being of the appellant as a minor and was
    not concerned with the asylum claim.  The  Judge  had,  however,  drawn
    adverse conclusions from its content without assessing it as a piece of
    evidence. There is nothing  to  show  that  an  appropriate  adult  was
    present for this process although the appellant's  carers  and  brother
    were present for at least part of it. The Judge had failed to  consider
    the impact of the presence of these people at the assessment.  Nor  was
    there any indication of whether an interpreter was used  in  the  Child
    Assessment; she may have been interviewed in English, a further  matter
    which the Judge failed to consider.


 7. For the reasons fully set out in  Mr Lane's skeleton  argument  it  was
    submitted that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  a  discrepancy  in  the
    appellant's evidence in paragraph 14 of the determination. In paragraph
    15 of the determination the Judge failed to take account  of  the  fact
    that the asylum interview dealt only with matters  arising  since  2006
    and the appellant was not asked about abduction of family members other
    than her father; the appellant should not have been criticised in these
    circumstances for failing to mention the abduction of her brother; this
    fact had, however, been mentioned by the appellant at  question  62  of
    the  asylum  interview.  The  Judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    likelihood that at her young age the appellant  would  be  unlikely  in
    interview to give information unless she was asked about it. The  Judge
    had failed to take account of whether the appellant's brother had  been
    abducted by the army or the LTTE.


 8. Mr Lane submitted that the Judge errs  in  fact  by  stating  that  the
    appellant made no mention of her boyfriend  in  Sri  Lanka  but  he  is
    clearly mentioned at both  B4  and  B6  of  the  record  of  the  Child
    Assessment. In totality, the Judge is submitted to have failed  in  any
    appropriate  context  to  have  considered  the  appellant's   age   or
    vulnerability in assessing the  reliability  of  the  evidence  or  the
    weight to be attached to it.  At this juncture in the hearing before me
    Mr Duffy interrupted on  behalf  of  the  respondent  to  withdraw  the
    previously indicated opposition to the appeal.  He  conceded  that  the
    determination of the Judge is not safe and that it should be set aside.




 9. My finding is that there is merit in the grounds of appeal  which  show
    the decision of the Judge to contain material errors of law  such  that
    it should be set aside.  Taking the final submission first,  the  Judge
    has clearly erred in paragraph 15 of the determination in finding  that
    the  appellant  made  no  reference  to  her  boyfriend  in  the  Child
    Assessment; there are two such references. I find that the  credibility
    assessment is flawed for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.


10. The remaining grounds of appeal which stand unopposed by the respondent
    are that the Judge failed properly to consider the risk  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka to the appellant as a single, un-married, mother with a child
    born  out  of  wedlock;  more  should  have  been  done  to  trace  the
    appellant's family in Sri Lanka and the  Judge  erred  by  refusing  an
    adjournment to the appellant to  allow  her  brother  to  attend  as  a
    witness for her.  In this respect the Judge is submitted to  have  been
    unjust and wrong.


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   Both  parties
    submitted that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a complete rehearing, a course which I consider to  be  appropriate
    having further considered the Practice Statement  on  the  disposal  of
    appeals in the Upper Tribunal made by the Senior President of Tribunals
    on 25th September 2012, particularly in relation to  paragraphs  7.2(a)
    and (b) as follows:


         7.2        The Upper Tribunal is likely on each  such  occasion  to
                proceed to re-make the decision, instead  of  remitting  the
                case to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal
                is satisfied that:

                (a) the effect of the error has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair  hearing  or  other
                opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to   and
                considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which
                is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be
                re-made is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to
                the First-tier Tribunal.

12.  The  case  is  therefore  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    reconsideration on the basis that none of the findings shall stand. The
    appellant proposes to call  her  brother  as  a  witness  and  a  Tamil
    interpreter is required.


Notice  of Decisions


13. The making of the decision in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of material errors of law.


14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  no  findings
    are preserved.


15. The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reconsidered.



Directions

16. The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  reconsidered  at
    the Sheldon Court, Birmingham, Hearing Centre with an estimated hearing
    time of 3 hours.


17. The hearing date cannot currently be provided but is likely  to  be  in
    June 2015.  The Birmingham Hearing Centre will notify  the  parties  in
    due course of that date.


18. A Tamil interpreter is required.

19. The case shall not be reconsidered by the same member of the First-tier
    Tribunal who made the decision that has been set aside,  namely  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chohan.

ANONYMITY


The First-tier Tribunal made  no  direction  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014

Signed

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date:  1st December 2014
