
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
AA/04320/2014

                                       AA/04323/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |           Decision and Reasons      |
|                                 |Promulgated                          |
|On 1st June 2015                 |           On 7th July 2015          |
|                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     TTN
                                     MN
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Knorr instructed by Southwark Law Centre.
For the Respondent:    Ms Fujiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The first appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 1st June  1995  and
    she appeals against a  decision  dated  16th  June  2014  made  by  the
    Secretary of State to remove her from the UK following  a  decision  to
    refuse her international protection.  She entered the United Kingdom in
    April 2009.  The second appellant was the daughter born  to  the  first
    appellant in the United Kingdom on 18th June 2013.

 2.  The  respondent  had  accepted  that  the  first  appellant  had  been
    trafficked (for labour) but contended that  she  had  not  demonstrated
    that she would be at real risk of persecution from non-state actors  on
    account of her membership of a particular social group if  returned  to
    Vietnam.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 5th March 2015, Judge  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal Young dismissed the appellants' appeals but an application for
    permission to appeal against that decision was  granted  by  First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on the basis that the Judge did not make findings
    as to whether the first appellant would be perceived as a prostitute on
    return to Vietnam.  Nor was there any evidence that the  Judge  treated
    the appellant as a vulnerable  witness  and  he  should  arguably  have
    placed weight on her written evidence, as she was not  called  to  give
    oral evidence.   This may have  affected  the  assessment  of  risk  on
    return from the first appellant's step father and whether or  not  they
    would receive support from the family on return.

 4. At the hearing before me, Ms Knorr expanded on her  grounds  of  appeal
    which included the assessment by the judge of the appellant 's  written
    evidence, the failure to consider her as a vulnerable  witness  in  his
    assessment of the evidence, the failure to  consider  the  extant  risk
    from the step father and take into account what the appellant had  said
    about that risk and  the  overall  risk  on  return  to  Vietnam.   She
    submitted that the case had been  put  on  the  basis  that  the  first
    appellant would be perceived as a victim of sexual trafficking and as a
    prostitute not merely as a single mother.  She would thus be part of  a
    Particular Social Group (PSG).  There had been  no  indication  by  the
    Home office Presenting Officer at the First-Tier Tribunal  hearing,  in
    line  with  the  Presidential  Guidance,  of  a  restriction   on   the
    questioning of the appellant and thus the appellant was not called. The
    judge had by implication criticised  the  lack  of  evidence  from  the
    appellant but had not placed weight on her written evidence.  The judge
    had not assessed the overall risk.

 5. Ms Fujiwala submitted that the judge had found that not all victims  of
    trafficking would be perceived as victims of sexual trafficking or as a
    victim  of  prostitution.   It  was  not  clear  why  all  victims   of
    trafficking should be perceived as such. The point in Hoxha [2005] UKHL
    19 was that the appellant was a victim or rape and would be  perceived,
    with the associated severe social stigma, as  the  victim  or  rape  on
    return.  The  expert  reports  did  not  detail  that  what  she  would
    experience on return would amount to persecution.  The point the  judge
    was trying to make was that not all those trafficked would  be  engaged
    in  prostitution.   The  judge  took  into  account   the   appellant's
    vulnerabilities.  With regard the oral evidence it was not  clear  that
    there was discussion regarding the oral evidence.  The  judge  had  not
    criticised the appellant on credibility but found at paragraph 119 that
    the real fear was not of re-trafficking  but  because  the  step-father
    would wish to prevent her from going to the police.  He found the  step
    father was not part of a gang and at paragraph 130 of the  decision  it
    could be seen that the judge did not accept that there was further risk
    from re-trafficking finding that the trafficking did not emanate from a
    gang from Vietnam and was opportunistic in China and in Russia.  It was
    unclear how information would get back to the  step-father  as  it  was
    unknown whether the mother still lived with the step-father.  The judge
    concluded that she would have treatment for her mental health condition
    until 2016.

 6. In conclusion I set out the Qualification Regulations at 6(1)(d)

      (d) a group shall be considered to  form  a  particular  social  group
      where, for example:

      (i) members of that group share an innate characteristic, or a  common
      background that cannot be changed, or share a characteristic or belief
      that is so fundamental to identity or conscience that a person  should
      not be forced to renounce it, and

      (ii) that group has a  distinct  identity  in  the  relevant  country,
      because  it  is  perceived  as  being  different  by  the  surrounding
      society;"

 7. There was much discussion within SB (PSG - Protection Regulations - Reg
    6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 00002 as to whether  both d(i) and (ii) were
    required (as the Qualification Regulations departed from Article 10  of
    the Directive.  In conclusion it was decided that whether a group is  a
    social group for the purposes of the Geneva Convention must be  decided
    in the context of the relevant society.  The question is how the  group
    would be perceived in the relevant society. It was also the  case  that
    Baroness  Hale  explained  in  Hoxha  [2005]  UKHL  19   that   earlier
    persecution of one sort may lead to later persecution  of  a  different
    sort. The point made here is how the appellant would  be  perceived  in
    the society to which she would be returned. The judge needed to  assess
    all the facts including the expert evidence, and weigh  the  cumulative
    evidence as to how the appellant would be perceived on  return  -  thus
    addressing d(i) and d(ii).  The judge appeared to find that because she
    had not been 'trafficked for sexual exploitation' and that she had only
    been 'trafficked' and would fear stigma on return, that she  would  not
    have a distinct identity and thus be within a PSG.  The judge  at  [96]
    did not find that there was evidence that would suggest that  a  victim
    of trafficking (absent sexual exploitation  )  would  have  a  distinct
    identity in being perceived to be different by surrounding society.  At
    paragraph 101 the judge stated

    'it was not (my emphasis) suggested that the appellant  belonged  to  a
    particular social group which could be  described  as  'single  mothers
    returning from abroad' which would  be  intrinsically  associated  with
    prostitution.  That seems a different  situation  from  the  particular
    social group which was identified for the appellant'.

 8. That was, however, a key element of Ms Knorr's case. The  judge  refers
    to the evidence of Ms Beddoe at [102] and [103]  regarding  stigma  but
    does not address, in this context, the issue of the suspicion of sexual
    exploitation, which Ms Beddoe and Mr Sidel (Paragraph 73)  alluded  to,
    and thus  in  turn  perception  by  society.   Ms  Beddoe  thought  the
    appellant was at high risk because of her presenting features of  being
    re-trafficked. The appellant had been accepted by the respondent  as  a
    victim of  trafficking  and  Ms  Knorr  submitted  she  would  also  be
    perceived as a victim of prostitution  (sexual  exploitation),  on  the
    basis of the expert evidence, because of her return as  a  lone  single
    mother. Ms Knorr argued that her sexual abuse in the UK was said to  be
    a consequence of her experience of being trafficked.  The judge made no
    finding as to whether the appellant would be perceived as a  victim  of
    trafficking for sexual exploitation.

 9. The judge at [120] also dismissed the evidence of the experts that  the
    appellant may be re-trafficked merely because  the  appellant  did  not
    articulate this herself and this and in this assessment the judge  made
    no reference to the vulnerability of the witness but noted that

    'as indicated no evidence was led from the appellant which  articulated
    that particular fear'.

10. There was, however, no reference to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 2 of 2010: Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant
    guidance.  The guidance confirms that

      'The consequences of such vulnerability differ according to the degree
      to which an individual is affected. It is a matter for  the  judge  to
      determine the extent of an identified vulnerability, the effect on the
      quality  of  the  evidence  and  the  weight  to  be  placed  on  such
      vulnerability in  assessing  the  evidence  before  you,  taking  into
      account the evidence as a whole'.

11. The judge placed minimal emphasis on the appellant's  written  evidence
    and rather throughout  the  decision  referred  to  the  lack  of  oral
    evidence or explanation from the appellant.   The  guidelines  indicate
    that areas of cross examination can  be  restricted  but  as  Ms  Knorr
    indicated there was no record within the decision  that  this  was  the
    reason given as to why the appellant was not called.

12. Even in the event that the appellant was not  part  of  a  PSG  it  was
    argued that humanitarian protection  should  be  considered.   In  this
    regard the evidence in relation to the step-father was important as the
    appellant had escaped from the traffickers who which she had been  sold
    by the step-father albeit the judge had stated there  was  no  evidence
    that  she  had  been  targeted  by  a  gang.   It  was  the  stepfather
    nonetheless who had sold her and the  expert  evidence  suggested  that
    there was risk from the step-father.

13. As part  of  the  judge's  assessment  of  risk  on  return  the  judge
    considered whether the appellant would be  able  to  access  assistance
    from her family and found that she could. However  the  judge  detailed
    that the appellant gave no evidence on the point  regarding  access  to
    her family but this was not correct.  The appellant's witness statement
    (29.1.2015) indicated that she did not have  friends  (indeed  she  had
    left Vietnam at the age of 13 years) or family she could turn  to.  Her
    contact with her mother had ceased.  She feared returning  to  an  aunt
    who lived two hours away lest her stepfather relocate her.  Dr  Majid's
    report identified that the appellant was adamant  that  she  could  not
    return to her family for support because of her step-father's  violence
    (Respondent's Bundle D5).  There was no basis for the assertion by  the
    judge that the mother may have left the step-father [38].

14.  I  was  presented  by  Ms  Fujiwala  with  Nguyen  (Anti  -Trafficking
    Convention: respondent's duties) [2015] UKUT 170 (IAC) but this  was  a
    reported decision on the duties of a signatory to the Council of Europe
    Convention on Action against trafficking into the  country  from  which
    they later travel (untrafficked) to the signatory state.  In this  case
    the respondent confirmed that if the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  re-
    trafficking she  could  succeed  which  underlines  the  importance  of
    accurately assessing  risk  on  return.   The  legal  authorities  also
    confirm the importance of assessing the individual circumstances of the
    appellant and those of the appellant in  this  judgment  differed  from
    those of this appellant.  There  was  no  indication  that  the  expert
    reports were the same.

15. I find thus that he judge failed to take proper account of the  written
    evidence of the appellant, which would have had a  material  effect  on
    the outcome.

16. Finally the judge appeared to assess [133]  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant particularly with regard her mental health at a later date at
    the hearing and as at the end of her discretionary leave in 2016.

17. I took account of the submissions of Ms Fujiwala but  for  the  reasons
    identified above I find that the judge erred in law and in a way  which
    may have a material affect on the outcome.

18. I set aside the decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  (TCE  2007)..   Bearing  in  mind  the
    nature and extent of the findings to  be  made  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the
    TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction: All further evidence should be served on  the  Tribunal  and  the
opposing party not later than 14 days prior to any substantive hearing.

Signed                                       Date 3rd July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington






